NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DOES FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT PROMOTE ECONOMIC GROWTH?
EXPLORING THE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL MARKETS ON LINKAGES
Laura Alfaro
Areendam Chanda
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Selin Sayek
Working Paper 12522
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12522

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006

An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title "FDI Spillovers, Financial Markets and Economic
Development." Corresponding author: Laura Alfaro, Harvard Business School, 263 Morgan Hall,
Boston, MA 02163, lalfaro@hbs.edu. Areendam Chanda, Department of Economics, 2107 CEBA,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, achanda@lsu.edu. Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Department
of Economics, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, 77204, Sebnem.Kalemli-Ozcan@mail.uh.edu.
Selin Sayek, Department of Economics, Bilkent University, Bilkent Ankara 06800 Turkey, sayek@bilkent.edu.tr.
We are grateful to participants at Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics Summer Workshop,
2006 NEUDC, 2006 Midwest Macroeconomic Meetings, 2006 Society of Economic Dynamics Meetings,
2006 DEGIT Conference at Hebrew University, 2006 European Economic Association Annual Congress,
2007 Econometric Society Winter Meetings, 2006 Euro-Latin Study Network on Integration and Trade
(ELSNIT) and the 2007 ACES Annual Meeting and seminars at Bilkent, Oregon and Louisiana State
Universities for useful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Laura Alfaro, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Does Foreign Direct Investment Promote Economic Growth? Exploring the Effects of
Financial Markets on Linkages
Laura Alfaro, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek
NBER Working Paper No. 12522
September 2006, Revised June 2007
JEL No. F23,F36,F43,O40
ABSTRACT
The empirical literature finds mixed evidence on the existence of positive productivity externalities
in the host country generated by foreign multinational companies. We propose a mechanism that emphasizes
the role of local financial markets in enabling foreign direct investment (FDI) to promote growth through
backward linkages, shedding light on this empirical ambiguity. In a small open economy, final goods
production is carried out by foreign and domestic firms, which compete for skilled labor, unskilled
labor, and intermediate products. To operate a firm in the intermediate goods sector, entrepreneurs
must develop a new variety of intermediate good, a task that requires upfront capital investments. The
more developed the local financial markets, the easier it is for credit constrained entrepreneurs to start
their own firms. The increase in the number of varieties of intermediate goods leads to positive spillovers
to the final goods sector. As a result financial markets allow the backward linkages between foreign
and domestic firms to turn into FDI spillovers. Our calibration exercises indicate that a) holding the
extent of foreign presence constant, financially well-developed economies experience growth rates
that are almost twice those of economies with poor financial markets, b) increases in the share of FDI
or the relative productivity of the foreign firm leads to higher additional growth in financially developed
economies compared to those observed in financially under-developed ones, and c) other local conditions
such as market structure and human capital are also important to generate a positive effect of FDI on
economic growth.
Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Areendam Chanda
Louisiana State University
Dept of Economics, 2107 CEBA
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
achanda@lsu.edu

Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
University of Houston
Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204
and NBER
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu
Selin Sayek
Bilkent University
Department of Economics
Bilkent 06800 Ankara Turkey
sayek@bilkent.edu.tr

1

Introduction

There is a widespread belief among policymakers that foreign direct investment (FDI) enhances
the productivity of host countries and promotes economic development. This belief stems form the
fact that FDI not only provides direct capital financing but also creates positive externalities via
the adoption of foreign technology and know-how.1 Yet, the empirical evidence on the existence of
such positive productivity externalities is sobering.2
The macro empirical literature finds weak support for an exogenous positive effect of FDI on
economic growth.3 Findings in this literature indicate that a country’s capacity to take advantage
of FDI externalities might be limited by local conditions, such as the development of local financial
markets or the educational level of the country, i.e., absorptive capacities. Borensztein, De Gregorio,
and Lee (1998) and Xu (2000) show that FDI brings technology, which translates into higher growth
only when the host country has a minimum threshold of stock of human capital. Alfaro, Chanda,
Kalemli-Ozcan and Sayek (2004), Durham (2004), and Hermes and Lensink (2003) provide evidence
that only countries with well-developed financial markets gain significantly from FDI in terms of
their growth rates.
The micro empirical literature finds ambiguous results for the effect of FDI on firm’s productivity. This literature comes in three waves. Starting with the pioneering work of Caves (1974),
the first generation papers focus on country case studies and industry level cross sectional studies.4
These studies find a positive correlation between the productivity of a multinational enterprise
(MNE) and average value added per worker of the domestic firms within the same sector.5 Then
comes the second generation studies, which use firm level panel data. However, most of these
1

The adoption process operates through licensing agreements, imitation, employee training, the introduction of
new processes, and products by foreign firms, and the creation of linkages between foreign and domestic firms.
2
See Blomstrom and Kokko (1998), Gorg and Greenway (2004), Lipsey (2002), Barba Navaretti and Venables
(2004), and Alfaro and Rodriguez-Clare (2004) for surveys of spillover channels and empirical findings.
3
See Carkovic and Levine (2006).
4
See also Blomstorm (1986).
5
A multinational enterprise (MNE) is a firm that owns and controls production facilities or other income-generating
assets in at least two countries. When a foreign investor begins a green-field operation (i.e., constructs new production
facilities) or acquires control of an existing local firm, that investment is regarded as a direct investment in the balance
of payments statistics. An investment tends to be classified as direct if a foreign investor holds at least 10 percent
of a local firm’s equity. This arbitrary threshold is meant to reflect the notion that large stockholders, even if they
do not hold a majority stake, will have a strong say in a company’s decisions and participate in and influence its
management. Hence, to create, acquire or expand a foreign subsidiary, MNEs undertake FDI. In this paper, we often
refer to the MNE and FDI interchangeably.

1

studies find no effect of foreign presence or find negative productivity spillover effects from the
MNEs to the developing country firms.6 The positive spillover effects are found only for developed countries.7 Based on these negative results, a third generation of studies argues that since
multinationals would like to prevent information leakage to potential local competitors, but would
benefit from knowledge spillovers to their local suppliers, FDI spillovers ought to be between different industries. Hence, one must look for vertical (inter-industry) externalities instead of horizontal
(intra-industry) externalities. This means the externalities from FDI will manifest themselves
through forward or backward linkages, i.e., contacts between domestic suppliers of intermediate
inputs and their multinational clients in downstream sectors (backward linkage) or between foreign
suppliers of intermediate inputs and their domestic clients in upstream sectors (forward linkage).8
Javorcik (2004) and Alfaro and Rodriguez-Clare (2004) find evidence for the existence of backward
linkages between the downstream suppliers and the MNE in Lithuania and in Venezuela, Chile, and
Brazil respectively.9 These results are consistent with FDI spillovers between different industries.
The purpose of this study is twofold. First, in a theoretical framework, we formalize the
mechanism through which FDI leads to a higher growth rate in the host country via backward
linkages, which is consistent with the micro evidence found by the third-generation studies described
above. The mechanism depends on the extent of the development of the local financial sector.
Financial markets act as a channel for the linkage effect to be realized and create positive spillovers.
This channel is also consistent with the macro literature cited above that shows the importance of
absorptive capacities.10 We are not aware of any other study that is consistent with both micro and
macro empirical evidence. Our results on the importance of the financial markets also contributes
to an emerging literature that emphasizes the importance of local policies and institutions for the
6

See Aitken and Harrison (1999).
Haskel, Pereira and Slaughter (2002), for example, find positive spillovers from foreign to local firms in a panel
data set of firms in the U.K.; Gorg and Strobl (2002) find that foreign presence reduces exit and encourages entry by
domestically owned firms in the high-tech sector in Ireland.
8
Hirschman (1958) argues that the linkage effects are realized when one industry may facilitate the development
of another by easing conditions of production, thereby setting the pace for further rapid industrialization. He also
argues that in the absence of linkages, foreign investments could have limited or even negative effects in an economy
(the so-called enclave economies).
9
See also Kugler (2006).
10
See Alfaro, Chanda, Kalemli-Ozcan and Sayek (2004), Harrison and McMillian (2003) and Harrison, Love and
McMillian (2004) for descriptions of various interactions between financial markets and foreign and domestic firms.
Javorkic and Spatareanue (2005) present survey data that show multinationals source on average 48.3 percent of
inputs from Czech enterprises. The multinationals stated that one of the reasons why they do not source more is the
fact that Czech firms lack funding for investment necessary to become suppliers.
7

2

benefits of FDI to be realized. Antras (2003), for example, argues that lack of adequate contract
and property rights enforcement can limit the interaction between foreign and local firms only to
hiring labor.11
Our model is a small open economy, where final goods production is carried out by foreign
and domestic firms, which compete for skilled labor, unskilled labor, and intermediate products.
To operate a firm in the intermediate goods sector, entrepreneurs must develop a new variety of
intermediate good, a task that requires upfront capital investments. The more developed the local
financial markets, the easier it is for credit constrained entrepreneurs to start their own firms.
The increase in the number of varieties of intermediate goods leads to positive spillovers to the
final goods sector. As a result, financial markets allow the backward linkages between foreign and
domestic firms to turn into FDI spillovers.12 Our model also implies the existence of horizontal
spillovers in the final goods sector since the greater availability of intermediate inputs not only
benefits the foreign firms but also raises the total factor productivity of the domestic firms in the
final goods sector, thus creating a horizontal spillover as an indirect result of the backward linkage.
In the second half of the paper, we use the model to quantitatively gauge how the response
of growth to FDI varies with the level of development of the financial markets. To the best of
our knowledge, this paper is unique in this respect. We find that a) holding the extent of foreign
presence constant, financially well-developed economies experience growth rates that are almost
twice those of economies with poor financial markets, b) increases in the share of FDI or the
relative productivity of the foreign firm leads to higher additional growth in financially developed
economies compared to those observed in financially under-developed economies. The calibration
section, additionally, highlights the importance of local conditions such as market structure and
human capital, the so-called absorptive capacities, for generating the positive effect of FDI on
economic growth. For example, we find larger growth effects when goods produced by domestic firms
and MNEs are substitutes rather than complements. By varying the relative skill endowments—
while assuming that MNEs use skilled labor more intensively—we obtain results consistent with
Borensztein, De Gregorio, and Lee (1998) who highlight the critical role of human capital.
11

See also Lin and Saggi (2006).
In our model, linkages are associated with pecuniary externalities in the production of inputs. In contrast to
knowledge spillovers, pecuniary externalities take place through market transactions, see Hirschman (1958). Hobday
(1995), in a case study of developing East Asia, finds many situations in which MNEs investment created backward
linkages effects to local suppliers.
12

3

Theoretical models of FDI spillovers via backward linkages include Rodriguez-Clare (1996),
Markusen and Venables (1999), and Lin and Saggi (2006). None of these models investigate the
critical role played by local financial markets and neither do they focus on the dynamic effects of FDI
spillovers. Instead, these are static models. Our model closely follows Grossman and Helpman’s
(1990, 1991) small open economy setup of endogenous technological progress resulting from product
innovation via increasing intermediate product diversity. We modify their basic framework to
incorporate foreign-owned firms and financial intermediation. The standard Grossman-Helpman
setting is preferred since it provides the most transparent solution. Further, models of FDI such as
the ones mentioned above also use the intermediate product variety structure in a static setting,
thus making it a natural choice when moving to a dynamic framework.13 Recently, Aghion, Howitt,
and Mayer-Foulkes (2005) have modeled technology transfers with imperfect financial markets
in a Schumpeterian growth model. Their model is different than ours in the sense that they
focus on credit constraints impeding international technology transfers (and hence international
convergence), while we focus on the role of financial markets easing the credit constraints and
allowing linkages between multinational firms and local suppliers in the host country to materialize.
Thus, we are concerned with linkages within an economy once FDI has taken place. In a related
paper that is closer to the spirit of our paper, Aghion, Comin, and Howitt (2006) develop a model
that highlights the role of local savings in attracting and complementing foreign investment which
spurs innovation and growth.
The importance of well-functioning financial institutions in augmenting technological innovation
and capital accumulation, fostering entrepreneurial activity and hence economic development has
been recognized and extensively discussed in the literature.14 Furthermore, as McKinnon (1973)
stated, the development of capital markets is “necessary and sufficient” to foster the “adoption of
best-practice technologies and learning by doing.” In other words, limited access to credit markets
restricts entrepreneurial development. In this paper, we extend this view and argue that the lack
of development of the local financial markets can limit the economy’s ability to take advantage
of potential FDI spillovers in a theoretical framework, a premise which is already supported by
empirical evidence.
13
Gao (2005) also incorporates FDI into a growth model that closely follows Grossman and Helpman (1991). The
author neither models the role of domestic financial markets nor relates the model to empirical evidence.
14
See Goldsmith (1969), Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990), and King and Levine (1993a,b), among others.

4

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 performs
a calibration exercise using values for the parameters from the empirical literature. Section 4
concludes.

2
2.1

The Model
Households

Consider a small open economy. The economy is populated by a continuum of infinitely lived agents
of total mass 1. Households maximize utility over their consumption of the final good,
Z
Ut =

∞

e−ρ(τ −t) log u(Cτ )dτ,

(1)

t

where u(.) is a continuously differentiable strictly concave utility function, ρ is the time preference
parameter, and Cτ denotes consumption of the final good at time τ . The final good, denoted by
Yt , is a numeraire and is freely traded in world markets at a price pt which we normalize to 1. The
total expenditure on consumption is thus given by Eτ = pτ Cτ = Cτ . Households maximize utility
subject to the following intertemporal budget constraint,
Z

∞

−r(τ −t)

e
t

Z
Eτ dτ ≤

∞

e−r(τ −t) wτ dτ + At ,

(2)

t

where At denotes the value of the assets held by the household at time t, and wτ is the wage income.
The intertemporal budget constraint requires that the present value of the expenditures, Eτ , not
exceed the present value of labor income plus the value of asset holdings in the initial period. The
solution of this standard problem implies that the value of the expenditures must grow at a rate
equal to the difference between the interest rate and the discount rate. However, if this rate of
growth of expenditure is different from the endogenous rate of growth of the economy then either
the transversality condition is violated or the economy no longer remains a small open economy.
To rule out these possibilities, we assume that households are credit constrained and can borrow at
most a fixed fraction of their current income. Further, we assume that this constraint is binding,
and therefore the actual rate of growth of expenditures is proportional to the rate of growth of

5

income:15

.

E
Ẏ
∝
E
Y

2.2
2.2.1

Production
The Final Goods Sector

Final good production combines the production processes of domestic and foreign firms denoted
respectively by Yt,d and Yt,f , which are not traded. Let pt,d and pt,f denote their respective prices.
The aggregate production function for this composite final good is given by,
ρ 1/ρ
ρ
] ,
+ µYt,f
Yt = [Yt,d

(3)

where ρ ≤ 1 and ε = 1/ (1 − ρ) represents the elasticity of substitution between Yt,d and Yt,f . We
do not model the decision of foreign firms to enter the market. Therefore, the aggregator of foreign
and domestic firms’ production serves as an artifact that allows us to capture the interaction of
foreign and domestic firms in an economy.16 We can exogenously vary µ to capture realistic shares
of foreign and domestic firms in the final output. If ε = ∞, foreign and domestic firms produce
perfect substitutes; ε = −∞, they produce complements. If ε = 1, the production function for the
final good becomes Cobb Douglas.
Profit maximization yields,


pt,f
Yt,d 1−ρ
=µ
.
pt,d
Yt,f

(4)

The cost function is given by,
h
i 1
1−ε
1−ε
.
C (Yt , pt,f , pt,d ) = Yt pt,d
+ µε p1−ε
t,f
Setting the price equal to marginal cost,
h
i 1
1−ε
1−ε
1 = pt,d
+ µε p1−ε
,
t,f
15

This is only an assumption of convenience since, as we will see later, the entrepreneurs are also credit-constrained
and we would rather treat both groups the same to rule out any gains from arbitrage.
16
Although not in a context of domestic and foreign production, Acemoglu (1998) has a similar set-up where the
final good is a composite of skilled- and unskilled-labor intensive intermediate inputs.

6

which allows us to derive an expression between the price of the domestic firm and foreign firm
goods,

 1
1−ε
pd = 1 − µε pf1−ε
.
2.2.2

(5)

Foreign and Domestic Firms Production Processes

Both foreign and domestic firms’ production processes combine unskilled labor, skilled labor, and a
composite intermediate good. The intermediate good is assembled from a continuum of horizontally
differentiated goods. Unskilled and skilled labor are not traded and available in fixed quantities
L and H, correspondingly. Competition in the labor market ensures that unskilled and skilled
wages, wt,u and wt,s , are equal to their respective marginal products. To capture the importance
of proximity between suppliers and users of inputs, we assume that all varieties of intermediate
goods are non-traded. This is a common assumption used to capture transportation costs or local
content requirements.17 The same results would arise if instead of the extreme assumption of
non-tradability we assumed that inputs had significant transportation costs, something for which
there is ample evidence.18 One could assume that there are some intermediate goods that are
tradable and others that are non-tradable. In that case, our qualitative results would prevail, while
the quantitative effects would be of smaller magnitude. However, we believe our assumptions are
realistic. Javorkic and Spatareanue (2005), for example, present survey data that suggest that
multinationals are actively engaged in local sourcing in the Czech Republic. When asked about the
share of inputs purchased from each type of suppliers (in terms of value), multinationals indicated
sourcing on average 48.3 percent of inputs from Czech enterprises, as compared to 33.3 and 12.6
percent from firms in the EU/Eastern Europe and multinationals located in the Czech Republic,
respectively. The top reasons reported for cooperating with Czech suppliers included: low prices,
geographic proximity, savings on transport costs, and savings on import duties. More generally, in
many cases, many countries tend to impose local content requirements to foreign firms.
Domestic production is characterized by,
γd λ
Yt,d = Ad Lβt,dd Ht,d
It,d ,
17
18

See Grossman and Helpman (1990), Markusen and Venables (1999) and Rodriguez-Clare (1996).
See Overman, Redding and Venables (2001) and Alfaro and Rodriguez-Clare (2004).

7

(6)

with 0 < βd < 1, 0 < γd < 1, 0 < λ < 1 and βd + γd + λ = 1. Lt,d , Ht,d , and It,d denote, respectively,
the amount of unskilled labor, skilled labor, and the composite intermediate good used in domestic
production at any instant in time, and Ad represents the time invariant productivity parameter.
Foreigners directly produce in the country rather than license the technology. The industrial
organization literature suggests that firms engage in FDI not because of differences in the cost of
capital but because certain assets are worth more under foreign than local control. If lower cost
of capital were the only advantage a foreign firm had over domestic firms, it would still remain
unexplained why a foreign investor would endure the troubles of operating a firm in a different
political, legal, and cultural environment instead of simply making a portfolio investment. Graham
and Krugman (1991), Kindleberger (1969), and Lipsey (2003) show that investors often fail to
bring all the capital with them when they take control of a foreign company; instead, they tend
to finance an important share of their investment in the local market. An investor’s decision to
acquire a foreign company or build a plant instead of simply exporting or engaging in other forms
of contractual arrangements with foreign firms involves two interrelated aspects: ownership of an
asset and the location to produce.19 First, a firm can possess some ownership advantage—a firmspecific asset such as a patent, technology, process, or managerial or organizational know-how—that
enables it to outperform local firms. And this is one of the reasons why researchers fail to find
evidence of horizontal spillovers since this means that a foreign firm will seek to use this special
asset to its advantage and prevent leakages of its technology. Hence, we model potential benefits
from FDI as occurring via linkages and not through technology spillovers. However, we do model
for the ownership of intangible assets and know-how by the MNE by allowing for a differential
productivity level than domestic firms.
Second, domestic factors, such as opportunities to tap into local resources, access to low-cost
inputs or low-wage labor, or bypass tariffs that protect a market from imported goods can also lead
to the decision to invest in a country rather than serve the foreign market through exports. We do
not model the operation choice for the MNE, rather we are interested in understanding the effects
of an already occuring foreign investment. Therefore, the model can abstract from reasons for why
a MNE operates through FDI rather than exporting.20
19
This approach to the theory of the multinational firm is also known as the OLI framework— ownership advantage,
localization, internalization. See Dunning (1981).
20
For models that endogenize the FDI decision, see Helpman (1984), Markusen (1984), and Helpman, Melitz, and

8

Since our objective in this paper is to understand the effects of foreign production on local
output and the role of financial markets, and not the decision to invest abroad, we model the
frictions of doing business in the domestic economy with the parameter φ.21 Thus, foreign firms
use the following Cobb Douglas production function,
Yt,f =

Af β f γ f λ
L H I ,
φ t,f t,f t,f

(7)

with 0 < βf < 1, 0 < γf < 1, and βf +γf +λ = 1. Like before, Lt,f , Ht,f ,and It,f denote, respectively,
the amount of unskilled labor, skilled labor, and the composite intermediate good used in foreign
production at any instant in time, and Af represents the time invariant productivity parameter.22
Unskilled and skilled labor have different shares within the domestic and foreign production,
though the total labor share is assumed to be the same across both types of firms. This reflects the
common observation that the share of labor tends to be around two-thirds of total factor payments
while at the same time permitting different skill intensities within domestic and foreign production.
A corollary of assuming the same total labor share is,
γf − γd = βd − βf .

(8)

The composite intermediate good is assembled from differentiated intermediate inputs. Following Ethier (1982), we assume that, for a given aggregate quantity of intermediate inputs used in
the final good production, output is higher when the diversity in the set of inputs used is greater.
This specification captures the productivity gains from increasing degrees of specialization in the
production of final goods.
Z
It,d = It,f = It =

n

1/α
xαt,i di
,

(9)

0

where xt,i is the amount of each intermediate good i used in the production of the final good at
time t, and n is the number of varieties available. Let pi denote the price of a variety i of the
Yeaple (2004).
21
We allow for a broad interpretation of these barriers, as foreign firms need to bear a wide range of costs/risks of
doing business abroad, including sovereign risk, taxes, and infrastructure and dealing with different institutions and
cultures. We also considered an alternative scenario where MNEs receive a net price pf /φ where φ > 1, reflecting
these disadvantages, obtaining similar results.
22
See Markusen and Venables (1999) and Rodriguez-Clare (1996) for similar technology assumptions between
foreign and domestic firms.

9

intermediate good x. The CES specification imposes constant and equal elasticity of substitution
(1/(1 − α)) between a pair of goods. Each variety of intermediate good enters the production
function identically and the marginal product of each variety is infinite when xt,i = 0. This implies
that the firm will use all the intermediate goods in the same quantity, thus xt,i = xt . Let Xt = nt xt
be the total input of intermediate goods employed in the production of the final good at time t,
1−α

then we can rewrite It = nt α Xt . Domestic production is given by,23
Yd = Ad Lβd d Hdγd Xdλ n

λ(1−α)
α

,

(10)

Af βf γf λ λ(1−α)
L H X n α .
φ f d f

(11)

and foreign production by,
Yf =

Thus, raising the varieties of intermediate inputs n, holding the quantity of intermediate goods
constant, raises output productivity. Using the cost function and the fact that in a symmetric
equilibrium all intermediate goods are priced similarly, pi = px , we can write the equilibrium
conditions for the domestic and foreign firms respectively as,
−βd −γd
λ(α−1)
γd
A−1
βd γd λ
d βd
α
,
w
w
p
n
pd =
u
s
x
λλ

pf =
2.2.3

−βf −γf
γf
λ
λ

φA−1
f βf

β

γ

wuf ws f pλx n

λ(α−1)
α

(12)

.

(13)

The Intermediate Goods Sector

The intermediate goods sector is characterized by monopolistic competition. There exists an infinite
number of potential varieties of intermediate goods, but only a subset of varieties is produced at
any point in time as entrepreneurs are required to develop a new variety. Since the set of potential
intermediate goods is unbounded, an entrepreneur will never choose to develop an already existing
variety. Therefore, variety i of x is produced by a single firm which then chooses the price pi to
maximize profits. Firms take as given the price of competing intermediate inputs, the price of the
final good, and the price of the factors of production. In a symmetric equilibrium all intermediate
goods are priced similarly, pi = px . Hence, profit maximization in every time period for each supplier
23

Since we will focus exclusively on the balanced growth path, we omit the time subscript for the rest of the paper.

10

of variety i implies,
max πi = px xi − cx (wu , ws , xi )xi ,

(14)

where cx (wu , ws , xi ) represents the cost function and xi = xd + xf is the sum of the demand for
the intermediate product i by domestic and foreign firms respectively.
Production of intermediate goods requires both skilled and unskilled labor according to the
following specification,

xi = Lδxi Hx1−δ
.
i

(15)

Hence, the cost function for the monopolist is given by,

c (wu , ws , xi ) = δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ) wuδ ws(1−δ) xi .

(16)

Profit maximization yields the result that each variety is priced at a constant markup (1/α)
over the marginal cost.24 Hence, the price of each intermediate good is given by,
(1−δ)

px = δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)

wuδ ws
α

.

(17)

The fraction that domestic firms spend on all intermediate goods is given by the corresponding
share in the production function, λpd Yd . This implies that for each intermediate good, the amount
spent by domestic firms is given by λpd Yd /n. Similarly, the amount that foreign firms spend on
these goods is given by λpf Yf /n. The sum of amounts spent by foreign and domestic firms is the
total revenue of the intermediate producer,

px xi =

λpd Yd λpf Yf
+
.
n
n

(18)

Therefore, we can write the operating profits per firm as,
πi =

(1 − α)
[λpd Yd + λpf Yf ] .
n

(19)

What is the value of introducing new intermediate goods and thus the value of the monopolistic
24

See Helpman and Krugman (1985), chapter 6.

11

firm? Let vt denote the present discounted value of an infinite stream of profits for a firm that
supplies intermediate goods at time t,
Z
vt =

∞

e−r(s−t) πs ds.

t

Equity holders of the firm are entitled to the stream of future profits of the firm. They make an
.

instantaneous return of (πt + v), (profits and capital gain). They can also invest the same amount
in a risk-free bond and receive return rvt (the prevailing market interest rate). Arbitrage in capital
markets ensures that,

.

π + v̇ = rv ⇒

π+v
= r.
v

(20)

Thus, the rate of return of holding ownership shares is equal to the interest rate.25
2.2.4

Introduction of New Varieties and Financial Markets

In order to operate a firm in the intermediate good sector, entrepreneurs must develop a new
variety of intermediate goods. The introduction of each new variety requires some initial capital
investment according to the following specification,
ṅ =

K θ
n .
a

(21)

In contrast to Grossman and Helpman (1991), who assume that new varieties are developed
with two inputs, labor and general knowledge, we opt for one input only, capital, to simplify the
analysis.26 Our main results do not depend on this simplifying assumption. The main implication
of this simplification is that our results are less dependent on the production parameters of the
innovation sector. This has important advantages for our calibration exercise, as the stylized facts
of the innovation and imitation processes are not well documented. Our central argument is that
entrepreneurs face difficulties in obtaining, for example, loans to set up firms and this prevents the
25

Note that the arbitrage condition does not contradict our assumption of credit-constrained households since they
can choose to lend to firms or invest in a risk free bond.
26
Grossman and Helpman (1991) assume that the greater the stock of general knowledge among the scientific
.
community, the smaller the input of human capital needed to invent a new product. They assume n = KL/a, where
K represents the stock of general knowledge capital and not physical capital like in our model. Hence, in our model,
in incurring setup costs, intermediate firms do not compete for labor inputs against the final good sector.

12

creation of backward linkages even under the presence of FDI. Assuming only capital is used for
these setup costs then allows us to focus better on this issue.
The introduction of a new variety depends on the existing stock of varieties. We introduce
the parameter θ since this allows a more general production structure. A value of θ < 0 suggests
a “fishing out” effect (increasing complexity in introducing new varieties) while a value of θ > 0
implies positive externalities (“standing on the shoulder of giants”). At this stage, we do not
postulate an exact value of θ.27 This will be pinned down by conditions required to satisfy balanced
growth. Finally, a can be viewed as the level of efficiency in the innovation sector.
Given nθ and a, if an entrepreneur wants to introduce one variety at any instant in time, the
amount of capital needed will be K = a/nθ , so that ṅ = 1. We assume that one unit of final output
(Y ) can be costlessly converted into one unit of physical capital and thus the price of each unit of
capital is the same as the price of Y , which in turn, has already been normalized to 1.Therefore,
in the absence of credit market imperfections, the cost of introducing a new variety is,
a
.
nθ

(22)

However, in the presence of imperfect credit markets, the initial capital investment must be financed
by borrowing from domestic financial institutions. The domestic financial system intermediates
resources at an additional cost, as in Edwards and Vegh (1997). This cost reflects the level of
development of the domestic financial markets where lower levels of development are associated
with higher costs. These costs manifest themselves in a higher instantaneous borrowing rate, i
which is greater than the lending rate, r. As King and Levine (1993a) mention, this wedge could
reflect taxes, interest ceilings, required reserve policies, high intermediation costs due to labor
regulation, or high administration costs, etc. This simplification allows us to focus on the main
theme of the paper: the role of financial markets in allowing FDI benefits to materialize. Thus,
this assumption should be regarded as a shortcut to more complex modelling of the financial
sector. The reader is referred to the appendix for a cost verification approach following King and
Levine (1993b) that yields similar implications. Our qualitative results will be the same under this
27

For more on the implications of these alternative assumptions, see Jones (1995). While we do not postulate an
exact value, we will work under the assumption that θ 6= 1. Also for convenience, the discussion will treat θ as
positive.

13

framework. Therefore, the present discounted value of the stream of interest payments is,
∞

Z
t

ia −r(s−t)
ia
e
ds = θ .
θ
n
rn

There is free entry into the innovation sector. Entrepreneurs will have an incentive to enter if
ia
rnθ

< v. However, this condition implies that the demand for capital will be infinite, which cannot

be an equilibrium solution. Hence, we can rule out this condition ex-ante. If, on the other hand,
ia
rnθ

> v, entrepreneurs will have no incentive to engage in innovation. This possibility cannot be

ruled out ex-ante but would lead to zero growth. Therefore, in equilibrium, if there is growth in
the number of varieties it must be the case that,
ia
= v iff ṅ > 0.
rnθ

(23)

This also implies,
ṅ
v̇
= −θ ,
v
n
i.e., more innovation reduces the value of each firm. Using this expression and the arbitrage
condition in the capital markets,

π
v

+

v̇
v

= r, we can rewrite equation (20) as,
π
ṅ
− θ = r.
v
n

(24)

Using firm profit equation (19), equation (23), and equation (24) we obtain,


pf Yf
ṅ
r (1 − α) λ pd Yd
+ 1−θ − θ = r.
1−θ
ia
n
n
n
In order to simplify, we define

Yd
n1−θ

= Ỹd and

Yf
n1−θ

(25)

= Ỹf as efficiency units of outputs and get,

i r
ṅ
r (1 − α) λ h
=
pd Ỹd + pf Ỹf −
n
θia
θ

(26)

As is standard in this class of models, the growth rate of varieties, ṅ/n, ultimately pins down
the growth rate of both domestic output and foreign output, and thus aggregate output as well.

14

2.3

General Equilibrium and the Balanced Growth Path

Using the efficiency unit adjusted output levels, Ỹd and Ỹf , we can also rewrite equation (4) as,
" #1−ρ
pf
Ỹd
=µ
.
pd
Ỹf

(27)

And we can rewrite equation (21) as,
1
1 K
ṅ
= K̃,
=
n
a n1−θ
a
where K̃ is the capital stock per efficiency unit.
Substituting the price for intermediate inputs (17) into the equilibrium conditions for the domestic (12) and foreign production (13), and defining efficiency wages for both skilled and unskilled
 (1−α)λ 
 (1−α)λ 
and w̃u = wu / n α
, for the domestic and foreign sector, respeclabor as w̃s = ws / n α
tively, we obtain the following expressions,
A−1 β −βd γ −γd
pd = d d λ d
λ

pf =

−βf −γf
γf
λλ

φA−1
f βf

δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)
α

!λ

δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)
α

w̃uβd +δλ w̃sγd +(1−δ)λ

(28)

!λ
β +δλ

w̃uf

γ +(1−δ)λ

w̃s f

(29)

Equilibrium conditions in the labor market imply that the labor employed by the domestic, the
foreign, and the intermediate goods production processes add up to the total labor supply in the
economy. This implies, for skilled and unskilled labor, respectively,
Ld + Lf + nLx = L,

(30)

Hd + Hf + nHx = H.

(31)

Using the cost functions for the domestic, foreign and intermediate goods sector and Shephard’s

15

Lemma, we can rewrite these two constraints as,
(βd + δαλ) pd Yd (βf + δαλ) pf Yf
+
= L,
wu
wu
(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) pd Yd (γf + (1 − δ)αλ) pf Yf
+
= H.
ws
ws
Using our output and wage equations in terms of efficiency units, we can rewrite both constraints
as,
(βd + δαλ) pd Ỹd n1−θ
(1−α)λ

w̃u n α
(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) pd Ỹd n1−θ
w̃s n

(1−α)λ
α

+

+

(βf + δαλ) pf Ỹf n1−θ
(1−α)λ

w̃u n α
(γf + (1 − δ)αλ) pf Ỹf n1−θ
w̃s n

(1−α)λ
α

= L,
= H.



Along the balanced growth path, labor shares must be constant. This means that pi Ỹi

n1−θ



/w̃j n

(i = d, f ; j = u, s) should be constant. There are two ways to achieve this. The first is to assume


ṅ
that prices, pi , grow at the rate (1−α)λ
−
(1
−
θ)
α
n . This assumption still implies that pd /pf would
be constant since none of these parameters reflect sectoral differences and the relative price would
thus be driven by other factors (mainly ρ and µ). An alternative would be to impose

(1−α)λ
α

= 1 − θ.

Although this assumption has the disadvantage of being a knife-edge condition, it does offer an
advantage. It allows us to back out the value of θ, for which empirical measures are not available
(measures for λ and α on the other hand are easily available from the literature). This condition
still implies that pd /pf would be constant. Therefore, we assume that this condition holds. Thus,
we can rewrite the above as,
(βd + δαλ) pd Ỹd (βf + δαλ) pf Ỹf
+
= L,
w̃u
w̃u
(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) pd Ỹd (γf + (1 − δ)αλ) pf Ỹf
+
= H.
w̃s
w̃s

(32)
(33)

Now we can solve for all the endogenous variables and derive the equilibrium balanced growth.
In order to be able to solve the equilibrium growth rate of varieties,

ṅ
n,

we need to solve the set of
n
o
prices {pd , pf , w̃u , w̃s } and the outputs of the domestic and foreign sectors, Ỹd , Ỹf . To solve for
the prices and the outputs, we use equations (4), (5), (28), (29), (32) and (33). These equations

16

(1−α)λ
α

can be solved in a sequential order. The details are presented in the appendix. While we can solve
for the FOCs and derive implicit relationships, because of equation (5), we cannot derive explicit
solutions for the endogenous variables in terms of the parameters.
Our model exhibits some of the standard properties of product variety-based endogenous growth.
Combining the above with equation (26),
i r
ṅ
r (1 − α) λ h
=
pd Ỹd + pf Ỹf −
n
θia
θ
we can see that, the scale effect is very much present—larger endowments (L and H) will lead
to larger output and thus to higher growth rate. Furthermore, higher λ, which is the share of
intermediate input costs in final output production, also drives up the growth rate of n by the same
reasoning. Similarly, lower substitutability among intermediate goods (α) increases the growth
rate since it raises the profitability of new intermediate goods. An increase in either, Af , or µ,
will lead to a reallocation of resources away from the domestic firm to the foreign firm. Therefore,
the instantaneous effect will be a decline in domestic firms’ share in output. In the long run, both
domestic and foreign firms will benefit from the higher growth rate. However, in the short-run, the
horizontal spillovers in the final goods sector, which indirectly result from the backward linkages
between the foreign firm and the intermediate goods sector, exist only for the surviving domestic
firms. This is an additional contribution of our setup, which can shed light on why empirical studies
fail to find evidence of positive horizontal spillovers for developing countries and even find negative
spillovers in some cases.28
Moving on to the role of the financial markets, one can see that the borrowing rate has a
negative effect on the growth rate. It reflects the higher per unit cost of initial capital investment.
The lending rate works through at least two channels - a positive and a negative one. The positive
effect reflects a lower wedge between the two rates. The negative effect is more standard in that it
reflects the higher opportunity cost of investing in the project and thus tends to lower the growth
28
While our model is very much in the spirit of traditional endogenous growth models, more recently there has been
a trend to move towards models that suggest a long run exogenous growth rate with endogenous growth in transition
(e.g. see Aghion et al (2005)). This class of models implies, that in the long run, differences in financial markets
or extent of FDI would be reflected in transition paths or differences in relative income levels instead. We have not
adopted this scheme a) because focusing on relative income levels abstracts from some of the dynamic spillovers that
are interesting when one talks about FDI and growth, b) the product variety models do not easily lend themselves
to endogenous growth in transition and exogenous growth in the steady state.

17

rate. However, a visual inspection of the above equation suggests, trivially, that the net effect of an
increase in r will be to raise the growth rate (assuming, of course, that the growth rate is already
positive). However, a third channel via which an increase in r may work is by increasing i. This
would make the overall effect of an increase in r ambiguous.
If we restrict ourselves to the special case of where the aggregator is a Cobb Douglas function
(or perfect substitute case), we can solve explicitly for all the endogenous variables. We turn to
these next to get a sense of the qualitative implication of the model.

The Special Case of Cobb Douglas Production Function

The Cobb Douglas case can be analyzed by using the following aggregator for the domestic and
foreign output,
1

µ

Y = Yd1+µ Yf1+µ ,

(34)

⇔ Y = Ydη Yf1−η ,

(35)

where µ = (1 − η) /η for simpler notation. Note that profit maximization here implies that
pd
η Yf
=
.
pf
1 − η Yd

(36)

As for the cost function and equilibrium conditions,
(1−η)

C(y, pd , pf ) = η −η (1 − η)−(1−η) pηd pf
⇒ pd = η (1 − η)

(1−η)
η

−(1−η)
η

pf

Y = 1,

.

Recalling the arbitrage condition,
i
(1 − α) rλ h
ṅ
pd Ỹd + pf Ỹf − θ = r.
ia
n

18

(37)

Using (36), the previous expression as,
⇒

(1 − α) rλ
ṅ
pf Ỹf − θ = r.
ia (1 − η)
n

(38)

We can solve the model completely, using equations (28), (29), (32), (33), (36), and (37). The
details are worked out in the appendix. The main equation of interest is (70) in the appendix,
renumbered here as (39)


(1 − α) rλ
ia



w̃s H
η (γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (1 − η) (γf + (1 − δ)αλ)


−θ

ṅ
= r,
n

(39)





Ψβ
Ψγ ; Υ = η η (1 − η)(1−η) ; Λ = A β βd γ γd ; Λ = A β βf γ γf /φ;
(ΦL)
H
where w̃s H = ∆ΥΛηd Λ1−η
f
f f
d
d d d
f
f
η(γd +(1−δ)αλ)+(1−η)(γf +(1−δ)αλ)
Φ=
; Ψβ = η (βd + δλ)+(1 − η) (βf + δλ) ; Ψγ = η (γd + (1 − δ)λ)+
η(βd +δαλ)+(1−η)(βf +δαλ)
(1 − η) (γf + (1 − δ)λ) .
There are a couple of conclusions one can draw from the Cobb Douglas case. First, higher
productivity of either domestic or foreign firms raises the growth rate in the economy since, all else
being equal, a higher Af and a higher Ad both tend to raise growth. The equation for w̃s H above, is
also increasing in both L and H. Essentially, an increase in any of these four exogenous parameters
increases the profits from introducing new intermediate goods and thus causes the growth rate to
rise. However, note that even if Af increases relative to Ad (i.e. a higher productivity gap between
the domestic and the foreign producer) this will not increase the share of the foreign producer in the
market. This is the clear drawback of using a Cobb Douglas specification. Second, the effect of a
higher share of foreign production, (1 − η) , on aggregate growth is ambiguous. The ambiguity can
be attributed to the term, Υ = η η (1 − η)(1−η) which is a U-shaped function of η that is minimized
at η = 0.5. For most of the countries in the world η > 0.5 and for most developing economies it
would be near to 1. Therefore, even if there is a productivity gap between the domestic and the
foreign producer, the term Υ, which is independent of this gap, could drive down the growth rates.

The Special Case of Perfect Substitutes

19

CES aggregators allow for finite elasticities of substitution. But what if the two outputs were
perfect substitutes? Perfect substitutes is of course a special case of the CES with ρ → 1 (and for
simplicity assume that µ = 1 as well). In this situation, it is easier to bypass the aggregator (since
both products will have the same price and are indistinguishable) and assume that they are traded
in the international market with the world price normalized to 1. One might wonder if the domestic
sector would survive at all given the technological superiority of the foreign firms. However, note
that the production function parameters for the domestic and foreign firms are different allowing
for both firms to co-exist while setting the marginal costs equal to the price of the final good,
since the relative marginal costs are not completely driven by productivity differences. The explicit
solution for the perfect substitute case is worked out in the appendix.
Next, we turn to the calibration exercises, where by using empirical estimates of our parameters
we quantitatively study the comparative static effects we have discussed so far.

3

Calibration Exercise

The purpose of the calibration exercise is to study the quantitative growth effects of FDI, focusing
on different levels of financial market development. We begin with a description of the parameters
used in the analysis.
Financial Development: We group countries based on their financial market development levels.
Different measures have been used in the literature to proxy for financial market development. The
broader financial market development measures, such as the monetary-aggregates as a share of
GDP and the private sector credit extended by financial institutions as a share of GDP, capture
the extent of financial intermediation; interest rate spreads, on the other hand, capture the cost of
intermediation. Given that the spread between the lending and borrowing rates better captures the
spirit of our model, we prefer it as the measure for the development of the financial markets.29 We
find that the alternative measures of financial market development, such as the size of the financial
market, the share of private sector credit in total banking activity, and the overhead costs are all
highly correlated with interest rate spreads. Hence, different measures yield similar results.30 The
29

Erosa (2001) defines the financial intermediation cost as the resources used per unit of value that is intermediated,
which is the total value of financial assets owned by the financial institutions. He measures the financial intermediation
cost as the spread between the lending and borrowing rates.
30
Alternative measures are from Levine et al. (2000).

20

average spread for the low financially developed (poor) countries, medium financially developed
(middle income) countries and the high financially developed (rich) countries between 2000 and
2003 are 14.5%, 8.5%, and 4.5%, respectively.
Elasticity of Substitution: In our model, ρ relates to the elasticity of substitution between
goods produced by foreign and domestic firms. Evidence regarding the appropriate choice of the
elasticity of substitution parameter ρ is sparse, given that such depiction of final goods production
is an artifact to capture the interaction between foreign and domestic firms. The evidence that is
closest to the spirit of our model is from the consumption literature that uses a constant elasticity
of substitution utility function between varieties of domestic and foreign goods, or between tradable
and nontradable goods. Ruhl (2005) provides a detailed overview of the Armington elasticity, i.e.,
the elasticity of substitution between foreign and home goods, and finds that an appropriate value
for ρ is around 0.2.31 While our benchmark analysis is based on the CES production function
with ρ = 0.2, we also undertake robustness analysis by allowing ρ to vary between −0.9 and 0.9.
In section 3.2, we present the quantitative characteristics of the model for the Cobb Douglas case
(ρ = 1).
The share of intermediate goods in the production of the final good (λ) is assumed to be the same
across the two production technologies. The formulation of the production technology allows setting
the share of the intermediate goods equal to the share of physical capital in final goods production.
Following Gollin (2002), we set this share equal to 1/3. The remaining 2/3 is accounted by skilled
and unskilled labor. The remaining parameters used in the benchmark analysis are chosen such
that those for the domestic firm capture the characteristics of the production technologies available
in the developing countries; whereas, those for the foreign firm capture the characteristics of the
production technologies available in the industrial countries.
Domestic Firms: According to Weil (2004), the share of wages paid to skilled labor is 49% for
the developing countries. We take this value to be that of domestic firms, suggesting that of labor’s
2/3rd share in final goods production, 49% is due to skilled labor. Therefore, we set the share of
skilled labor in domestic firms, γd , at 32%. In parallel, the share of unskilled labor in domestic
31
A wide range of estimates are available from trade and business cycles literatures ranging between 0 and 0.5.
Ruhl (2005) argues that a model with temporary and permanent trade shocks can replicate both the low elasticity of
substitution figures used by the international real business cycle studies and the high elasticity of substitution values
found by the empirical trade studies. Such an encompassing model justifies a value of ρ around 0.2.

21

firms, βd , is set at 35%. For the benchmark analysis, we set the total factor productivity Ad equal
to 1.
Foreign Firms: The share of skilled and unskilled labor costs in output of the foreign firm is
calculated in a similar fashion. Following Weil (2004), the share of wages paid to skilled labor is
taken as 65% in industrial countries. Accordingly, the share of skilled labor in the foreign firm’s
production, γf , is set equal to 40%. Similarly, the share of unskilled labor, βf , is set equal to
27%. Thus, γf > γd .32 As a benchmark, the productivity of the foreign firm, Af , is initially set
to be twice that of the domestic firm following Hall and Jones (1999), who show the productivity
parameter for a very large sample of non-industrial countries is around 45% of the productivity
parameter of the U.S. With respect to the cost of doing business that the foreign firms face, φ, our
benchmark case is one where there is no such cost. However, note that an increase in the cost of
doing business is equivalent to lower productivity of foreign firms. Thus, by considering variations
in relative productivities, we can also infer implications for the variations in cost of doing business.
Share of Foreign Production: The share of foreign production to total output is not exogenous
in the CES production function case and the choice of µ implicitly determines this share. As such,
the benchmark value for µ is determined to allow for the matching of the relative output values to
the real data. Lipsey (2002) estimates that in 1995 the share of world production due to FDI flows
was at best 8%.33 Keeping this in mind, we set µ = 0.1 as our benchmark value since, as we shall
see later, it produces a share of approximately 6%. In the Cobb Douglas production function case,
we round off the share of foreign firms in total output to 5% (i.e. η = 0.95).
Intermediate Goods Sector: Based on the work of Basu (1996), the mark-up is assumed to be
10%, and hence the value of the reciprocal of (1+mark-up) is given by α = 0.91. Given the lack of
any estimate, the share of unskilled labor in the production of the intermediate goods, δ, is taken
as 0.5.
The Stock of Skilled and Unskilled Labor: H and L, respectively, are set following Duffy, Papageorgiou, and Perez-Sebastian (2004). The authors argue that there is an aggregation bias caused
by differences in terms of efficiency units of the different types of labor. To overcome this bias, they
32
As Barba Navaretti and Venables (2004) note, there is ample evidence that foreign firms employ more skilled
personnel than domestic firms. They also tend to be larger, more efficient, and pay higher wages.
33
Mataloni (2005) finds that foreign owned companies were responsible for 12% of GDP in Australia, 5% in Italy,
7% in Finland, 19% in Hungary, and 22% in the Czech Republic.

22

weigh the length of education by the returns to schooling, and compute what they call “weighted”
labor stock data. We calculate averages of their data for the low financially developed (poor) countries, medium financially developed (middle income) countries, and the high financially developed
(rich) countries. Accordingly, we set the ratio of unskilled labor to skilled labor equal to 12 for
the poor countries, 9 for the middle income countries, and 5 for the rich countries. To rule out
the possibility of scale effects driving differences in growth rates, we assume that H + L = 1. The
shares of the two factors are allocated according to these three ratios so that they sum to 1 (e.g.,
for poor countries H = 0.077 and L = 0.923).
Additional Parameters: The cost of introducing a new variety, a, is taken to be a free parameter.
The model is calibrated to allow for the financially well-developed country growth rates to match
the U.S. growth rate. Given the fact that the U.S. is often considered to be the technological
leader, one can assume that the productivity of foreign firms in the U.S. is no different than the
productivity of the domestic U.S. firms, so that Af / (φAd ) = 1, to back out a. The U.S. growth
rate of real GDP was approximately 3.5% for the period 1930–2000. This condition and the other
parameters above pin down a = 0.6 for the CES production function case with ρ = 0.2, and a = 3
for the Cobb Douglas production function case. We use the value of a = 0.75 also in the sensitivity
analysis of the CES case when we allow the ρ value to range between −0.9 and 0.9.
The risk-free interest rate is assumed to be 5%. Finally, the parameter capturing the ease of
developing new variety of products, θ, is limited by other parameter choices given the following
formulation: θ = 1 − (λ(1 − α)/α). Table 1 summarizes all the parameter values.
We consider two scenarios that reflect the benefits of FDI. The first scenario is an exogenous
increase in the share of FDI due to increases in µ. Increases in µ in the CES aggregator lead
to a higher share of foreign output in GDP. This exercise answers the straightforward question:
What happens to the overall growth rate of the economy if the more productive MNE’s produce
a higher share of output? The second scenario is where advances in innovation in the parent
country are transmitted through FDI to the host country. These technological benefits of FDI are
captured through the productivity parameter of the foreign firm (i.e, an increase in Af ). Our initial
tests are based on the effects of a 15% increase in the productivity of the foreign firm relative to
the domestic firm. Starting with our benchmark value of Af /φAd = 2, this would mean a new
value of Af /φAd = 2.3 (φ = 1 in both cases). Later on when undertaking sensitivity tests, we

23

consider a range of values between 1.15 and 2.6. The lower bound of 1.15 is based on Aitken
and Harrison’s (1999) finding that as a plant goes from being domestically owned to fully foreign
owned, its productivity increases by about 10% to 16%. Given there is no consensus in the empirical
estimates, in our analysis, we use a wide of values thus providing a more comprehensive picture.
Returning to the initial assumptions of Af = 2Ad , and φ = 1, note that our consideration
of a range for Af /φAd from 1.15 to 2.6 can also be implicitly used to understand the effects of
variations in the cost of doing business, φ, when Af = 2Ad . Thus, Af /φAd = 2.6 would correspond
to φ = 0.77, and Af /φAd = 1.15 to φ = 1.74. A value of φ < 1 might reflect a situation where the
host country government enacts policies to attract FDI (e.g., fiscal or financial incentives, special
laws to bypass cumbersome bureaucratic regulations that domestic firms are ordinarily subjected
to), whereas φ > 1 could reflect the usual additional costs of business discussed earlier. Thus,
φ = 1.74 would then reflect costs that are high enough such that the overall efficiency of foreign
firms is only 15% greater than that of domestic firms despite the former having a technological
advantage that is “twice” that of the latter.
Under both of these scenarios, H/L ratios are held fixed for each country in the benchmark
analysis. Hence, the resulting differences in the growth rates do not reflect human capital differences, rather they reflect variations in FDI. Both scenarios are studied separately for the CES and
the Cobb Douglas production function cases, in sections 3.1 and 3.2, respectively.

3.1

CES Production Function

The benchmark results for the CES production function with ρ = 0.2 are reported in table 2. As
table 2 indicates, when µ = 0.1, foreign production equals around 6.5% of domestic production,
while, when µ = 0.2, the same ratio increases to around 15.5%. These two values correspond to
the share of foreign production in total production to be 6.1% and 13.4%, respectively.34 Hence, as
alluded to earlier, we use µ = 0.1 in most of the analysis. However, for the sake of completeness,
the tables also list results for increments of 0.1 for µ until µ = 0.6.35
34

Pf Yf
. Using
Pd Yd
Pf Yf
. For
Pd Yd +Pf YF

The tables report the ratio of foreign production to domestic production, i.e.,

these share values

it is possible to impute the share of foreign production in total production, i.e.,
example, if foreign
production is 6.5% of domestic production, this corresponds to the share of foreign production in total production
being 0.065/(1 + 0.065) × 100 = 6.1%
35
We restrict our attention to µ ≤ 0.6 since this range covers most realistic values of foreign output shares.

24

3.1.1

Changes in Relative Productivities and Shares of MNE

The first scenario capturing an increase in the foreign presence is an exogenous increase in the FDI
share (higher µ). Table 2 lists the growth rates for the three different levels of financial development
in addition to the amount of foreign output relative to domestic output (valued at their respective
prices). In order to ease the discussion, in table 3, we also present the results of table 2 as changes
over increments of 0.1 for µ . For example, results in table 3 show that the increase in µ from 0.1
to 0.2 corresponds to a tripling of the foreign output level. This increase in FDI also creates a 1.25
percentage point increase in the average growth rate of the financially well-developed countries,
a 0.88 percentage point increase in the average growth rate of the financially medium developed
countries, and a 0.61 percentage point increase in the average growth rate of the financially poorly
developed countries. That is, for the same amount of increase in the share of FDI, the additional
growth rates made possible in financially well developed countries are almost double those made
possible in financially poorly developed countries.
These numbers may appear to be quite high and one might wonder if the 1.25 percentage
point increase for developed economies is an overestimate. There are a couple of things to keep in
mind. First, note that we have assumed Af /φAd = 2 in these exercises. For financially developed
economies, the actual gap between domestic and foreign producers is likely to be much lower and
thus the estimate might be too high. Secondly, as µ increases, it is possible that new MNEs
entering a domestic market might be of lower productivity than the first entrants. This could also
potentially further reduce the productivity gap between domestic and foreign firms. Nevertheless,
the differences in growth rates particularly between the medium level and the low level groups is
still significantly different.
Another interesting result that emerges from table 3 is that the change in the growth rates are
higher when initial FDI participation is greater. For example, as µ increases from 0.1 to 0.2, the
additional growth for a country with poorly developed financial markets is 0.61% while going from
0.3 to 0.4 leads to an additional growth rate of 1.25%. Of course, one might wonder what actually
happens to foreign output shares (which are a corollary of changes in µ but are easier to interpret).
We already have seen that the movement from 0.1 to 0.2 leads to an output share increase from
6.1% to 13.4% of GDP. From the fourth column in table 2, it is easy to see that as µ moves from

25

0.3 to 0.4, foreign output share goes from 20.4% to 27%.36 Thus, the increase in output share is
slightly lower in the second case, while the increase in growth rate is higher.
The fact that growth rates go up when the share of foreign output increases is easy to understand
in a scale-effect driven model such as ours. More productive foreign firms raise the scale of the
economy and thus increase the number of varieties which raises the growth rate. The non-linearity is
less transparent. One possible explanation is given by the indirect horizontal spillover this increased
share of foreign firms creates. As the share of foreign firms increase, while the share of domestic
firms decreases, the ones that remain in the latter group benefit from the increased number of
varieties and thus also have a higher level of technology, and this further adds to the growth rate.
Moving on to table 4, we obtain similar qualitative results when the increase in the extent of
foreign presence is captured through an increase in the relative productivity, Af /(φAd ). These
results, combined with the ones from the earlier table, suggest that regardless of the source of the
increase in the extent of foreign presence in the local economy, for the same magnitude of increase
in foreign presence, the additional growth effects generated in the local economy are higher for
the financially well developed countries than those generated in the financially medium developed
countries, and these are higher than those generated in the financially poorly developed countries.
However, an important difference is that the additional growth rates generated by improvements
in the relative productivity of the foreign firm are quantitatively much lower than those discussed
previously for the case of an increase in the share of FDI (higher µ). For example, 15% increase in the
relative productivity of the foreign firms increases the growth rate of the financially well developed
countries by 0.03 percentage points, the growth rate of the financially medium developed countries
by 0.02 percentage points, and the growth rate of the financially poorly developed countries by 0.01
percentage points. The higher relative productivity of the foreign firm corresponds to a only 4.2%
increase in the total value of foreign production, pf Yf , and thus only a marginal increase in the
share of foreign production in total production. These results hold qualitatively across alternative
µ assumptions.
Obviously, one would be led to wonder why the effects are so dissimilar. An obvious resolution
lies in the way that the two alternative scenarios work. Irrespective of the productivity advantage
36
In column 4 of table 2 relative output at µ = 0.3 is 0.257. This means that the foreign output share is
0.257/1.257 = 0.204. Similarly for µ = 0.4, we have 0.369/1.369 = 0.269 .

26

that foreign firms enjoy, an increase in µ ensures a higher share of total expenditures will be devoted
to the output produced by foreign firms. The fact that Af > Ad ensures that this shift translates
into a scale effect. Thus, the exercise in altering µ, simply answers the question—given realistic
productivity differences between domestic firms and foreign firms—what would a higher share of
multinational production mean for the economy at various levels of financial development? On
the other hand, for any given µ, changes in Af relative to Ad have effects that are slightly more
“indirect” in the following sense. An increase in Af /Ad will reduce the relative price of the foreign
good and thus will create a substitution away from the domestic good towards the foreign good.
Thus, while the relative price goes down, the relative quantity goes up. With the elasticity of
substitution being more than 1, we know that the overall effect is to increase pf Yf relative to pd Yd .
However, as the numbers in table 4 indicate, the changes are small, and thus the overall growth
effect, not surprisingly, will be small. One possibility is that the choice of ρ = 0.2, which implies
an elasticity of substitution of 1. 25, has an important bearing on these magnitudes. In the next
subsection, which deals with the sensitivity of our results, we explore the implications of varying
this parameter.
An alternative way is to compare the elasticities of changes in growth due to changes in the
parameters of the foreign production firm. For example, instead of restricting ourselves to specific
increases in µ or Af /Ad (which may not be strictly comparable), we could compare the subsequent
simultaneous increases in the share of MNE output in total GDP and the associated increase in
the growth rate. To fix ideas, consider row 1 of both tables 3 and 4. In the case of countries with
poorly developed financial markets, following an increase in µ from 0.1 to 0.2, we see that the rate of
growth of GDP increases by 0.61% while the share of MNE output in total GDP increases by 7.3%
(from 6.1% to 13.4%). Dividing the former by the latter produces a value of 0.08. This is equivalent
to saying that for every 1% increase in the share of MNE output in GDP, the growth rate of the
economy rises by 0.08%. Now consider instead an increase in Af /Ad . Begining from the benchmark
(row 1 of 2), a 15% increase in Af /Ad , as we have already seen, raises the growth rate for poorly
financially developed countries by 0.01%. At the same time the share of output in GDP increases
from 6.1% to 6.28%—a 0.18% increase in its share. Here the elasticity is 0.05. This suggests that
following an increase in Af /Ad , every 1% increase in the MNE share of output is associated with
a 0.05% increase in the growth rate Thus, the elasticity measures of the effects of changes in µ

27

and Af /Ad are much less disparate. We can also revisit the comparison between countries with
well developed financial markets and countries with poorly developed financial markets. In the
case of the former, the elasticity measures yield values of 0.17 and 0.16 following increases in µ and
Af /Ad respectively. Like our earlier findings, we still see that an increase in MNE share of output
is associated with higher rates of economic growth for financially well developed economies.
Thus far, we have considered two alternative scenarios with qualitatively similar but quantitatively distinct outcomes. This leads to the next question—which one is more likely to hold in
practice? The first scenario where µ increases seems to be more applicable to a “cross-section”
analysis. With two countries beginning at the same MNE share (of GDP) but different levels of
financial market development, it tells us what happens to the growth rate if the MNE share of GDP
increases further. Alternatively, going down column (3) of table 2—we can ask what happens to the
growth rate for different MNE shares for the same level of financial development. These are also
the kind of questions that growth regressions often seek to answer. The second scenario, where Af
increases relative to Ad , addresses a slightly different issue. It provides a framework to understand
what happens as some firms shift to using a more productive technology. This for instance, would
be applicable when domestic firms are acquired by multinational enterprises, which then bring
their superior technology to these firms. Obviously, this also reflects greater MNE “participation,”
however, it does not take an increase in output share as a given but as an endogenous outcome of
this change. Thus, both scenarios have their respective contributions.
3.1.2

Sensitivity Analysis

Next we examine how the results change with the other parameters or “local conditions.” We focus
on changes in relative skill endowments across countries (varying H/L), the effects of alternative
productivity gaps, changes in the cost of doing business (φ), and finally, varying the elasticity of
substitution (by varying ρ) .
Changes in Labor Endowments: The above exercise kept the relative labor endowments constant
across the three groups of countries in order to observe the differences solely on account of financial
market development differences and changes in the share and/or productivity of foreign firms. The
three groups however also differ in their relative labor endowments, as shown in the lower panel of
table 1. When allowing for different labor endowments, table 5 shows that the growth effects of

28

higher FDI in the countries with well developed financial markets are three times more than the
ones with the poor developed financial markets. Tables 6 and 7 present, respectively, the results
when we allow for the relative labor endowments to differ among the three groups together with
changes in the share of foreign firms, and with changes in the productivity of foreign firms.
When we compare table 5 to table 2, we see that the actual growth rates for countries with
medium and poorly developed financial markets are now even lower. Indeed, the growth rate of the
countries with low levels of financial market development is now only 0.91% compared to 1.42%
earlier. Thus, the introduction of human capital variations across groups exacerbates differences in
growth rates.
The incremental effects of changes in µ can be inferred by comparing tables 3 and 6. The
differences in the additional growth rates are also much higher once one allows for human capital
differences. When µ increases from 0.1 to 0.2, the countries with medium level of financial development see their growth increase by 0.70%, while countries with low level of financial development
see their growth increase by 0.43%.
When focusing on productivity gaps, we also find that growth rate differences become larger.
Comparing the results in tables 4 and 7, one observes that when µ = 0.2, for example, the additional
growth rate generated is 0.06 (table 4) for the financially medium developed countries. When
the labor endowments of these countries decrease to the actual level, the additional growth rate
decreases to 0.05 (table 7). These results imply that the 0.01 percentage points additional growth
was due to the higher quality labor endowments. However, like before, productivity gaps themselves
have growth effects that are of much smaller magnitude than changes in µ.
Overall, these results suggest that countries with more skill-intensive labor endowments benefit
more in terms of growth effects from FDI, which is consistent with the empirical studies such as
Borensztein et al. (1998).
Alternative Measures of Relative Productivity: So far in the analysis, in setting the parameters
regarding the relative productivity of the foreign and domestic firms, Af /φAd , we made use of
the information from macro level studies showing that the relative productivity difference between
the industrialized and developing countries is approximately 2. Micro level studies provide further
information regarding the productivity differences between foreign owned and domestic owned firms
and, as we discussed above, a wide range of micro estimates are available. We report results in

29

table 8 panels A and B starting with the lowest value from the micro evidence, namely 1.15 (taken
from Aitken and Harrison (1999)) and allow for increments of approximately 15% in this value.
Panel A shows the additional growth rates observed in the three groups of countries when the
technology gap among the foreign and domestic firms change for different values of µ. The results
for the benchmark case (µ = 0.1) suggest that increments of 15% increases in the technology gap
between the foreign and domestic firms creates additional growth rates of 0.020 percentage points
in the financially well developed countries, 0.010 percentage points in the financially medium developed countries, and 0.006 percentage points in the financially poorly developed countries. If the
technology gap measure increases by 100%, to 2.3, one has to look at the cumulative of the additional growth values reported in Panel A. For the financially well developed countries, this doubling
of the relative productivity measure creates an additional 0.1 percentage point growth, while creating around 0.05 percentage point growth in the financially medium developed, and around 0.03
percentage point growth in the financially poorly developed countries. Panel B alternatively looks
into the additional growth rates due to increased foreign presence measured through changes in µ,
rather than through changes in the technology gap. The same results prevail, where the additional
growth rates are almost triple for the financially well developed countries than for the financially
poorly developed countries.
Changes in the Cost of Doing Business: While the relative productivity between foreign and
domestic firms can change due to the changes in the foreign and the domestic firms’ gross productivity, an alternative source of change could be alterations in the cost of doing business, φ. The
effects of a reduction of the cost of doing business in our model are similar to those of a relative
increase in the productivity to foreign firms just described. Note that although the interpretation is
symmetric, the policy implications are different. One suggests that the authorities should improve
the business environment to benefit more from FDI; the other that attracting more productive
foreign firms relative to domestic firms, everything else being equal, implies higher growth rates.
Changes in the Elasticity of Substitution: Table 9 compares the growth rates in the high,
medium and low financially developed economies for ρ = −0.2 in the upper panel and ρ = 0.2 in
the lower panel. In particular, when the elasticity of substitution is greater than 1 (ρ > 0), for
the same value of µ, we observe much higher growth rates. Further increases in µ (i.e., a greater
MNE presence), while leading to increases in the growth rate for ρ = 0.2, actually reduces growth

30

rates when ρ = −0.2, despite increasing MNE share in output. Thus, clearly, the elasticity of
substitution in the aggregator plays a key role in our numerical exercises. These results suggest
one must be cautious when talking of attracting “FDI that is complementary to local production.”
Such complementarity is useful when one talks of final and intermediate industry relationships.
However, it does not necessarily raise the growth rates when domestic and foreign producers supply
complementary final goods.
Finally, we consider the extent to which a change in the growth rate following an increase in
the overall productivity gap (Af /φAd ) is affected by the choice of the elasticity of substitution parameter. As earlier, we consider the implications of a 15% increase in the overall productivity gap.
Figures 1 and 2 show the non-monotonic relationship between ρ and the additional growth rates
created by increased FDI for the financially developed economies. Figure 1 depicts the relationship
when ρ > 0, i.e., the elasticity of substitution is greater than 1. Figure 2 depicts the relationship
when the elasticity of substitution is less than 1 (ρ < 0).37 We also consider the effects for various values of µ. Beginning with figure 1, we see that as Yf and Yd become more substitutable (ρ
increases), the additional growth generated actually declines. This is true for all values of µ considered here. This might initially seem counter-intuitive. However, note that when the elasticity
of substitution is very high, combined with the fact that Yf already uses technology that is twice
as productive and µ is fixed, optimal allocation would cause domestic output to have already been
substituted by foreign output as much as possible. Thus, further increases in Af create only limited
additional substitution possibilities and hence the additional growth effects are small.
In the situation where the two products are more complementary (i.e., ρ < 0), we see again
that increases in the elasticity of substitution (i.e., as the absolute value of ρ falls) leads to lower
additional growth rates. However, note that the effects are actually even smaller here. The overall
impression one can draw is that the introduction of a more advanced technology by the MNE while
raising the growth rate, seems to be less effective when a) ρ < 0 and b) the products become more
substitutable. The figures furthermore show that these results remain unchanged across alternative
initial values of foreign presence in the market, i.e., for alternative values of µ.38
37
The case where ρ = 1 is the Cobb Douglas case discussed in the next section. For values of ρ in the neighborhood
of 1, there is a sharp discontinuity, and hence we do not include ρ = 1 in these diagrams.
38
The figures and table 9 use benchmark parameters. In particular, the ratio of skilled to unskilled human capital
is constant across groups.

31

3.2

Cobb Douglas production function

This section discusses the results for the Cobb Douglas production function. As seen in table 10,
column (1), there are large differences in growth rates across groups only due to differences in the
level of development of the financial markets. Next, we consider the effect of increasing Af by
25% as shown in table 10, column (2). Comparing columns (1) and (2) shows very little change in
growth rates. The growth rates are slightly higher for the high and medium financially developed
countries (i.e., 2.49 vs. 2.52; 3.61 vs. 3.65). Thus, it seems that the marginal effect of raising Af
is very small. This was true for the CES case and carries over here as well. With foreign firms
producing only 5% of the total output, it would be unreasonable to expect improvements in their
productivity to have large measurable effects on the growth rate of the economy.
In column (3), we allow human capital ratios to vary across country groups. Everything else
is as in column (1). Comparing to column (1), we see that the growth rates for medium and
low financially developed countries decrease, whereas the rates for the high financially developed
country are the same since the ratio for the latter is unchanged. In column (3), the countries with
high levels of financial development grow twice as fast as the countries with low levels of financial
development. In Column (4) we again increase Af by 25%, except that now human capital ratios
vary across the three groups. Again as in the case of comparing column (1) and column (2), the
differences between (3) and (4) are negligible.
In column (5), we decrease the share of the domestic firm in total output to 75% (i.e. η = 0.75)
thus taking the share of the foreign firms up to 25%. This probably represents an upper bound in
terms of foreign ownership. Everything else is as in column (3). Growth rates are lower for all the
levels of financial development but the qualitative results are the same. Low financially developed
countries grow at less than one third of the speed of high financially developed countries. Column
(6) repeats the same exercise with the exogenous increase in productivity of MNE. The growth
rates are higher again, though more so than the previous cases, where the increase was negligible.
These findings are parallel to the findings reported for the CES case, where the magnitude of effects
are much larger when the implicit share of foreign production is higher in the domestic economy.
The bottom line is that the role of financial markets is extremely important in realizing the growth
effects of higher FDI.

32

4

Conclusions

Although there is a widespread belief among policymakers that FDI generates positive productivity
externalities for host countries, the empirical evidence fails to confirm this belief. In the particular
case of developing countries, both the micro and macro empirical literatures consistently finds
either no effect of FDI on host countries firms productivity and/or aggregate growth or negative
effects. The theoretical models of FDI, on the other hand, imply that FDI is beneficial for the host
country’s development.
In this paper, we try to bridge this gap between the theoretical and the empirical literatures.
The model rests on a mechanism that emphasizes the role of local financial markets in enabling
FDI to promote growth through the creation of backward linkages. When financial markets are
developed enough, the host country benefits from the backward linkages between the foreign and
domestic firms with positive spillovers to the rest of the economy.
Our calibration exercises show that an increase in FDI leads to higher growth rates in financially
developed countries compared to those observed in financially poorly-developed ones. Moreover,
the calibration section highlights the importance of local conditions (absorptive capacities) for the
effect of FDI on economic growth. We find larger growth effects when goods produced by domestic
firms and MNEs are substitutes rather than complements. Policymakers should be cautious when
implementing policies aimed at attracting FDI that is complementary to local production. Desired
complementarities are those between final and intermediate industry sectors; not necessarily between domestic and foreign final good produces. Finally, by varying the relative skill ratios—while
assuming that MNEs use skilled labor more intensively—our results highlight the critical role of
human capital in allowing growth benefits from FDI to materialize.
Some caveats are in order. We have focussed on only one kind of spillover. There are likely to
be additional spillovers and technology transfers. Besides, our results are based on a model that
takes FDI as given. The decision of a firm to outsource or invest abroad (and the potential to
generate linkages) may depend on the conditions of the country and on the characteristics of the
firm.39 Furthermore, the possibility of imported intermediate inputs would hinder the extent of
backward linkages and would have quantitative implications on the current results. Future research
39

See Antras and Helpman (2004).

33

would include such an extension of the model, allowing for tradability of intermediate inputs, and
for differential use of alternative sources of intermediate inputs across domestic and foreign firms.

34

5

References

Acemoglu, D., 1998. “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change
and Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1055-1089.
Aghion, P., D. Comin, and P. Howitt, 2006. “When Does Domestic Saving Matter for Economic Growth?” NBER Working Paper 12275.
Aghion, P., P. Howitt, and D. Mayer-Foulkes, 2005. “The Effect of Financial Development
on Convergence: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 173-222.
Aitken, B. J. and A. Harrison, 1999. “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Investment? Evidence from Venezuela,” American Economic Review 89, 605-618.
Alfaro, L., A. Chanda, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and S. Sayek, 2004. “FDI and Economic Growth,
The Role of Local Financial Markets,” Journal of International Economics 64, 113-134.
Alfaro, L. and A. Rodriguez-Clare, 2004. “Multinationals and Linkages: Evidence from Latin
America,” Economia 4, 113-170.
Antras, P., 2003. “Firms, Contracts and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118,
1374-1418.
Antras, P. and E. Helpman, 2004. “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy 112, 552580.
Barba Navaretti, G. and A. Venables, 2004. Multinational Firms in the World Economy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Basu, S., 1996. “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111, 719-751.
Blomstrom, M., 1986. “Foreign Investment and Productivity Efficiency: The Case of Mexico,”
Journal of International Economics 15, 97-110.
Blomstrom, M. and A. Kokko, 1998. “Multinational Corporations and Spillovers,” Journal
of Economic Surveys 12, 247-277.
Borensztein, E., J. De Gregorio, and J-W. Lee, 1998. “How Does Foreign Direct Investment Affect Economic Growth?” Journal of International Economics 45, 115-135.
Carkovic, M. and R. Levine, 2006. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Accelerate Economic Growth?”
University of Minnesota, Working Paper.
Caves, R., 1974. “Multinational Firms, Competition and Productivity in the Host Country,”
Economica 41, 176-193.
Duffy, J., C. Papageorgiou, and F. Perez-Sebastian, 2004. “Capital-Skill Complementarity?
Evidence From a Panel of Countries,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 327-344.

35

Dunning, J. H., 1981. International Production and the Multinational Enterprise. London: George
Allen and Unwin.
Durham, K. B., 2004. “Absorptive Capacity and the Effects of Foreign Direct Investment and
Equity Foreign Portfolio Investment on Economic Growth,” European Economic Review 48,
285-306.
Edwards, S. and C. Vegh, 1997. “Banks and Macroeconomic Disturbances under Predetermined Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 239-278.
Erosa, A., 2001. “Financial Intermediation and Occupational Choice in Development,” Review
of Economic Dynamics 4, 303-334.
Ethier, W., 1982. “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of International Trade,” American Economic Review 72, 389-405.
Gao, T., 2005. “Foreign Direct Investment and Growth Under Economic Integration,” Journal
of International Economics 67, 157-174.
Gollin, D., 2002. “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy 110, 458-474.
Goldsmith, R. W., 1969. Financial Structure and Development. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Gorg, H. and D. Greenway, 2004. “Much ado about nothing? Do domestic firms really benefit
from foreign direct investment?” World Bank Research Observer 19, 171-197.
Gorg, H. and E. Strobl, 2002. “Multinational Companies and Indigenous Development: An
Empirical Analysis,” European Economic Review 46, 1305-1322
Graham, E. and P. Krugman, 1991. Foreign Direct Investment in the United States. Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic, 1990. “Financial Development, Growth and the Distribution of Income,” Journal of Political Economy 98, 1076-1107.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman, 1990. “Comparative Advantage and Long-Run Growth,” American Economic Review 80, 796-815.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman, 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hall, R. E. and C. Jones, 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per
Worker than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 83-116.
Harrison, A. and M. S. McMillian, 2003. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Affect Domestic
Firms’ Credit Constraints,” Journal of International Economics 61, 73-100.
Harrison, A., I. Love, and M. S. McMillian, 2004. “Global Capital Flows and Financing Constraints,” Journal of Development Economics 75, 269-301.

36

Haskel, J. E., S. C. Pereira, and M. J. Slaughter, 2002. “Does Inward Foreign Direct Investment Boost the Productivity of Local Firms?” NBER Working Paper 8433.
Helpman, E., 1984. “A Simple Theory of International Trade and Multinational Corporations,”
Journal of Political Economy 92, 451-471.
Helpman, E. and P. Krugman, 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple, 2004. “Export versus FDI with Heterogeneous
Firms,” American Economic Review 94, 300-316.
Hermes, N. and R. Lensink, 2003. “Foreign Direct Investment, Financial Development and
Economic Growth,” Journal of Development Studies 40, 142-163.
Hirschman, A., 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Hobday, M. 1995. Innovation in East Asia: The Challenge to Japan. Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar.
Javorcik, B. S., 2004. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages,” American Economic Review
94, 605-627.
Javorcik, B. S. and M. Spatareanue, 2005. “Disentangling FDI Spillovers Effects: What do
Firm Perceptions Tell US?” in Does Foreign Direct Investment Promote Development?,”
in T. Moran, E. Grahan and M. Blomstrom, (eds.), Institute for International Economics.
Washington D.C.
Jones, Charles I., 1995. “R & D-Based Models of Economic Growth,” The Journal of Political
Economy 103, 759-784.
Kindleberger, C. P., 1969. American Business Abroad. New Haven: Yale University Press.
King, R. and R. Levine, 1993a. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.
King, R. and R. Levine, 1993b. “Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 513-542.
Kugler, M., 2006. “Spillovers from Foreign Direct Investment: Within or Between Industries,”
Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Levine, R., N. Loayza, and T. Beck, 2000. “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.
Lin P. and K. Saggi, 2006. “Multinational Firms, Exclusivity, and Backward Linkages,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Lipsey, R. E., 2002. “Home and Host Country Effects of FDI,” NBER Working Paper 9293.
37

Lipsey, R. E., 2003. “Foreign Direct Investment and the Operations of Multinational Firms:
Concepts, History, and Data,” in E. Kwan Choi and James Harrigan (eds.) Handbook of
International Trade. Oxford: Blackwell.
Markusen, J. and A. J. Venables, 1999. “Foreign Direct Investment as a Catalyst for Industrial Development,” European Economic Review 43, 335-338.
Markusen, J., 1984. “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies and the Gains from Trade,” Journal of International Economics 16, 205-226.
Mataloni, R. J., 2005. “U.S. multinational companies: operations in 2003,”Survey of Current
Business July, 9-29.
McKinnon, R., 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development. Washington: Brookings
Institute.
Overman, H., S. Redding and A. Venables, 2001. “The Economic Geography of Trade, Production and Income: A Survey of Empirics,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2978.
Rodrı́guez-Clare, A., 1996. “Multinationals, Linkages and Economic Development,” American
Economic Review 86, 852-873.
Ruhl, K., 2005. The Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics, mimeo.
Weil, D., 2004. Economic Growth. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Xu, B., 2000. “Multinational Enterprises, Technology Diffusion, and Host Country Productivity
Growth,” Journal of Development Economics 62, 477-493.

38

A

Modelling Financial Markets

We present a bare-bones model of imperfect financial markets using the costly state verification
approach. The model is adapted from King and Levine (1993b).40 As in their model, we assume
individuals have equal financial wealth which is a claim on profits of a diversified portfolio of
firms engaged in innovative activity. Some individuals do have the ability to manage innovation,
but this does not lead them to accumulate different levels of wealth from the rest of individuals
in the economy. These potential entrepreneurs have the ability to successfully manage a project
with probability ψ. These abilities are unobservable to both the entrepreneur and the financial
intermediary. However, the actual capability of such an individual to manage a project can be
ascertained at a cost, F .41 The main two differences are the following. First, consistent with our
model, upfront investments require capital instead of labor. The second difference is related to our
assumption regarding the structure of verification costs. We assume these costs to be proportional
to the set up costs for any project. The main advantage of this approach is that it allows us to retain
the balanced growth properties of the model while allowing in principle to make total verification
costs decreasing in the level of overall technology and hence in the level of development.42 Therefore,
one could argue that our setup automatically relates more efficient financial markets to higher levels
of development.43 We depart from the main text in that now innovation and imitation projects
are potentially risky and there is a probability ψ of the project being run successfully. Which
potential entrepreneur will manage a project successfully is unknown both to the entrepreneur and
the intermediary. The intermediary can spend an amount F to reduce the uncertainty regarding
the project’s outcome. Further, we postulate the following structure on F,
F =f
40

a
.
nθ

(40)

See Aghion, Howitt and Mayer-Foulkes (2005) for an alternative modelling strategy for imperfect financial markets
in an endogenous growth model. In their model, entrepreneurs can pay an upfront cost and defraud the lenders.
Incentive compatibility constraints and arbitrage conditions then leads to an upper bound on how much is actually
invested in new innovations which is lower than the optimal investment amount. The gap between the two is an
inverse function of the degree of creditor protection. Their model seems more suited to “quality ladder” Schumpeterian
models, whereas the King and Levine structure is more easily incorporated into a product variety setup such as ours.
41
Obviously entrepreneurs cannot evaluate themselves and credibly communicate the results to others.
42
Indeed King and Levine (1993b, 518) suggest this modification as a potentially useful extension of their model.
43
The objective of our paper, as mentioned, is not to model the relation between financial markets and development
but instead the role of financial markets in allowing an economy to reap the benefits of potential FDI spillovers.

39

Therefore, since setup costs require

a
nθ

units of K, then the cost of verification simply is proportional

to total setup costs and f represents that factor of proportionality. While not necessary for our
model, it seems intuitive that f should be less than 1—verification costs are likely to be lower
than setup costs. If the value of a successful project is q, with a competitive intermediation sector,
in equilibrium, we must have ψq = F.44 The value of a successful project is simply the present

discounted value of profits (v) minus the set up costs a/nθ . Therefore, the zero profit condition
can be rewritten as,

a
⇒ ψ v − θ = F.
n

(41)

The standard arbitrage condition from equation (20) continues to hold,
π v̇
+ = r.
v
v

(42)

Substituting equation (40) in equation (41), we continue to get as in the main model
π
ṅ
v − θ n = r. In our model the
(1−α)
n [λpd Yd + λpf Yf ] . Noting

v̇
v

= −θ nṅ . We

can combine this with the previous equation to get,

per intermediate

firm operating profit was (see equation (19)), πi =

that v = fξ r naθ +

ra
,
nθ

and using Ỹi = Yi /n1−θ , we can obtain an expression for the growth rate similar to the one

derived in the main text,
g=

i r
ṅ
λ (1 − τ ) (1 − α) h


λpd Ỹd + λpd Ỹf − .
=
n
θ ra f + 1
θ
ψ

Of course, what was earlier represented in the main text by i can now be substituted by r
In practice,

f
ψ



f
ψ


+1 .

is likely to be unobservable across countries. Therefore, in the numerical exercises,

when we use the spread, theoretically, we are measuring r ψf . Thus, a higher spread has the same
effect as a higher verification cost. Further, for every unique f, given r and ψ, there is a unique
value of the spread. Therefore, using the spread between lending and borrowing rates serves as a
convenient proxy for verification costs.
44

Of course in the background we assume that for an intermediary it is better to do this evaluation rather than
simply lending the money and not incurring the verification cost.

40

B

Solving the Model with a CES Aggregator

As mentioned in the text, we begin with six equations,
A−1 β −βd γ −γd
pd = d d λ d
λ
pf =

−βf −γf
γf
λ
λ

φA−1
f βf

δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)
α

!λ
w̃uβd +δλ w̃sγd +(1−δ)λ ,

δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)
α

(43)

!λ
β +δλ

w̃uf

γ +(1−δ)λ

w̃s f

" #1−ρ
pf
Ỹd
=µ
,
pd
Ỹf


pd = 1 − µε pf1−ε ⇒ pd = pd (pf ) ,

,

(44)

(45)
(46)

(βd + δαλ) pd Ỹd (βf + δαλ) pf Ỹf
+
= L,
w̃u
w̃u
(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) pd Ỹd (γf + (1 − δ)αλ) pf Ỹf
+
= H.
w̃s
w̃s

(47)
(48)

Also, recall that the growth rate of varieties is pinned down by equation (26),
i r
(1 − α) λ h
ṅ
=
pd Ỹd + pf Ỹf − .
n
θia
θ

(49)

We next list the steps involved in arriving at a solution for this setup: 1) First of all note that we
can use equations (43) and (44) to express efficiency wages as a function of the prices of foreign
and domestic goods,
(γf +(1−δ)λ)
(γf −γd )

w̃u = Adu ∆Af u pd

−(γd +(1−δ)λ)

pf

(γf −γd )

(
) βd +δλ
(γf −γd ) (γf −γd )
w̃s = Ads ∆Af s pd
pf
.

,

(50)

− βf +δλ

41

(51)

From these two equations we get,

−βd −γd 
γd
A−1
pd
w̃u γf −γd
d βd
,
=
−βf −γf
pf
w̃s
γf s
φA−1
f βf
 
Λf w̃u γf −γd
pd
.
=
pf
Λd w̃s

(52)





β γ
where Λd = Ad βdβd γdγd , Λf = Af βf f γf f /φ. Dividing equation (47) by (48),
(βd + δαλ) + (βf + δαλ)

⇒

pf Ỹf
pd Ỹd

(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (γf + (1 − δ)αλ)

=

pf Ỹf
pd Ỹd

w̃u L
.
w̃s H

(53)

Note that the cost minimization equation (45) can be rewritten as,


1 pf
µ pd

 −1

Ỹf

1−ρ

=

.

Ỹd

(54)

Substituting this into equation (53),
(βd + δαλ) + (βf + δαλ)



pf
pd

1−

(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (γf + (1 − δ)αλ)



h i −1

1
1−ρ

pf
pd

1
µ

1−

1−ρ

1
1−ρ

w̃u L
h i −1 = w̃ H .
s
1 1−ρ
µ

Further using equation (52),
(βd + δαλ) + (βf + δαλ)



pf
pd

1−

(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (γf + (1 − δ)αλ)



1
1−ρ

pf
pd

h i −1
1
µ

1−

1−ρ



1
1−ρ

h i −1 =
1
µ

1−ρ

Λ d pd
Λ f pf



1
γf −γd

L
.
H


 1
1−ε
Finally using equation (5), 1 − µε p1−ε
= pd , we can rewrite the expression above to obtain,
f
!1−
(βd + δαλ) + (βf + δαλ)
⇒

1
1−ρ

pf

(

h i −1
1
µ

1
1−ε
1−µε p1−ε
f

)

!1−
(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (γf + (1 − δ)αλ)

pf
1

(1−µε p1−ε
) 1−ε
f

42

1−ρ

1
1−ρ



h i −1
1
µ

1−ρ



1 1−
=
Λ

µε p1−ε
f
pf



1
1−ε

1
f −γd

γ



L
H

Thus solving for pf = p∗f , where ∗ denotes the solved value. 2) Given pf , we can again use

 1
1−ε 1−ε
∗
ε
pd = 1 − µ pf
to back out pd . 3) Since we now have both p∗d and p∗f , we can also derive
the efficiency wages and the relative outputs. To derive the efficiency wages, we can substitute
prices into equations (50) and (51), as to rewrite them such that we have w̃u∗ = w̃u∗ (pd , pf ) and
w̃s∗ = w̃s∗ (pd , pf ). More explicitly, after some tedious rearrangements, we get,

w̃u∗

=

Adu ∆Af u (p∗d )

(γf +(1−δ)λ)
−(γd +(1−δ)λ)
(γf −γd ) p∗  (γf −γd ) ,
f

(55)

(
)
βd +δλ
(γf −γd ) p∗  (γf −γd ) ,
f

(56)

− βf +δλ

w̃s∗

=

Ads ∆Af s (p∗d )

where,

Adu

 (γf +(1−δ)λ)
βd γd
(γf −γd ) ; A =
= Ad βd γd
fu


Ads =



Ad βdβd γdγd

 −(βf +δλ)
(γf −γd ) ;

∆=

β

γ

Af βf f γf f
φ
β

γ

Af βf f γf f
φ

Af s =

δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)
α

! −(γd +(1−δ)λ)
(γf −γd )
!

;

βd +δλ

(γf −γd )

;

!−λ
.

This allows us also to derive the relative wages,
w̃u
=
w̃s

Λd p∗d
Λf p∗f

!

1
γf −γd

.

From equation (54), we obtain a value for relative outputs,
∗

1 pf
⇒
=
µ p∗d
Ỹd
Ỹf



−1
 1−ρ

.

 
4) We can write Ỹf = Y Ỹd . 5) Taking the unskilled labor market equation (47),
(βd + δαλ) p∗d Ỹd + (βf + δαλ) p∗f Ỹf = w̃u∗ L,

43

(57)

6) We can now substitute this into equation (57) and get Ỹf∗ . 7) Thus, we can now derive the
growth rate from equation (49):
i r
ṅ
(1 − α) λ h ∗ ∗
=
pd Ỹd + p∗f Ỹf∗ − .
n
θia
θ

C

Solving for the Cobb Douglas Case

The Cobb Douglas case can be analyzed by using the following aggregator for the domestic and
foreign output,
µ

1

Y = Yd1+µ Yf1+µ ,

(58)

Y = Ydη Yf1−η ,

(59)

where µ = (1 − η) /η for simpler notation.45 Similarly, we begin with an analogous set of six
equations,
−βd −γd
γd
A−1
d βd
pd =
λλ

pf =

δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)
α

−βf −γf
γf
λλ

φ(τ )A−1
f βf

!λ
w̃uβd +δλ w̃sγd +(1−δ)λ ,

δ −δ (1 − δ)−(1−δ)
α

(60)

!λ
β +δλ

w̃uf

γ +(1−δ)λ

w̃s f

,

η Ỹf
pd
=
,
pf
1 − η Ỹd
pd = η (1 − η)

(1−η)
η

(62)
−(1−η)
η

pf

,

(βd + δαλ) pd Ỹd (βf + δαλ) pf Ỹf
+
= L,
w̃u
w̃u
(γd + (1 − δ)αλ) pd Ỹd (γf + (1 − δ)αλ) pf Ỹf
+
= H.
w̃s
w̃s
45

ρ
ρ 1/ρ
Note that if we use Yt = [(1 − µ)Yt,d
+ µYt,f
] , the Cobb Douglas case is CES with ρ → 0.

44

(61)

(63)

(64)
(65)

We have six equations and six unknowns. Substituting (62) into equations (64) and (65), we
obtain,



η (βd + δαλ) + (βf + δαλ)
pf Ỹf = w̃u L,
(1 − η)


η (γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (1 − η) (γf + (1 − δ)αλ)
pf Ỹf = w̃s H.
(1 − η)

(66)
(67)

Therefore, we can derive the wage premium in this setup,
⇒

η (γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (1 − η) (γf + (1 − δ)αλ) L
w̃s
.
=
w̃u
η (βd + δαλ) + (1 − η) (βf + δαλ)
H

(68)

At the same time note that the growth equation,
i
(1 − α) λ h
ṅ
pd Ỹd + pf Ỹf − θ = r ⇒
ia
n



(1 − α) λ
ia (1 − η)


pf Ỹf − θ

ṅ
= r.
n

(69)

To solve for the endogenous rate of growth of varieties we simply need to figure out pf Ỹf . This in
turn requires us to figure out either w̃s H, (equation (67)), or w̃u L, (equation (66))46 . If we proceed
with the former, we have,


(1 − α) λ
ia



w̃s H
η (γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (1 − η) (γf + (1 − δ)αλ)


−θ

ṅ
= r.
n

(70)

Similarly, to solve for w̃s and w̃u , equations (60) and (61) can be rewritten such that we have,
w̃u = w̃u (pd , pf ) and w̃s = w̃s (pd , pf ). More explicitly, after some tedious rearrangements, we get,
(γf +(1−δ)λ)
(γf −γd )

w̃u = Adu ∆Af u pd

−(γd +(1−δ)λ)

pf

(γf −γd )

(
) βd +δλ
(γf −γd ) (γf −γd )
w̃s = Ads ∆Af s pd
pf
.

,

(71)

− βf +δλ

(72)

Note that these are exactly the same as the corresponding CES equations (55) and (56). We can
use these expressions for efficiency wages and substitute them into equation (68) and write prices
46
Given the symmetric nature of Cobb Douglas production functions, ultimately it does not matter which one we
proceed with.

45

as a function of L/H. Again this involves some tedious algebra but ultimately gives us
φAd βdβd γdγd
pf
=
β γ
pd
Af βf f γf f



η (γd + (1 − δ)αλ) + (1 − η) (γf + (1 − δ)αλ) L
η (βd + δαλ) + (1 − η) (βf + δαλ)
H

γf −γd
.

(73)

Therefore, we have the relative prices completely in terms of exogenous variables. As expected, the
prices are inversely related to the relative TFP’s of the sectors. Further as long as γf > γd (share
of H is greater in the foreign sector), a decrease in the L/H ratio leads to a decrease in relative
prices. As human capital becomes relatively more abundant, the sector that uses this factor more
intensively benefits more from the lower cost and therefore charges a lower price. Finally we can
use equation (63) in conjunction with (73) to solve explicitly for pf and pd . Once we have these
two solutions, we can substitute them back into equations (71) and (72) and derive the explicit
values for w̃u and w̃s . All of this involves another round of tedious algebra, and we get the following
solutions,

pf = Υ

pd = Υ

Λd
Λf

Λd
Λf

η 
Φ

−(1−η) 

L
H

L
Φ
H

∆ΥΛηd Λf1−η



η(γf −γd )
,

(74)

−(γf −γd )(1−η)
,
−1 H

(75)

Ψ γ

,
(76)
L


L Ψβ
η 1−η
w̃s = ∆ΥΛd Λf
Φ
,
(77)
H




β γ
where Υ = η η (1 − η)(1−η) ; Λd = Ad βdβd γdγd ; Λf = Af βf f γf f /φ; Ψβ = η (βd + δλ)+(1 − η) (βf + δλ) ;
η(γd +(1−δ)αλ)+(1−η)(γf +(1−δ)αλ)
; Ψγ = η (γd + (1 − δ)λ) + (1 − η) (γf + (1 − δ)λ) ; (note that
Φ =
η(βd +δαλ)+(1−η)(βf +δαλ)
Ψβ + Ψγ = 1). To derive the growth rate, we substitute w̃s H = ∆ΥΛηd Λf1−η (ΦL)Ψβ H Ψγ into
w̃u =

equation (70) to derive

D

Φ

ṅ
n.

Domestic and Foreign Production as Perfect Substitutes

For this section, note that both firms have to sell the products at the same price and thus we
ignore the aggregator. As mentioned in the main text, we normalize this price to 1. Therefore,
Y = Yd + Yf . Working through the model and solving it the same way as in the Cobb Douglas case,
46

we have the total value of output produced by MNEs as,
Ỹf =

(βd + λδα) w̃s H − (γd + λ (1 − δ) α) w̃u L
,
(1 − λ + αλ) (βd − βf )

(78)

and the following expression for the domestic production,
Ỹd =

(γf + αλ (1 − δ)) w̃u L − (βf + λδα) w̃s H
,
(1 − λ + αλ) (βd − βf )

(79)

where the equilibrium factor prices (which can be derived using cost functions and labor market
clearing conditions like before) are given by,

w̃u =

 γf +(1−δ)λ 
 (γd +(1−δ)λ)
!λ 
γd −γf
γd −γf
βf γf λ
Af βf γf λ
δ δ (1 − δ)(1−δ)
1




,
α
φ
Ad βdβd γdγd λλ

w̃s =

δ δ (1

δ)(1−δ)

−
α

!λ



Ad βdβd γdγd λλ

 (βf +δλ)

 βd +δλ



γd −γf

φ

γd −γf



(80)

β

γ

Af βf f γf f λλ



.

(81)

While we do not go into the details, observe that for both Ỹf and Ỹd to be positive, the parameters
must satisfy certain conditions. Summing the two equations, (78) and (79), and using the fact that
(γf − γd ) = (βd − βf ) , we can rewrite total final good production in the economy as,
Ỹd + Ỹf =

(γf − γd ) w̃u L + (βd − βf ) w̃s H
w̃u L + w̃s H
=
.
(1 − λ + αλ) (βd − βf )
(1 − λ + αλ)

(82)

Substituting equation (82) into the arbitrage condition (26) gives us the equilibrium growth rate
for varieties,


ṅ
λ (1 − α) (w̃u L + w̃s H)
r
=
− .
n
θ ia
(1 − λ + αλ)
θ

(83)

Improvements in the level of financial market development continue to have clear positive effects
on the growth rate. How does a change in Af (or φ) affect the growth rate of the economy? In
order to perform this exercise, we need to solve for the effect of changes in Af on w̃u and w̃s .
Looking at the reduced form factor price equations, an increase in Af raises the skilled wage per
efficiency unit and reduces the unskilled wage per efficiency unit as long as multinationals use skills

47

more intensively, that is γf > γd . This is because an improvement in the technology of the skill
intensive sector raises the demand for skills more than it raises the demand for raw labor. As a
result, this creates an upward pressure on skilled labor wages. This creates an excess supply of
unskilled labor since domestic firms use this kind of labor relatively intensively. As a result, skilled
labor wages rise and unskilled labor wages fall. This suggests that the overall effect on growth
can be ambiguous. Moreover, the effect of changes in Af depends also upon the relative stocks of
L and H in the economy. If the increase in skilled labor wage bill, more than compensates the
reduction in unskilled labor wage bill then the growth rate of the economy will go up. Thus, even
the skill intensive nature of FDI is not sufficient to ensure that more FDI leads to higher growth
rates in the economy. If it does raise the growth rate then clearly both sectors experience increases
in growth rates. This would then be the case of a beneficial spillover effect. On the other hand,
if the increase in skilled wages does not compensate for the reduction in unskilled wages, then the
growth rates will diminish. In this case, FDI would have a negative impact in the economy.47 Of
course the opposite happens if Ad increases.

47

Rodriguez-Clare (1996) and Markusen and Venables (1999) also get ambiguous results in terms of the effects of
multinationals in the domestic economy stemming from reduction in the demand for local inputs due, for example,
to the fact that foreign firms may import intermediate inputs.

48

Table 1: Parameters

Benchmark Parameters
Common parameters for three groups
α = 0.91
r = 0.05
φ=1
Production Function Parameters
β d = 0.34
β f = 0.27
δ = 0.5
d
f
f
γ = 0.33
γ = 0.40
A /Ad = 2
µ = 0.1
ρ = 0.2
Group Specific Parameters
Financial Dev.
High (rich)
0.045
Medium (middle)
0.085
Low (poor)
0.145

L/H
5
5
5

Robustness Parameters
Production Function Parameters
µ = 0.2
Group Specific Parameters
L/H
High (rich)
5
Medium (middle)
9
Low (poor)
12
Notes: We group countries based on their financial market development levels, using the interest
rate spreads. The average spread for the low financially developed (poor) countries, medium financially developed (middle income) countries and the high financially developed (rich) countries
between 2000 and 2003 are 14.5%, 8.5%, and 4.5%, respectively. In the benchmark case, all countries have the same ratio of unskilled to skilled labor equal to 5. In the sensitivity analysis, we
set the ratio of unskilled labor to skilled labor equal to 12 for the poor countries, 9 for the middle
income countries, and 5 for the rich countries (taken from Duffy et al. (2004)).

49

Table 2: Benchmark Results

µ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

Growth Rate
High Financial
Development

Growth Rate
Medium Financial
Development

Growth Rate
Low Financial
Development

Relative
Output
(Y f /Y d )

3.10
4.35
6.17
8.74
12.25
16.97

2.13
3.01
4.29
6.10
8.57
11.89

1.42
2.03
2.92
4.17
5.88
8.18

0.065
0.155
0.257
0.369
0.487
0.612

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. Growth rates are in percent. Relative outputs are
valued at their respective price. The relative labor endowments are constant at the level of rich
(high financial development) countries and ρ = 0.2.

Table 3: Increasing Foreign Presence, Changing µ

∆µ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

to
to
to
to
to

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

∆ Growth
High Financial
Development

∆ Growth
Medium Financial
Development

∆ Growth
Low Financial
Development

∆ Relative
Output
∆(Y f /Y d )

Percent
Change in
Yf

1.25
1.83
2.56
3.51
4.72

0.88
1.29
1.80
2.47
3.32

0.61
0.89
1.25
1.71
2.30

0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.12

203.2
114.1
84.8
69.6
59.9

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. All changes are in percentage points unless reported
otherwise. Relative outputs are valued at their respective price. The relative labor endowments
are constant at the level of rich (high financial development) countries and ρ = 0.2.

50

Table 4: Increasing Foreign Presence via Increasing MNE Productivity: Af /Ad ↑ by 15%

µ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6

∆ Growth
High Financial
Development

∆ Growth
Medium Financial
Development

∆ Growth
Low Financial
Development

∆ Relative
Output
∆(Y f /Y d )

Percent
Change in
Yf

0.03
0.09
0.19
0.35
0.59
0.94

0.02
0.06
0.13
0.24
0.41
0.66

0.01
0.04
0.09
0.17
0.29
0.46

0.002
0.006
0.009
0.013
0.017
0.022

4.2
5.0
5.8
6.6
7.2
7.8

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. All changes are in percentage points unless reported
otherwise. Relative outputs are valued at their respective price. The relative labor endowments are
constant at the level of rich (high financial development) countries and ρ = 0.2. A 15% increase in
Af /Ad implies that this ratio increases in value from 2 to 2.3.

Table 5: L/H Varies by Group

µ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

Growth Rate
High Financial
Development

Growth Rate
Medium Financial
Development

Growth Rate
Low Financial
Development

Relative
Output
High

Relative
Output
Medium

Relative
Output
Low

3.10
4.35
6.17
8.74
12.25

1.68
2.38
3.40
4.84
6.79

0.97
1.40
2.02
2.90
4.09

0.065
0.155
0.257
0.369
0.487

0.065
0.153
0.255
0.365
0.482

0.064
0.153
0.253
0.363
0.480

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. Growth rates are in percent. Relative outputs are
valued at their respective price. The relative labor endowments change together with financial
development as high, medium and low; ρ = 0.2.

51

Table 6: Increasing Foreign Presence (Changing µ) and L/H varies by Group

∆µ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

to
to
to
to

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

∆
Growth
High

∆
Growth
Medium

∆
Growth
Low

∆

∆

Y
High

Y
Medium

1.25
1.83
2.56
3.51

0.70
1.02
1.43
1.96

0.43
0.62
0.87
1.19

0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12

0.09
0.10
0.19
0.12

f /Y d

f /Y d

∆
Y

Low

%∆
Yf
High

%∆
Yf
Medium

%∆
Yf
Low

0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12

203.2
114.1
84.8
69.6

202.5
113.6
84.4
69.2

202.2
113.4
84.2
69.1

f /Y d

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. All changes are in percentage points unless reported
otherwise. Relative outputs are valued at their respective price. The relative labor endowments
change together with financial development as high, medium, low; and ρ = 0.2.

Table 7: Increasing Foreign Activity via Increasing MNE Productivity (Af /Ad ↑ by 15%), and L/H
varies by Group

µ
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

∆
Growth
High

∆
Growth
Medium

∆
Growth
Low

∆
Y f /Y d
High

∆
Y f /Y d
Medium

∆
Y f /Y d
Low

%∆
Yf
High

%∆
Yf
Medium

%∆
Yf
Low

0.03
0.09
0.19
0.35
0.59

0.02
0.05
0.10
0.19
0.33

0.01
0.03
0.06
0.12
0.20

0.002
0.006
0.009
0.013
0.017

0.002
0.005
0.009
0.013
0.017

0.002
0.005
0.009
0.013
0.017

4.23
5.04
5.83
6.56
7.21

4.23
5.03
5.81
6.56
7.19

4.22
5.02
5.80
6.52
7.18

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. All changes are in percentage points unless reported
otherwise. Relative outputs are valued at their respective price. The relative labor endowments
change together with financial development as high, medium, low; and ρ = 0.2.

52

Table 8: Increasing Foreign Productivity and Presence for Different Relative Productivity Levels

Panel A: Increasing Foreign Productivity
Effect of Increases in Af /Ad for different values of µ

Af /Ad

∆
Growth
High
µ = 0.1

∆
Growth
Medium
µ = 0.1

∆
Growth
Low
µ = 0.1

∆
Growth
High
µ = 0.2

∆
Growth
Medium
µ = 0.2

∆
Growth
Low
µ = 0.2

∆
Growth
High
µ = 0.3

∆
Growth
Medium
µ = 0.3

∆
Growth
Low
µ = 0.3

1.15 to
1.32
1.52
1.75
2.0
2.3
2.6

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.010
0.003
0.002
0.011
0.011
0.010

0.006
0.002
0.001
0.006
0.007
0.006

0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06

0.03
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.03

0.02
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.12

0.06
0.02
0.01
0.07
0.07
0.07

0.04
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.05
0.04

Panel B: Increasing Foreign Presence
Effect of Increases in µ for different values of Af /Ad

Af /Ad

1.15
1.32
1.52
1.75
2.00
2.30
2.60

∆
Growth
High
∆µ 0.1
to 0.2

∆
Growth
Medium
∆µ 0.1
to 0.2

∆
Growth
Low
∆µ 0.1
to 0.2

∆
Growth
High
∆µ 0.2
to 0.3

∆
Growth
Medium
∆µ 0.2
to 0.3

∆
Growth
Low
∆µ 0.2
to 0.3

∆
Growth
High
∆µ 0.3
to 0.4

∆
Growth
Medium
∆µ 0.3
to 0.4

∆
Growth
Low
∆µ 0.3
to 0.4

1.05
1.09
1.14
1.20
1.25
1.31
1.36

0.59
0.61
0.64
0.67
0.70
0.73
0.76

0.36
0.38
0.39
0.41
0.43
0.45
0.47

1.49
1.56
1.65
1.74
1.83
1.93
2.02

0.83
0.88
0.92
0.97
1.02
1.08
1.13

0.51
0.54
0.56
0.59
0.62
0.66
0.69

2.03
2.15
2.28
2.42
2.56
2.72
2.87

1.14
1.20
1.27
1.35
1.43
1.52
1.60

0.69
0.73
0.78
0.83
0.87
0.93
0.98

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. All changes are in percentage points unless reported otherwise.
The relative labor endowments change together with financial development as high, medium, low; and
ρ = 0.2.

53

Table 9: MNEs and Local Firms: Substitutes or Complements

µ

Growth Rate
High Financial
Development

Growth Rate
Medium Financial
Development

Growth Rate
Low Financial
Development

Y f /Y d

0.1
0.2

1.03
0.54

ρ = −0.2 (complements)
0.67
0.33

0.42
0.18

0.13
0.24

0.1
0.2

3.10
4.35

ρ = 0.2 (substitutes)
2.13
3.01

1.42
2.03

0.06
0.16

Notes: See table 1 for the parameter values. Growth rates are in percent. Relative outputs are
valued at their respective price. The relative labor endowments are constant at the level of rich
(high financial development) countries.

Table 10: Growth Rates For The Cobb Douglas Case

Low
Medium
High

(1)
Same L/H
Af = 2Ad
1 − η = 0.05

(2)
Same L/H
Af = 2.5Ad
1 − η = 0.05

(3)
Diff. L/H
Af = 2Ad
1 − η = 0.05

(4)
Diff. L/H
Af = 2.5Ad
1 − η = 0.05

(5)
Diff. L/H
Af = 2Ad
1 − η = 0.25

(6)
Diff. L/H
Af = 2.5Ad
1 − η = 0.25

1.67
2.49
3.61

1.69
2.52
3.65

1.16
1.98
3.61

1.17
2.01
3.65

0.85
1.49
2.78

0.91
1.59
2.94

N otes: (1 − η) is the MNE output share when using the Cobb Douglas function. All values are in
percentage points. φ = 1 in all columns. In (1) -(2) the relative endowments are the same (at the
level of high financial development countries) for all group of countries. In (3) - (6) the relative
labor endowments change together with financial development as high, medium, and low

54

Figure 1: Financially well-developed, positive rho

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1
0.5

0.8
rho

0.4

0.6
0.3
0.4

0.2
0.2

0.1

mu

Figure 2: Financially well-developed, negative rho

0.05
0.045

additional growth

0.04
0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0
0.5

-0.2
0.4

-0.4
0.3
-0.6
rho

0.2
-0.8

0.1
mu

