                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TARIFF LIBERALIZATION POLICY
                   AND FINANCIAL RESTRICTIONS



                        Joshua Aizeninan


                     Working Paper No. 1253




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, M& 02138
                         December 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1253
                                                 December 1983




          Tariff Liberalization Policy and Financial Restrictions



                                ABSTRACT




     The purpose of this paper is to assess how restrictions on capital

mobility affect adjustment to a tariff liberalization policy. This is done by

comparing the adlustment process under free and restricted convertibility of

foreign assets in a regime where the commercial exchange rate is pegged.     It

is shown that trade liberalization causes in the short run a larger drop in

domestic goods prices and a smaller current account deficit in a regime with

restricted convertibility. Similar results apply also for the long—run

current account effects of the liberalization: they are smaller under

financial restrictions.




                                                Joshua Aizenman
                                                3718 Locust Walk, CR
                                                Economics Department
                                                University of Pennsylvania
                                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                215—898—7409
 1. Introduction



     The experience of countries in the Southern—Cone has raised the question

of the optimal way to implement liberalization policies. Countries there (and

elsewhere) have used various restrictive policies on international trade in

goods and assets. Commercial policies have resulted in distortions which have

opened a wedge between the domestic and foreign prices of traded goods.

Financial restrictions, on the other hand, have occasionally introduced a

wedge between the exchange rates used for commercial and financial

transactions. A country that wishes to liberalize its policies is therefore

confronted with a choice among various liberalization schemes.

     A question under current debate is the desirability of imposing (or

preserving) financial controls during attempts to liberalize commercial

policies.1 A necessary step in answering such a question is understanding the

effects of financial restrictions on the adjustment process. The purpose of

this paper is to provide a framework capable of modeling those issues in a

monetary economy.

     The paper will first focus on modeling two financial regimes. The first

regime is a standard fixed exchange rate regime, in which a unified exchange

rate is applied for financial and commercial transactions. In the second

regime convertibility of domestic and foreign assets is effectively restricted

by the policy maker. These restrictions can drive a flexible wedge between

the exchange rates used for various transactions——a wedge whose magnitude is

market determined. This might be the case under the formal use of multi—tier

exchange rates1 or in an economy where there is significant use of a "black"

market for foreign exchange. A further purpose of the analysis is to model



                                     —1-—
such an economy. Next, the adjustment process to a commercial liberalizaiton

policy is contrasted for the two regimes, allowing us to study the effect of

financial restrictions on the process.

     The underlying framework is a version of the Calvo—Rodriguez currency

substitution model, modified in several directions to allow for convertibility

restrictions and for the inclusion of commercial policy. The analysis is

 conducted for the case where all prices that are not officially pegged are

 fully flexible. It can be readily extended to allow for slow wage

 adjustment. Section 2 presents the model underlying the analysis. Section 3

 uses the model to evaluate the effects of financial restrictions on the

 adjustment process. Section 4 summarizes the findings, closing the paper with

 comments on the effects of introducing sluggish wage adjustment.   This section

 also describes alternative uses of the model to analyze the effect of

 financial restrictions on adjustment to a devaluation and monetary policy.




2. The Model



2.a. The Case of Financial Constraints

     Consider a small open economy, subiect to commercial and financial

policies. A minimal framework that is capable of describing it should at

least allow for two goods and two assets. A simple example is the case where

consumers allocate their wealth between domestic and foreign money balances,

subject to convertibility restrictions. Such restrictions may introduce a

wedge between the exchange rate that is relevant for commercial transactions

and the exchange rate that applies for foreign assets. A useful way of

modeling this outcome is the case of a two-tier exchange rate.2 Suppose that

there is a given stock of foreign exchange in the hands of the private sector,



                                     —2—
and the policy maker effectively controls financial capital flows. The

restrictions on private capital flows imply that the exchange rate that clears

the market for foreign assets can diverge from the commercial exchange rate.

Suppose that the authorities peg the commercial rate at a preannounced rate,

letting the market determine the financial rate. Let e        and e denote the
                                                          c        f

commercial and financial rates respectively (each defines the domestic

currency equivalent of a unit of foreign currency). In such an economy the

capital account is nil, and the balance of payments can be identified with the

balance of trade. While such a formulation seems to be quite restrictive, it

can describe effectively an economy where financial restrictions introduce a

flexible wedge between the prices of foreign currency for various transac-

tions. The magnitude of such a wedge is market determined, and will play an

important role in our discussion.3 Financial liberalization can he modeled as

either a policy that increases foreign assets in the hands of the private

sector, or as a policy which abolishes the restrictions that caused the wedge

between the various exchange rates. As in Calvo—Rodriguez (1977), the desired

asset composition depends on the discrepancy between the returns on various

assets.4 Equilibrium in the asset market can be summarized by:



(1)         ef .   M/N   =
                             9(ef/ef),   0' > 0.



where      and N denote private holding of foreign and domestic money

balances. Domestic goods are taken to be an imperfect substitute for foreign

goods. The small economy is facing a given price of foreign goods, denoted by
  *
p •     A tariff at a rate t results in a domestic price of foreign goods equal

to e       p*(1 + t). Let us denote by E the nominal expenditure, by S the

share of expenditure devoted to domestic goods, and by X the foreign demand



                                              —3—
for the domestic goods. The total demand for these goods is thus given by:


                              *            E               *
(2)          (e(1+t) p /p) • —+ X(e                   • p /p)




where 5', X' > 0, describing the dependence of demand on relative prices.

Let Y denote the supply of home goods and R the tariff revenue, whose proceeds

are assumed to be rebated in a lump sum manner.5 The domestic demand for

imports is given by (l—)E/{(l+t) • ec •*]• Thus, the tariff revenue is

given by


                                  *       (l—)E *
(3)          R = t •   e    • p                     = _________
                                                         1+
                                      (   +t)e.p
                                              C

      Expenditure is a function of nominal disposable income (PY + R) and
wealth (V)


(4)          E = E(PY + R, V)             where 0 < E1, < 1, E2 > 0,



and nominal wealth is given by



(5)          V = M +        • N
                       ef

All prices that are not officially pegged are assumed to be fully flexible.

This allows one to proceed by assuming that output is at its full employment

level, denoted by Y0, and goods prices are set such as to clear the goods

market:




(6)          Y0 =.-+X
                  p


                                                     —4—
We assume the absence of an active monetary policy. Thus, money balances

accumulate over time via the balance of payment surplus. In our two—tier

regime such a balance of payment surplus is equal also to the current

account.:



(7)         M = p          •       X —
                                         (1—)E
                                          l+t

       Using the goods market equilibrium condition (eq. 6) we find that



(8)              = p       •       Y   + R — E(p            •    Y   + R,V).



       For a given level of foreign assets (M*) eq. 1 and 8 provide the motion

rules for our system while eq. 6 defines the goods prices for given values of

 (ef M). Thus, long run equilibrium values of wealth (V) and goods prices

(p) are obtained from:



(9)         p • Y              + R = E(p        .   Y           + R, V)
                       0                                0




(10)        y =                .       + x.
             0                     p



For the equilibrium values of V and p the long run equilibrium financial

exchange rate is given by:


                               8(0) • V
(11)        ef =           *
                   M (1 + 0(0))


       From eq. 1, 6, 8 we obtain that our dynamic system can be described by



                                                                      —5—
(12)        ef =   f(M,   ef)            fi <         > 0




(13)        M = h(M,                  h1 < 0, h2 < 0.
                     ef)



As is evident from eq. 12—13, a linearized version of our system exhibits

saddle path stability around the long run equilibrium, and the dynamics of

adlustment are described in Figure 1, where AA corresponds to the saddle
        8
path.

        Curve      = 0 describes combinations of money balances and the financial

exchange rate that are compatible with anticipation of a stable financial

exchange rate. An increase in money balances will raise the demand for

foreign assets. To regain composition equilibrium at         =   0, the financial
rate should depreciate at the same rate that the money balances rise. Thus,

 ef = 0 is upward—sloping, with a unitary elasticity. In a similar way, curve

 N = 0 describes combinations of (M, ef) that are consistant with current

account equilibrium. Inspection of our system reveals that around the

equilibrium N = 0 is consistent with an adjustment of (M, ef) that leaves

wealth intact. Thus,            = 0   is downward—slooing.



2.b The Case of Free Convertibility



        Under free convertibility there is a unified exchange rate. Assuming a

fixed rate regime, the authorities use reserves to peg the exchange rate for

all transactions. This implies that any portfolio disequilibrium is corrected

by means of a swap of domestic money balances with foreign assets. Such a

swap does not alter wealth (V), it only affects the private sector's portfolio



                                                —6—
composition.9 Thus, we cannot identify the current account with the change in

money balances. Instead, the current account is equal to the net accumulation

of wealth. Thus, in eq. 7 and 8                        replaces :



(8')            = p   •   Y   + R — E(p        •   Y   + R,V)



As before, eq. 9—10 define the long run values of wealth and goods prices.

Eq. 11, however, now defines the equilibrium holdings of foreign assets for

the given exchange rate (ef =                  e).      A useful property of our model is that

eq. 10—11 hold for both regimes, defining the long run equilibrium.

       From eq. 6, 8' we obtain that the adjustment process under a fixed rate

regime is given by



(14)        7
                = g(V)         ,   g'   < 0.




From eq. 1 we also obtain:



(15)        V = (1 +      9(0))     •




Notice   that for a given wealth eq. 6 gives us domestic goods prices.



3. Adjustment to a commercial liberalization policy



       We would like to use our model to contrast the adjustment to a commercial

liberalization policy under the two regimes. This will enable us to assess

the economic relevance of financial restrictions, because under a two—tier

regime we impose such restrictions, whereas under a unified exchange rate they



                                                        —7—.
are nil.

       To make the comparison meaningful, consider the case of an identical

initial long run equilibrium under both regimes. Suppose that by the choice

of units in such an equilibrium p =
                                                 ec
                                                       =
                                                           ef
                                                                =   •   10
                                                                             For simplicity of

exposition we consider now the case of a low initial tariff, such that in the

new liberalized regime t = 0.

       Because eq. 9, 10 define the long run equilibrium for both regimes, it is

useful to start by deriving the long run effects of the commercial

liberalization:




(16)
                        —   (1—)       +
                                           > 0
            dt
                 L.R. S'



            dV              (1 - E1)Y
(17)                    =                  [(l-)+ '         +   l-] > .
                 L.R.              2
                                                 0

       For given domestic goods prices the liberalization switches demand from

domestic to foreign goods. To regain equilibrium domestic goods prices should

drop. The resultant drop in the price level induces also a drop in the demand

for nominal wealth resulting in a lower equilibrium V. While the drop in

nominal wealth is the same under both regimes, its decomposition between

quantity and price adjustment differs. From eq. 11 we obtain that in a two—

tier regime the long run effect of the liberalization on the financial

exchange rate given by:


            de
                        —*
                 L.R. N (1 + 0(0))
                                            dt

       Thus, the liberalization will generate a drop in the equilibrium



                                                 —8—
 (long run) financial exchange rate. Furthermore, from eq. 11 we find that the

cumulative current account adjustment under the two regimes is given by

          under a fixed exchange rate regime, whereas under a two—tier regime
     L.R.
               dV
it is equal to
               d
                        •
                             1
                          1 + 010)
                                     Thus, we can concludes that, in the long
                   L.R.
run, financial restrictions are manifested in shifting part of the adjustment

from quantities to prices, implying a smaller current account adjustment.

       The impact effect of the liberalization can he read from eq. 6. Under

both regimes we obtain that



                       =
                           '+ (1   —
                                       cS) + E2
(19)
                S.R.          S+6' +—y— 5E

       Under a fixed exchange rate regime the liberalization policy does not



have direct wealth effects in the short run (thus                   =   0).
                                                            S .R.



This is not the case, however, under a two—tier regime. When the liberali-

zation goes into effect, the new long run financial rate is expected to

drop. This anticipation will reduce the demand for foreign assets, resulting

in a drop in the financial exchange rate. The adjustment process can he

traced with the help of Figure 1. Let 'a' denote the initial long run

equilibrium that was common to both regimes. Notice that the liberalization

policy does not effect the locus of ef = 0.        A lower tariff implies a lower

price level. This will increase real wealth, inducing at a given financial

rate a current account deficit. Thus, if we wish to preserve a current

account balance   (tt =    0 for a given M) the financial exchange rate should

appreciate enough to eliminate the current account pressure. Thus, following

the tariff reduction curve M = 0 shifts downward. Because the liberalization



                                           —9—
policy does not affect the locus of ef = 0, the saddle path shifts

downward. The new long run equilibrium under a two—tier regime is obtained at

point c. The effect of the liberalization is to place us under perfect

foresight on the new saddle path (point b), below the initial equilibrium.

Thus, in the short run the financial rate will appreciate, undershooting its

long—run value. The effect of the liberalization is also to generate a

current account deficit. During the adjustment to the new long run

equilibrium money balances will drop, the financial exchange rate will

appreciate, and goods prices will further decline to preserve the market

equilibrium of assets and goods. In terms of Figure 1, we will move gradually

along the saddle path from b to c.

     As eq. 19 reveals, goods prices will drop in both regimes when the

liberalization goes into effect. Under financial restrictions the

appreciation of the financial rate following the liberalization will magnify



                                     dV               dV
the drop in goods prices (because                 >               =   0).
                                           S.R.            S.R.
                                           T.T.            FIX

     Under a fixed exchange rate regime the long run equilibrium is obtained

at point c'. Because the exchange rate is unified and fixed, we will stay in

the short run at point a, and gradually will move towards the new long run

equilibrium.

     In both regimes we observe a current account deficit following the

liberalization. This deficit can be shown to be smaller under a two—tier

regime. That is because the instantaneous appreciation of the financial rate

will substitute partially for the needed quantity adjustment achieved via the

current account. The resultant wealth adjustment under a two—tier regime

partly cushions the current account deficit. Again, we observe a trade—off



                                          —10—
between quantity and price adjustment.

     Notice that our analysis shows that current account deficit will

accompany an appreciation of the financial exchange rate. This is in contrast

with the analysis of the asset approach for floating rates, where it is shown

that a current account deficit is accompanied by a depreciation of the

financial exchange rate.    [See Dornbusch and Fischer]. The different

correlations among the exchange rate and the current account reflect the

underlying differences between the two exchange rate regimes. Under a

floating rate system, a current account deficit reduces holdings of foreign

assets by the private sector, leaving holdings of money balances intact.

Under a two—tier system a current account deficit reduces holding of money

balances, leaving holdings of foreign assets in the hands of the private

sector intact. To regain asset composition equilibrium we need depreciation

in the first case, appreciation in the second. In terms of Figure 1, under
                                  *
floating   rates foreign assets (M ) would replace domestic money balances, and

the curve describing        0 would be downward sloping. It can be shown that

although the slope of M = 0 might be either positive or negative, the saddle

path under floating rates slopes downward.



4. Summary and Concluding Remarks



     The foregoing analysis has assessed the effect of capital mobility

restrictions on the adjustment process to a tariff liberalization policy.

This was done by comparing the adjustment process under free and restricted

convertibility of foreign assets in a regime where the commercial exchange

rate was pegged.

     In a regime with restricted convertibility we observe a larger drop in



                                      —11—
domestic goods prices and a smaller current account deficit when the trade

liberalization becomes effective. This is accompanied by appreciation of the

financial rate. During the transition to the new long run equilibrium we

observe in both regimes a further drop in goods J)rices and C4. current account

deficit. Financial restrictions reduce the long—run effects of trade

liberalization on the current account.

      This analysis can he readily extended in several (jirections. First we

can extend our framework to allow for short—run wage rigidities. This implies

that the effect of the liberalization Is to generate unemployment in the short

run. The magnitude of the resultant unemployment will he larger under

financial restrictions, because of the larger drop in goods prices in the

short run. Nominal wage rigidities imply also that a "smart' nominal policy,

such as devaluation, could reduce the resultant unemployment. If wages are

rigid in the short run, financial restrictions enhance the importance of such
                11
measures.

      The paper's framework also permits an assessment of how financial

restrictions affect adlustment to devaluation, a monetary injection, and other

policies. It can he shown that the effect of financial restrictions is to

increase the current account's short—run response to devaluation and monetary
           12
pol icy.




                                    —   I-
                                   FOOTNOTES




1. For a survey of the literature on the timing and order of liberalization

    policies see Edwards. Earlier work on those issues can be found in

    McKinnon.

2. For models of two—tier exchange rate regimes see, for example, Flood and

    Marion, Marion, Bhandari and Decaluwe and the references thereupon.

3. The model can be also applied for the case where part of the financial

    transaction uses the official rate, and another part uses the "black

    market" exchange rate. Our analysis neglect issues related to interest

    payments, because the service account seem to play insignificant role in

    explaining the short run adjustment process to a liberalization policy.

    The model can be modified to include world bonds instead of foreign

    exchange (see, for example, Dornbusch and Fischer).

4. Similar models were used intensively in the formulation of the asset

    approach. For example Dornbusch and Fischer analyze exchange rates and

    current account, whereas Eichengreen applies a related model to analyzing

    tariffs under flexible exchange rates.

5. The model abstracts from issues related to fiscal policy.

6. Notice that E denotes nominal expenditure. Making real expenditure depend

    on real disposable income and real wealth would not affect the results

    reoorted in the paper.

7. The dynamics of our model can be viewed as consistent with the permanent

    income or life cycle hypothesis, according to which assets are used to

   smooth consumption over time.

8. The positive slope of the saddle path is the result of the signs of the



                                     —13—
   partial derivatives of eq. 12—13.

9. We assume the absence of an active monetary policy, and that the private

   sector ignores the composition of the central bank's balance sheet in

   arriving at portfolio decisions. For a discussion about assets swap under

   a fixed rate regime see Frenkel and Rodriguez.

10. Our analysis can be readily extended for the case where at the initial

   equilibrium the financial rate exceed the commercial rate.

11. For example, consider the case where employment (L) is demand determined,

   L =   L(w/p)   where w is the money wage, L' < 0.        The wage is pre—set1

   adjusting according to a rule        =      — L)/L   ,
                                                            where   L is the full

   employment level. In such a framework the total unemployment during the

   adjustment process is proportional to the unexpected domestic goods price

   drop at the liberalization day.

12. Notice that the short—run effect of financial restrictions was to reduce

    the current account deficit following tariff liberalization (in comparison

    to the current account under a unified fixed rate). This is because a

    tariff policy has real long run effects, whereas a monetary policy and

    devaluation prove to be neutral in the long run in our framework.




                                        —14—
                                  Re ferences




Bhandari, S.J. and B. Decaluwe, 1983, Stochastic Implications of Incomplete

    Separation Between Commercial and Financial Exchange Markets. Unpublished

    Manuscript.

Calvo, G. C.A. Rodriguez, 1977, A Model of Exchange Rate Determination Under

    Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations, Journal of Political

    Economy 85, 617—625.

Dornbusch, R.and S. Fischer, 1980. Exchange Rates and the Current Account,

    American Economic Review 71, 960—971.

Edwards S., 1983, The Order of Liberalization and the Current and Capital

    Accounts of the Balance of Payments: A Survey of Malor Issues. 'Working

    Paner, Dept. of Economics, UCLA.

Eichengreen B.J. 1981, A Dynamic Model of Tariffs, Output and Employment Under

    Flexible Exchange Rates. Journal of International Economics 11, 341—360.

Flood, R.P. and N.P. Marion, 1982, The Transmission of Disturbances Under

    Alternative Exchange Rate Regime With Optimal Indexing, Quarterly Journal

    of Economics 95, 45—62.

Frenkel, J. and Rodriguez, C., 1975, Portfolio Equilibrium and the Balance of

    Payments: A Monetary Approach, American Economic Review Vol. 65,

    December, pp. 674—88.

Marion, N.P. 1981, Insulation Properties of a Two—Tier Exchange Market in a

    Portfolio Balance Model, Economica, 48(189), pp. 61—70.

McKinnon, R.J., 1973, Money and Capital in Economic Development, Brookings

    Institution.




                                       —15—
e




    M =0
                <1    ef= 0




           C'




    A-



                      M




           FIGURE 1
