                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CAN NEWS ABOUT THE FUTURE DRIVE THE BUSINESS CYCLE?

                                            Nir Jaimovich
                                            Sergio Rebelo

                                        Working Paper 12537
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12537


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2006




We thank the editor, Mark Gertler, three anonymous referees, and Gadi Barlevy, Paul Beaudry, Larry
Christiano, Fabrice Collard, Wouter Denhaan, Martin Eichenbaum, Zvi Hercowitz, Erin Hoge, Navin
Kartik, Benjamin Malin, Franck Portier, and Laura Veldkamp for their comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2006 by Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Can News About the Future Drive the Business Cycle?
Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 12537
September 2006, April 2008
JEL No. E24,E32

                                             ABSTRACT

Aggregate and sectoral comovement are central features of business cycle data. Therefore, the ability
to generate comovement is a natural litmus test for macroeconomic models. But it is a test that most
existing models fail. In this paper we propose a unified model that generates both aggregate and sectoral
comovement in response to contemporaneous shocks and news shocks about fundamentals. The fundamentals
that we consider are aggregate and sectoral TFP shocks as well as investment-specific technical change.
The model has three key elements: variable capital utilization, adjustment costs to investment, and
a new form of preferences that allow us to parameterize the strength of short-run wealth effects on
the labor supply.


Nir Jaimovich
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
njaimo@stanford.edu

Sergio Rebelo
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

Business cycle data feature two important forms of comovement. The …rst is aggregate
comovement: major macroeconomic aggregates, such as output, consumption, investment,
hours worked, and the real wage tend to rise and fall together. The second is sectoral
comovement: output, employment, and investment tend to rise and fall together in di¤erent
sectors of the economy.
   Lucas (1977) argues that these comovement properties re‡ect the central role that ag-
gregate shocks play in driving business ‡uctuations. However, it is surprisingly di¢ cult
to generate both aggregate and sectoral comovement, even in models driven by aggregate
shocks. Barro and King (1984) show that the one-sector growth model generates aggregate
comovement only in the presence of contemporaneous shocks to total factor productivity
(TFP). Other shocks generate a negative correlation between consumption and hours worked.
Christiano and Fitzgerald (1998) show that a two-sector version of the neoclassical model
driven by aggregate, contemporaneous TFP shocks does not generate sectoral comovement
of investment and hours worked.
   In this paper we propose a model that generates aggregate and sectoral comovement in
response to both aggregate and sectoral shocks. The shocks that we consider are aggregate
TFP shocks, investment-speci…c shocks, and sectoral TFP shocks to the consumption and
investment sectors. We consider both contemporaneous shocks and news shocks. News
shocks consist of information that is useful for predicting future fundamentals but does not
a¤ect current fundamentals.
   The early literature on business cycles (e.g. Beveridge (1909), Pigou (1927), and Clark
(1934)) emphasizes news shocks as potentially important drivers of business cycles. The idea
is that news shocks change agents’ expectations about the future, a¤ecting their current
investment, consumption, and work decisions. There is a revival of interest in this idea,
motivated in part by the U.S. investment boom of the late 1990s and the subsequent economic
slowdown. Figure 1 displays some suggestive data for this episode. The …rst panel shows data
obtained from the Institutional Brokers Estimate System on the median analyst forecast of
the value-weighted long-run growth rate of earnings for companies in the Standard & Poors
500 index. The second panel shows the level of investment and realized earnings for the
same companies. We see that after 1995 the expected annual earnings growth rate rises



                                             1
rapidly, from roughly 11:5 percent to 17:7 in 2001.1 Investment and earnings forecasts are
positively correlated, whereas investment and realized earnings are negatively correlated.2
One plausible interpretation of these data is that high expectations about earnings growth
driven by the prospects of new technologies lead to high levels of investment and to an
economic boom. When the new technologies fail to live up to what was expected, investment
falls, and a recession ensues.
       It is surprisingly di¢ cult to make this story work in a standard business cycle model.
Cochrane (1994), Danthine, Donaldson, and Johnsen (1998), and Beaudry and Portier (2004,
2008) …nd that many variants of the neoclassical growth model fail to generate a boom in
response to expectations of higher future total factor productivity (TFP). Good news about
future productivity make agents wealthier, so they increase their consumption, as well as
their leisure, reducing the labor supply. This fall in labor supply causes output to fall.
Therefore, good news about tomorrow generates a recession today!
       Our model introduces three elements into the neoclassical growth model that together
generate comovement in response to news shocks. These same elements generate comove-
ment in response to contemporaneous shocks. The …rst element, variable capital utilization,
increases the response of output to news about the future. The second element, adjustment
costs to investment, gives agents an incentive to respond immediately to news about future
fundamentals.3 The third element, a weak short-run wealth e¤ect on the labor supply, helps
generate a rise in hours worked in response to positive news. We introduce this element by
using a new class of preferences which gives us the ability to parameterize the strength of
the short-run wealth e¤ect on the labor supply. These preferences nest, as special cases, the
two classes of utility functions most widely used in the business cycle literature, those char-
acterized in King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988) and in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Hu¤man
(1988).
       In our quantitative work, we consider a one-sector and a two-sector version of our model.
The latter is used to study sectoral comovement. Using our preferences to vary the strength
   1
     The realized average annual earnings growth rate is 10 percent for the 1985-95 period and 11 percent
for the 1995-2000 period.
   2
     The correlation between investment and earnings growth forecasts is 0:48 for the whole sample and 0:72
for the 1995-2004 period. Earnings forecasts lead investment; the correlation between the earnings forecast
at time t and investment at time t + 1 is 0:52 for the full sample. The correlation between investment and
realized earnings is 0:40 for the whole sample and 0:57 for the 1995-2004 period.
   3
     The …rst two elements, variable capital utilization and adjustment costs to investment, are generally nec-
essary to generate comovement in response to contemporaneous investment-speci…c shocks, see Greenwood,
Hercowitz, and Krusell (2000).


                                                      2
of short-run wealth e¤ects on the labor supply we …nd that these e¤ects lie at the heart
of the model’s ability to generate comovement. We can generate aggregate comovement in
the presence of moderate labor-supply wealth e¤ects. However, low short-run labor-supply
wealth e¤ects are essential to generate sectoral comovement that is robust to the timing and
nature of the shocks.4
       Our work is related to several recent papers on the role of news and expectations as
drivers of business cycles. Beaudry and Portier (2004) propose the …rst model that produces
an expansion in response to news. Their model features two complementary consumption
goods, one durable and one non-durable. Both goods are produced with labor and a …xed
factor but with no physical capital. The model generates a boom in response to good news
about TFP in the non-durable goods sector. Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno (2007)
show that habit persistence and investment adjustment costs produce aggregate comovement
in response to news about a future TFP shock. In their model, intertemporal substitution in
the supply of labor is large enough to compensate for the negative wealth e¤ect of the news
shock on the labor supply. However, hours worked fall when the shock materializes because
there continues to be a negative wealth e¤ect on labor supply, but there is no longer a strong
intertemporal substitution e¤ect on labor supply. Denhaan and Kaltenbrunner (2005) study
the e¤ects of news in a matching model. Matching frictions are a form of labor adjustment
costs, so their model is related to the version of our model with adjustment costs to labor,
which we discuss in section 4. Lorenzoni (2005) studies a model in which productivity has
a temporary and a permanent component and agents have imperfect information about the
relative importance of these two components. Blanchard (2007) emphasizes the importance
of news about future fundamentals in an open economy setting.
       Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we propose a one-sector model that gener-
ates aggregate comovement with respect to news about TFP and investment-speci…c shocks.
In Section 3 we explore the role that capital utilization, adjustment costs, and preferences
play in these results. In Section 4 we present a two-sector model that generates sectoral
comovement with respect to both contemporaneous and news shocks to fundamentals. The
fundamentals that we consider are aggregate TFP shocks and sectoral TFP shocks to con-
sumption and investment. In Section 5 we study simulations of a version of our one-sector
   4
    Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote (1999) provide microeconomic evidence that is consistent with the view
that short-run wealth e¤ects on the labor supply are weak. Their evidence is based on a sample of lottery
prize winners. They …nd that prizes of $15,000 per year for twenty years have no e¤ect on the labor supply.



                                                    3
model with investment-speci…c technological progress in which agents receive forecasts about
future output growth. Section 6 concludes.


2. The one-sector model

Our model economy is populated by identical agents who maximize their lifetime utility (U )
de…ned over sequences of consumption (Ct ) and hours worked (Nt ):
                                                                       1
                                        X
                                        1
                                                    Ct         Nt Xt       1
                                                t
                               U = E0                                          ,                  (2.1)
                                        t=0
                                                               1

where
                                              Xt = Ct Xt1 1 ,                                     (2.2)

and E0 denotes the expectation conditional on the information available at time zero. We
assume that 0 <         < 1,   > 1,     > 0, and             > 0. Agents internalize the dynamics of Xt
in their maximization problem. The presence of Xt makes preferences non-time-separable in
consumption and hours worked. These preferences nest as special cases the two classes of
utility functions most widely used in the business cycle literature. When                = 1 we obtain
preferences of the class discussed in King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988), which we refer to
as KPR. When           = 0 we obtain the preferences proposed by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Hu¤man (1988), which we refer to as GHH.
   Output (Yt ) is produced with a Cobb-Douglas production function using capital services
and labor:
                                      Yt = At (ut Kt )1           Nt .                            (2.3)

Here At represents the level of TFP. Capital services are equal to the product of the stock
of capital (Kt ) and the rate of capital utilization (ut ). Output can be used for consumption
or investment (It ):
                                          Yt = Ct + It =zt .                                      (2.4)

The variable zt represents the current state of technology for producing capital goods. We
interpret an increase in zt as resulting from investment-speci…c technological progress, as in
Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (2000). Combining (2.3) and (2.4) we obtain:

                                  At (ut Kt )1       Nt = Ct + It =zt .                           (2.5)



                                                         4
Capital accumulation is given by:
                                                                                It
                                       Kt+1 = It 1                                            + [1                    (ut )]Kt .                                (2.6)
                                                                            It       1

      The function              (:) represents adjustment costs that are incurred when the level of in-
                                                                                                                       0
vestment changes over time. We assume that                                                   (1) = 0,                      (1) = 0, so that there are no
                                                                                             00
adjustment costs in the steady state, and that                                                    (1) > 0. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (2005) (henceforth CEE) argue that this form of adjustment costs is better at mim-
icking the response of investment to a monetary shock than the speci…cations in Lucas and
Prescott (1971), Abel and Blanchard (1983), and Hayashi (1982).5
      The function (ut ) represents the rate of capital depreciation. We assume that deprecia-
                                                                       0                           00
tion is convex in the rate of utilization:                                 (ut ) > 0;                   (ut )          0. The initial conditions of the
model are K0 , I 1 , and X                      1   > 0.
      The …rst-order conditions for this economy’s planning problem are:

                                                                                                    1
                                                Ct             Nt Xt        +            t   Ct         Xt1       1    =     t,                                 (2.7)

                                Ct         Nt Xt                Nt +        t   = Et                    t+1 (1              )Ct+1 Xt           ,                (2.8)

                                 Ct             Nt Xt              Nt       1
                                                                                Xt =          t     At (ut Kt )1                  Nt   1
                                                                                                                                           ,                    (2.9)
                                                                                                              0
                                                    t (1        )At ut Kt1               Nt =             t       (ut )Kt ,                                    (2.10)

                            t   = Et [          t+1 (1          )At+1 u1t+1 Kt+1 Nt+1 + t+1 [1     (ut+1 )],                                                   (2.11)
                                                                                   "                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                   2
                                       It                  0     It      It                0   It+1    It+1
       t =zt   =    t   1                                                    + Et      t+1                                                                 ,   (2.12)
                                      It    1                   It 1 It 1                       It        It
where      t,      t,   and      t   are the Lagrange multipliers associated with (2.2), (2.5), and (2.6),
respectively.
      We choose the following parameter values for our benchmark model. We set                                                                                  = 1,
which corresponds to the case of logarithmic utility. We set                                                                      to 1:4, which corresponds
to an elasticity of labor supply of 2:5 when preferences take the GHH form. We set the
discount factor             to 0:985, implying a quarterly steady-state real interest rate of 1:5 percent.
The share of labor in the production function,                                               , is set to 0:64. We set the value of                                to
0:001, so preferences are close to a GHH speci…cation. We choose the second derivative of
  5
    Lucca (2007) provides microfoundations for the CEE adjustment cost formulation. He shows that these
adjustments costs are equivalent, up to a …rst-order approximation, to a model in which there is time to
build and where …rms invest in many complementary projects that have uncertain duration.


                                                                                 5
                                                                                      00
the adjustment-cost functions evaluated at the steady state,                               (1), to equal 1:3. Finally, we
                        0
set the elasticity of       (u) evaluated in the steady state ( (u)u= 0 (u), where u is the level of
                                                                          00

                                                                     00
utilization in the steady state) to 0:15. The value of                    (u)u= 0 (u) in‡uences the degree of
                                                             00
shock ampli…cation present in the economy. When                   (u)u= 0 (u) is low, the cost of utilization
rises slowly with the level of utilization. In this case, the level of capital utilization is highly
responsive to shocks, resulting in a powerful ampli…cation mechanism. Since there is little
                                                                               00               00
guidance in the literature about appropriate values for                             (1) and          (u), we discuss below
the robustness of our results to these parameters. We solve the model by linearizing the
equations that characterize the planner’s problem around the steady state.


News shocks Given these parameter values, the model produces aggregate comovement
in response to both contemporaneous shocks to At or zt and to news about future values
of At or zt . Most macroeconomic models generate aggregate comovement in response to
contemporaneous shocks. For this reason, we focus our discussion on the response of our
model to news shocks.
       The timing of the news shock we consider is as follows. At time zero the economy is in
the steady state. At time one, unanticipated news arrives. Agents learn that there will be
a one-percent permanent increase in At or zt beginning two periods later, in period three.
Figure 2 depicts the response of the economy to this news. In all cases, there is an expansion
in periods one and two in response to positive news about future productivity. Consumption,
investment, output, hours worked, average labor productivity, and capital utilization all rise
in periods one and two even though the positive shock only occurs in period three.6
       Figure 2 shows that the impact of news about At is less important than the realization
of the At shock. An increase in At , once it materializes, has an immediate, direct impact
on output. On the other hand, news of a future increase in At a¤ects output only through
changes in the supply of labor and in the amount of capital that is accumulated before the
shock arrives.
       In contrast, with investment-speci…c technical change, most of the rise in output occurs
in period one, when the news arrives, not in period three, when the zt shock materializes.
This property results from the fact that an increase in zt does not have a direct e¤ect on
   6
    Beaudry and Portier (2008) provide a useful characterization of the class of models that cannot generate
aggregate comovement in response to news about future TFP. Our model has preferences and investment
adjustment costs that are outside the set of speci…cations that they consider.



                                                     6
output. Output is only a¤ected by changes in the supply of labor and in the amount of
capital accumulated both before and after the realization of the shock.
   Table 1 shows that there is a wide range of parameters that generate aggregate comove-
ment in response to news about future At and zt . This table is constructed by using our
benchmark calibration and changing one parameter at a time to …nd the range of values for
this parameter consistent with aggregate comovement in the period in which the news ar-
rives. We …nd that adjustments to investment do not have to be high, ( 00 (1) > 0:4), varying
utilization can be relatively costly ( 00 (u)u= 0 (u) < 2:5), and the labor supply does not need
to be very responsive ( < 10). The value of              has to be lower than 0:4. Therefore, although
the model does not generate aggregate comovement when preferences take the KPR form,
short-run wealth e¤ects on the labor supply can still be substantial.

3. The elements of the one-sector model

In this section we discuss the role played by the three features of the model that generate
comovement between consumption, investment, output, and hours worked in response to
news about the future values of At or zt . In discussing the in‡uence of capital utilization
and adjustment costs on investment decisions it is useful to consider a version of the model
with GHH preferences ( = 0). In this case Xt is constant so, to simplify, we normalize the
level of X to one. The …rst-order conditions for the planner’s problem for this version of the
model are:
                                         Ct         Nt       =    t,                             (3.1)

                                   Nt    1
                                             = At (ut Kt )1           Nt       1
                                                                                   ,             (3.2)

together with (2.10), (2.11), and (2.12).


Variable Capital Utilization To explain the role played by capital utilization, we con-
sider a version of the model with constant capital utilization. To obtain the planner’s …rst-
order conditions for this model, we eliminate the …rst-order condition for ut , (2.10), set ut = 1
in equations (2.5) and (3.2), and (ut ) =          in equation (2.6):

                                              1
                                        Nt        = At Kt1       Nt    1
                                                                           .                     (3.3)

This equation implies that Nt does not respond to news about future changes in At or zt . The
positive wealth e¤ect of future shocks reduces the marginal utility of consumption today,           t.


                                                     7
Equation (3.1) implies that Ct rises. When ut = 1, equation (2.5) implies that investment
must fall. Therefore, labor and output do not respond to the news shock, consumption
rises, and investment falls. In the case of variable utilization, equation (3.2) implies that
an increase in utilization raises the marginal product of labor. This increase provides an
incentive for hours worked to rise.


Preferences To understand the role of preferences in shaping the e¤ects of news about
the future it is useful to study the problem of a worker in our economy.
        We …rst consider the response of a worker to a contemporaneous, permanent increase
in the real wage, wt . To simplify, we abstract from uncertainty and assume that the real
interest rate is constant and given by: r = 1=                1. The worker’s problem is to maximize
(2.1) subject to the budget constraint:

                                      at+1 = (1 + r)at + wt Nt        Ct ,

and to the non-Ponzi game condition, limt!1 at+1 =(1 + r)t = 0, and the initial value of the
worker’s assets, a0 . The timing is as follows. At time zero, the worker is in the steady state
with a constant wage rate. At time one, there is an unanticipated, one percent permanent
increase in wt . The …rst panel of Figure 3 shows the response of Nt for four di¤erent values
of : zero, 0:001, 0:25, and one. The strongest response of Nt occurs with GHH preferences
(   = 0). However, in this case hours worked are not stationary, they rise permanently.7
With KPR preferences (            = 1), Nt converges back to the steady state after the shock,
but its short-run response is very weak. When                  is equal to 0:001 or 0:25, the short-run
impact of the wage rise on Nt is in between that obtained with GHH and KPR preferences.
Lower values of       produce short-run responses that are closer to those obtained with GHH
preferences. As long as 0 <            1, hours worked converge to the steady state.
        We now compute the Hicksian wealth e¤ect on hours worked of the real wage increase.
We denote by U and U the lifetime utility of the worker before and after the permanent
increase in wt , respectively. To calculate the wealth e¤ect we compute the path of Nt for a
worker who does not bene…t from the wage increase but who receives an output transfer at
    7
     A simple way to make hours stationary when preferences take a GHH form is to introduce a trend in the
utility function such that the utility cost of supplying labor increases at the same rate as the real wage. This
trend can be justi…ed by appealing to home production. However, we …nd that, in models with stochastic
technical progress, this formulation can generate large recessions through an implausible mechanism. In
periods with low rates of technical progress, hours worked can fall signi…cantly because the trend increase
in the utility cost of supplying labor is not o¤set by increases in the real wage rate.

                                                       8
time one that raises his utility to U . This wealth e¤ect is zero for GHH preferences and
negative for KPR. In both cases the wealth e¤ect is constant over time. When 0 <                                   <1
the wealth e¤ect varies over time. In the long run, this e¤ect is similar to that with KPR
preferences. In the short-run, the e¤ect is actually positive, helping to raise the labor supply.
This positive wealth e¤ect results from the fact that the disutility of work is high when Xt
is high.8 Since consumption rises over time, Xt also increases over time, and the disutility
of work is higher in the future than in the present.
       It is easy to see why it is generally di¢ cult to generate an expansion in response to good
news about the future with KPR preferences. Suppose we tell a worker with KPR preferences
that his real wage goes up in the future but not in the present. This news generates a wealth
e¤ect that reduces the worker’s supply of labor today.


Investment Adjustment Costs The …rst-order condition for labor, (3.2), implies that,
unless the rate of capital utilization changes, Nt does not respond to news about the future.
The …rst-order condition for capital utilization, (2.10), implies that                      t= t   must fall in order
for ut to rise. A fall in      t= t   requires the presence of adjustment costs to investment. Without
adjustment costs,           t= t   = zt and the capital utilization equation reduces to:

                                       (1    )At ut Kt1       Nt = zt 0 (ut )Kt .

Since zt and At both remain constant at time two, this equation along with (3.2) implies
that both Nt and ut remain constant.
       We can now put all the elements of the model together to explain how we can generate
comovement in response to news about the future. A future increase in At or zt implies
that investment will rise in the future. In the presence of investment adjustment costs it is
optimal to smooth investment over time, and so investment rises in period one. An increase
in investment leads to a decline in          t= t,   the value of installed capital in units of consumption.
This fall occurs because the adjustment costs embedded in (2.6) imply that higher levels of
investment today reduce the cost of investment tomorrow.
       The fall in   t= t   lowers the value of installed capital. Capital is less valuable because it is
less costly to replace, so it is e¢ cient to increase today’s rate of capital utilization. The rise
in utilization increases the marginal product of labor. This increase provides an incentive
   8                                                                                1
    The disutility of labor at time t is given by:       Ct      N t Xt      Nt         Xt . It is easy to see that this
disutility is increasing in Xt .


                                                          9
for hours worked to rise. As long as the wealth e¤ect on the supply of labor is small enough,
hours rise and we see an expansion in response to good news about future values of At or zt .


Implications for the Value of the Firm The ratio                                      t= t     is equal to Tobin’s marginal
q, which is the value of an additional unit of installed capital. Therefore, to generate co-
movement, good news about future productivity must lead to a fall in Tobin’s marginal q.
A natural question is: does this fall imply a decline in the value of …rm? The answer is no
because with CEE adjustment costs, average q (the ratio of …rm value to the capital stock)
is di¤erent from marginal q. To see this result, de…ne the end-of period value of the …rm as
the result of the following problem:9
                                                    X
                                                    1      t
                                                                   t
                V (K1 ; I0 ; A0 ; z0 ) = max E0                        At (ut Kt )1       Nt      wt Nt    It =zt ,
                                                     t=1       0


subject to (2.6). The expression V (K1 ; I0 ; A0 ; z0 ) represents the time-zero value of the …rm
after it receives the cash ‡ow (Y0                 w0 N0 ), incurs investment expenses (I0 =z0 ), and chooses
values for I1 and K1 . We show in the Appendix that V (K1 ; I0 ; z0 ) can be written as:

                                          0                                           0    0     I0        I0
               V (K1 ; I0 ; A0 ; z0 ) =       (1     ) K0 + I0 1=z0 +                                                  .       (3.4)
                                          0                                           0         I 1       I 1

       The value of the …rm is the sum of two components. The …rst component, ( 0 = 0 ) (1                                         ) K0 ,
is the value of the capital stock. The second component, is the value of investment. This
second term is present because higher investment today lowers the cost of higher investment
in the future.
       News about future At or zt reduce the value of the capital stock but can raise the value
of investment. For our parameter values, the value of the capital falls and the value of the
investment rises. The …rst e¤ect dominates so the overall value of the …rm falls.
       An easy way to overturn this implication without changing any of the other key properties
of our model is to introduce decreasing returns to scale into the production function. We
…nd that the value of the …rm rises in response to news about future increases in At or zt
when the degree of returns to scale is lower than 0:9. A production function that exhibits
decreasing returns to capital and labor can be written as: Yt = At (ut Kt )                                     1
                                                                                                                    Nt 2 T 1   2    3
                                                                                                                                        ,
where      1   +    2   < 1, and T can be interpreted as a production factor that belongs to the
   9
    Our motivation for using the end-of-period value of the …rm is as follows. In a discrete-time version of
the Hayashi (1982) model marginal and average q coincide only when they are based on the end-of-period
value of the …rm. This timing is not required in continuous time, see the Appendix.

                                                               10
…rm.10 The value of this factor increases whenever there is an increase in the future values
of At or zt .11 This e¤ect produces an overall increase in the value of the …rm.


4. The two-sector model

To study sectoral comovement we consider a two-sector version of our model with a con-
sumption sector and an investment sector.12 Preferences are described by (2.1) and (2.2).
The resource constraint (2.5) is replaced with the following two equations:

                                      Ct = At ztc (uct Ktc )1       (Ntc ) ,                            (4.1)

                                                                1
                                   Itc + Iti = At zti uit Kti          Nti      ,                       (4.2)

where the superscript c and i denotes variables that are speci…c to the consumption and
investment sector, respectively. The capital accumulation equation, (2.6), is replaced by:

                              c                      Itc
                             Kt+1 = Itc 1                       + [1         (uct )]Ktc ,               (4.3)
                                                    Itc 1

                              i                      Iti
                             Kt+1 = Iti 1                       + [1         (uit )]Kti .               (4.4)
                                                    Iti 1
Finally, we introduce the condition:

                                              Ntc + Nti = Nt .

       Before turning to our results it is useful to review Christiano and Fitzgerald’s (1998)
discussion of why sectoral comovement of hours worked cannot arise with KPR preferences.
Combining the …rst-order conditions for consumption and labor for the case of                    = 1 yields
the following expression:

                                                            1
                                            Ntc + Nti           = =Ntc .                                (4.5)
  10
     A degree of returns to scale of 0:9 is consistent with the estimates in Burnside (1996). The factor T can
be interpreted as organizational capital, see Prescott and Visscher (1980).
  11
     Another avenue to generate an increase in the value of the …rm in response to news shocks is to introduce
adjustment costs to labor (see the Appendix). These adjustment costs add a term similar to the investment
value to the overall value of the …rm.
  12
     See Hu¤man and Wynne (1998) for evidence on sectoral comovement. These authors propose a model
that generates sectoral comovement in response to contemporaneous shocks. Their model does not produce
comovement in response to news shocks because it has no forces that can compensate for the negative wealth
e¤ect on the labor supply of news about future fundamentals.



                                                      11
Equation (4.5) implies that Ntc and Nti cannot move in the same direction. The analogous
equation for the case of GHH preferences is:

                                                         1       Ct
                                            Ntc + Nti        =       .                                (4.6)
                                                                 Ntc

Equation (4.6) shows that with GHH preferences it is possible for Ntc and Nti to move in the
same direction. The fact that comovement is not possible with                = 1 but it is possible with
  = 0 suggests that wealth e¤ects on the labor supply plays a crucial role in determining
sectoral comovement.13 Our preferences allow us to consider intermediate values of                       to
obtain a better understanding of the role played by short-run wealth e¤ects on the labor
supply in generating sectoral comovement.
       We now discuss numerical results for a version of the model calibrated with the same
parameter values used for the one-sector model. Figure 4 shows the e¤ects of three di¤erent
permanent, contemporaneous one-percent shocks. The …rst shock is an aggregate TFP shock
(At ). The second is a sectoral shock to TFP in the consumption sector (ztc ). The third is
a sectoral shock to TFP in the investment sector (zti or, equivalently, zt ). The timing is as
follows. The economy is in the steady state at time zero and the shock occurs at time one.
It is clear from Figure 4 that the model generates both aggregate and sectoral comovement
in response to all three shocks.
       Figure 5 shows the response to news about the same three shocks (At , ztc , and zti ) . The
timing is as follows. The economy is in the steady state at time zero. At time one the economy
learns that there is a permanent, one-percent increase in one of the three shocks in period
three. Figure 5 shows that the model generates both aggregate and sectoral comovement in
response to news about all three shocks.


Robustness To understand better the mechanism that drives the results displayed in
Figures 4 and 5 we now discuss the range of parameters that generate sectoral comovement
with respect to contemporaneous and news shocks. We follow the same procedure we use to
study robustness in the one-sector model.
       Table 1 shows that it is easy to generate comovement with respect to contemporaneous
shocks to ztc , even with KPR preferences. Generating sectoral comovement in response
  13
    The results in DiCecio (2005) also suggest that wealth e¤ects play a central role in generating sectoral
comovement in response to contemporaneous shocks. In his model there is sectoral comovement because
wages are sticky. Workers have to supply the number of hours demanded by …rms at a …xed nominal wage,
and so the wealth e¤ect on the labor supply plays no role in the short run.

                                                    12
to contemporaneous shocks to At requires only that short-run wealth e¤ects be somewhat
weaker than those implied by KPR ( < 0:6). In both of these cases minimal adjustment
costs to investment are required and variable utilization is not necessary. It is much more
di¢ cult to generate sectoral comovement in response to contemporaneous shocks to zti . We
need very weak short-run wealth e¤ects ( < 0:11) and a responsive labor supply ( < 2). We
also need variable utilization, but increasing utilization can be relatively costly ( 00 (u)u= 0 (u)
< 2:8).
       Finally, it is essential to have low values of              ( < 0:006) to obtain sectoral comovement
in response to news about      At , ztc ,   and   zti .   We also need moderate investment adjustment costs
  00
( (1) > 1), a low elasticity of the cost of utilization with respect to the rate of utilization
( 00 (u)u= 0 (u) < 0:25), and a responsive labor supply ( < 1:6).
       We …nd that sectoral comovement of labor and of investment are driven by di¤erent
features of the model. Low values of                  are essential to generate comovement of labor in the
two sectors. Investment adjustment costs are important to generate comovement in sectoral
investment.


Adjustment Costs to Labor We now consider a version of our model that incorporates
adjustment costs to labor, along the lines of Sargent (1978) and Cogley and Nason (1995).
We replace equations (4.1) and (4.2) with the following two equations:

                            Ct + Ntc '(Ntc =Ntc 1 ) = At ztc (uct Ktc )1         (Ntc ) ,

                                                                             1
                          Itc + Iti + Nti '(Nti =Nti 1 ) = At zti uit Kti           Nti     ,

where '(:) is a function such that '(1) = '0 (1) = 0, '0 (:)                 0, and '00 (:) > 0.
       We …nd that adjustment costs to labor help generate aggregate comovement with respect
to news shocks. These costs provide an incentive to increase the labor supply immediately
in anticipation of future increases in the labor supply that occur in response to the shock.
In the presence of adjustment costs it is not e¢ cient to reduce the labor supply today and
then increase it in the future once the shock occurs. As a result, the short-run wealth e¤ect
on the labor supply can be stronger than in the benchmark model. Indeed, we …nd that the
introduction of labor adjustment costs allows the model to generate aggregate comovement
in the one-sector model in response to news about At or zt for a much wider range of
parameters, including high values of . However, we …nd that adjustment costs to labor do


                                                              13
not help with generating sectoral comovement in response to news shocks in the two-sector
model.

5. Model Simulations

We have shown that our model can generate expansions and contractions in response to good
news about future productivity. One natural question is whether this success comes at a cost
of the model’s ability to generate empirically recognizable business ‡uctuations. That is, can
the model, when calibrated with the same parameters used in the experiments discussed so
far, generate volatility, comovement, and persistence of macroeconomic aggregates that are
empirically plausible? To answer this question we simulate a version of our model driven by
stochastic, investment-speci…c technical progress and compute the standard set of business-
cycle statistics.14 We assume that log(zt ) follows a random walk:

                                      log(zt+1 ) = log(zt ) + "t+1 .

We use the method proposed by Tauchen and Hussey (1991) to estimate a two-point Markov
chain for "t . We measure zt using quarterly data on the U.S. real price of investment for the
period 1947.I to 2004.IV. These data were constructed by Fisher (2006) using National In-
come and Product Accounts series for the consumption de‡ator and Cummins and Violante’s
(2002) updated series for Gordon’s (1989) quality-adjusted producer durable-equipment de-
‡ator.15 The support of the estimated Markov chain is: f0:00, 0:0115g. The transition
matrix is:
                                               0:7378 0:2622
                                         =                         .                                  (5.1)
                                               0:2622 0:7378
We generate 1000 model simulations with 230 periods each. For each simulation, we detrend
the logarithm of the relevant time series with the Hodrick-Prescott …lter using a smoothing
parameter of 1600. In our main calibration we consider a setting in which agents receive
noisy news about the future. Our measure of news is based on the Livingston survey of
output forecasts.16 The Livingston survey pools professional forecasters to obtain forecasts of
di¤erent economic variables. Two-quarter ahead GDP forecasts are available for the period
  14
     Fisher (2006) and Justiniano and Primiceri (2005) argue that investment-speci…c technical progress is
the most important determinant of output variability.
  15
     We thank Ricardo DiCecio for providing us with an updated version of this time series.
  16
     See Croushore (1993) for a description of the Livingston survey. The Survey of Professional Forecasters
(SPF) is an alternative source of output growth forecasts for the U.S. economy. We also use SPF forecasts
to calibrate our model. The results are similar to those we obtain with the Livingston forecasts.

                                                    14
1971.IV – 2003.IV. To study the robustness of the results to di¤erent assumptions about
the timing of information arrival, we simulate the model under two additional information
scenarios. In the …rst scenario agents receive no news. In the second scenario agents receive
perfect information about zti .


Noisy News Forecasts of future rates of investment-speci…c technical change are not avail-
able for our sample, so it is di¢ cult to choose the precision of signals about "t+2 . For this
reason, we consider a setting in which we provide agents with a signal, S y , for whether the
growth rate of output two periods later is going to be above or below the average. The signal
has two values, high (H) or low (L). We choose the signal to have the same precision as the
Livingston survey of output forecasts. To obtain a discrete signal with two possible values
we use the Tauchen and Hussey (1991) method to estimate a two-point Markov chain for
the Livingston survey forecasts. The precision of these forecasts is as follows:

                                y
                            Pr(gt+2      Average(g y )jS y = H) = 0:70,                       (5.2)
                                y
                            Pr(gt+2 < Average(g y )jS l = L) = 0:58,

       y
where gt+2 represents the growth rate of output at time t+2. The forecast precision is higher
in expansions than in recessions.17
       To provide agents in the model with a signal on output with the same precision as the
Livingston survey forecast, we implement the following algorithm. First, we assume values
q1 and q2 for the following conditional probabilities:

                                  Pr(S y = Hj"t+2 = H) = q1 ,
                                  Pr(S y = Lj"t+2 = L) = q2 .

We simulate time series for "t and generate S y according to q1 and q2 . Agents receive these
signals and forecast "t+2 using both the signal and the current realization of "t :

                                           Pr(S y = ij"t+2 = H) Pr("t+2 = Hj"t )
               Pr("t+2 = HjS y = i; "t ) = X                                        .
                                              Pr(S y = ij"t+2 = j) Pr("t+2 = jj"t )
                                          j=H;L

  17
    Using the Survey of Professional Forecasters, Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006) also …nd that
forecast precision is higher in expansions than in recessions.




                                                  15
We simulate the model and compute:
                                 y
                             Pr(gt+2      Average(g y )jS y = H),
                                 y
                             Pr(gt+2 < Average(g y )jS l = L).

We then revise the values of q1 and q2 until the precision of S y in the model coincides with
the precision (5.2) estimated in the data. We obtain q1 = 0:99 and q2 = 0:62.
    Column 5 of Table 2 shows the results for this version of the model. This model generates
business cycle moments that are similar to those in postwar U.S. data reported in column
1. Consumption, investment, and hours worked are procyclical. Investment is more volatile
than output, consumption is less volatile than output, and the volatility of hours is similar
to that of output. The model accounts for 64 percent of the standard deviation of output in
the data.


Robustness To understand the robustness of our results to di¤erent assumptions about
the timing of information arrival we consider two additional cases. In the …rst case agents
receive no news about the future. In the second case agents receive a perfect signal about
"t+2 .
    Table 2 reports moments for U.S. data and model simulated data. These moments were
computed using data detrended with the HP …lter with a smoothing parameter of 1600.
Column 4 in Table 2 summarizes the business cycle properties of a version of our model in
which the economy receives no news. Forecasts of future values of "t are solely based on the
Markov chain (5.1). This version of the model generates business cycle moments that are
similar to those in the postwar U.S. data we report in column 1. Consumption, investment,
and hours worked are procyclical. Investment is more volatile than output, consumption is
less volatile than output, and the volatility of hours is similar to that of output. Column
6 of Table 2 summarizes the business cycle properties of our model when at time t agents
receive perfect signals about "t+2 , the growth rate of zt in two periods. This model generates
patterns of volatility and comovement that are similar to those of the model with no news.
    To summarize, Columns 4 and 6 show that the business cycle implications of our model
are robust to changes in the information structure of the shocks. Providing the economy with
news about the future does not alter the basic patterns of comovement or relative volatility of
the major macroeconomic aggregates. Therefore the business cycle properties of our model
are robust to the timing of information arrival. In contrast, the business cycle properties

                                              16
of the neoclassical one-sector growth model depend heavily on the timing of information
arrival.


News and Volatility It is well known that in the past 60 years output volatility has
declined and output persistence has increased in virtually all developed countries. These
facts are documented for the U.S. in Table 2. Columns 2 and 3 provide statistics for the
U.S. for the period 1947-1982 and 1983-2003. The volatility of output declines from 1.88 in
the …rst sample to 0.97 in the second sample. The persistence of output, as measured by
the sum of the four estimated coe¢ cients in an AR(4) process for output, rises from 0.65 to
0.86.
   Stock and Watson (2003) document both the reduction in output volatility and the in-
crease in persistence for the G7 countries and discuss several possible explanations, including
better monetary policy, changes in sectoral composition toward sectors with lower volatility,
and declines in the volatility of the shocks to the economy.
   Our model provides a complementary explanation for the volatility decline and persis-
tence increase. Advances in information technology have led to dramatic increases in the
volume of available data and in the ability to process these data. Let us assume that the
increase in information volume has made it easier to forecast the future. Under this as-
sumption, we can think of the increased volume of information as moving the economy
from Column 4 of Table 2 (no news) toward Column 6. An increase in the availability of
news makes it easier to forecast the future, thus reducing economic volatility and increasing
persistence.
   Evidence from the Livingston survey is consistent with the idea that business cycles
have become easier to forecast. The survey contains unemployment forecasts at a six-month
horizon from the fourth quarter of 1961 to the fourth quarter of 2003. The average absolute
percentage forecast error is 3.3 percent in the …rst part of the sample (1961.IV-1982.IV) but
only 1.5 percent in the second part of the sample (1983.I-2003.IV). Therefore, the forecast
error declined by 79 percent. This increase in forecast precision cannot be solely accounted for
by the reduction in unemployment volatility. The standard deviation of log(unemployment)
declined only by 23 percent between the …rst and the second part of the sample.


Recessions According to our estimated Markov chain, (5.1), the rate of technical progress
is always positive. This Markov process is a good approximation to the behavior of investment-

                                              17
speci…c technical progress in the data. Declines in zt are rare (they occur in only 6 percent
of the quarters in our sample) and small in magnitude. The average percentage decline in zt
in quarters in which zt falls is 0:8 percent.
         The absence of technical regress in our calibration raises the question of whether the
model can generate recessions.18 To study this question we …rst describe a simple method to
determine the timing of recessions. Our strategy is similar to that used by the Business Cycle
Dating Committee of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) for comparing
di¤erent recessions (see Hall, Feldstein, Frankel, Gordon, Romer, Romer, and Zarnowitz
(2003)). It is also reminiscent of the methods used by Burns and Mitchell (1946) in their
study of the properties of U.S. business cycles.
         To date the beginning of U.S. recessions, we compute trend output using the HP …lter
with a smoothing parameter of 1600. We identify periods in which output is below trend for
at least two consecutive quarters, say t and t + 1. Recessions are dated as starting at time
t        1. This timing method produces recession dates that are similar to those chosen by the
NBER dating committee.19
         We compute the average time series for di¤erent macroeconomic variables during recession
periods for the U.S. economy. The solid line in Figure 6 shows the average behavior during
recessions of the HP-detrended logarithm of real GDP, real consumption of nondurables and
services, real private investment, and hours worked. Time zero is the quarter in which the
recession begins. The dashed lines represent the 95 percent con…dence interval around the
average for each variable. The fall from peak to trough in output, consumption, investment,
and hours is 1:8 percent, 0:7 percent, 4:3 percent, and 1:7 percent, respectively.
         The dashed line in Figure 6 shows the average recession in our model. The model captures
the salient features of recessions in the data. The last graph in this …gure, which displays the
behavior of investment-speci…c technical change in the average recession, shows an interesting
feature of the recessions generated by the model. On average, recessions occur when there
    18
     King and Rebelo (1999) propose a real business cycle model that generates recessions in the absence of
negative technology shocks. Their model shares one key feature with our model, which is variable capital
utilization, but it relies on a much higher elasticity of labor supply.
  19
     The HP procedure produces six recessions whose starting dates coincide with those chosen by the NBER:
1948.IV, 1957.III, 1960.II, 1980.I, 1981.III, 1990.III. There are four other recessions in which the HP proce-
dure produces recession dates that are within two quarters of the NBER dates (indicated in parentheses):
1953.III (1953.II), 1969.III (1969.IV), 1974.II (1974.III), and 2001.II (2001.I). The HP procedure identi…es
four additional recessions starting in 1962.II, 1967.II, 1986.III, and 1994.III. None of the latter episodes
involves a fall in output, which suggests that our procedure corresponds to a broader de…nition of recession
than that of the NBER.


                                                     18
is a high contemporaneous rate of change in investment-speci…c technical progress but the
economy learns that two periods later technical change will slow down. It is impossible to
identify what causes recessions in our model by lining up the usual suspects–contemporaneous
shocks to the economy. Recessions are driven not by bad shocks today but by lackluster news
about the future. This property is generally not present in a version of the model in which
agents do not receive news about the future. In the no-news version of the model recessions
tend to coincide with periods in which the rate of investment-speci…c technical change is low.
   The model only generates nine recessions, as opposed to 14 in the data. In addition,
recessions are more shallow in the model that in the data. These two di¤erences between the
implications of the model and U.S. data occur in part because the U.S. economy is a¤ected
by shocks, such as oil shocks, that are absent from the model.


6. Conclusion

Aggregate and sectoral comovement are central features of business cycles data. Therefore,
the ability to generate comovement is a natural litmus test for macroeconomic models. But
it is a test that most existing models fail. In this paper we propose a uni…ed model that
generates both aggregate and sectoral comovement in response to both contemporaneous
shocks and news shocks about fundamentals. The fundamentals that we consider are ag-
gregate TFP shocks, TFP shocks to the consumption and investment sector, and shocks to
investment-speci…c technical change. The model has three key elements: variable capital
utilization, adjustment costs to investment, and a new form of preferences that allows us
to parameterize the strength of short-run wealth e¤ects on labor supply. We …nd that, in
order for comovement to be robust to the timing and nature of the shocks that bu¤et the
economy, short-run wealth e¤ects on the labor supply must be weak.




                                             19
References

 [1] Abel, Andrew and Olivier Blanchard, “An Intertemporal Equilibrium Model of Savings
    and Investment,”Econometrica 51: 675-692, 1983.

 [2] Alexopoulos, Michelle “Read All about it!! What Happens Following a Technology
    Shock?,”mimeo, University of Toronto, 2004.

 [3] Barro, Robert J. and Robert G. King “Time-Separable Preferences and Intertemporal-
    Substitution Models of Business Cycles,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99:
    817-839, 1984.

 [4] Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier “An Exploration into Pigou’s Theory of Cycles,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 51: 1183–1216, 2004.

 [5] Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier “When Can Changes in Expectations Cause Busi-
    ness Cycle Fluctuations in Neo-Classical Settings?,”forthcoming, Journal of Economic
    Theory, 2008.

 [6] Beveridge, William H. “Unemployment: A Problem of Industry,” Longmans Green,
    London, 1909.

 [7] Blanchard, Olivier “Adjustment Within the Euro. The Di¢ cult Case of Portugal,”
    Portuguese Economic Journal, 6-1, 1-22, 2007.

 [8] Burns, Arthur and Wesley Mitchell Measuring Business Cycles, National Bureau of
    Economic Research, New York, 1946.

 [9] Burnside, Craig “Production Function Regression, Returns to Scale and Externalities,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 37: 177-201, 1996.

[10] Christiano, Lawrence and Terry Fitzgerald “The Business Cycle: It’s Still a Puzzle,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives 22: 56–83, 1998.

[11] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans “Nominal Rigidities and
    the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,”Journal of Political Economy, 113:
    1–45, 2005.



                                           20
[12] Christiano, Lawrence, Cosmin Ilut, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno “Monetary
    Policy and a Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycle,”mimeo, Northwestern University, 2007.

[13] Clark, John Maurice “Strategic Factors in Business Cycles,” National Bureau of Eco-
    nomic Research, 1934.

[14] Cochrane, John H. “Shocks,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
    41: 295-364, 1994.

[15] Cogley, Timothy and James M. Nason “Output Dynamics in Real-Business-Cycle Mod-
    els,”American Economic Review, 85: 492-511, 1995.

[16] Croushore, Dean “Introducing: The Survey of Professional Forecasters,”Federal Reserve
    Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, 3–15, 1993.

[17] Cummins, Jason and Giovanni Violante “Investment-Speci…c Technical Change in the
    United States (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences,” Review
    of Economic Dynamics, 5: 243-284, 2002.

[18] Danthine, Jean Pierre, John B. Donaldson and Thore Johnsen “Productivity Growth,
    Consumer Con…dence and the Business Cycle,” European Economic Review, 42, 1113-
    1140, 1998.

[19] Denhaan, Wouter J. and Georg Kaltenbrunner “Growth Expectations and Business
    Cycles,”mimeo, London Business School, 2005.

[20] DiCecio, Riccardo “Comovement: It’s Not A Puzzle,” Working Paper 2005-035B, St.
    Louis Federal Reserve Bank, June 2005.

[21] Fisher, Jonas “The Dynamic E¤ects of Neutral and Investment-Speci…c Technology
    Shocks,”Journal of Political Economy, 114: 413-451, 2006.

[22] Gordon, Robert, The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 1989.

[23] Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory Hu¤man, “Investment, Capacity Uti-
    lization and the Real Business Cycle,”American Economic Review 78, 402-417, 1988.



                                           21
[24] Greenwood, Jeremy Zvi Hercowitz and Per Krusell “The Role of Investment-speci…c
    Technological Change in the Business Cycle,” European Economic Review, 44: 91-115,
    2000.

[25] Hall, Robert, Martin Feldstein, Je¤rey Frankel, Robert Gordon, Christina Romer, David
    Romer, and Victor Zarnowitz “The NBER’s Recession Dating Procedure,” mimeo,
    NBER, 2003.

[26] Hayashi, Fumio, “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,”
    Econometrica 50: 213–24, 1982.

[27] Hu¤man, Greg and Mark Wynne “The Role of Intratemporal Adjustment Costs in a
    Multi-Sector Economy,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 34: 317-350, 1999.

[28] Imbens, Guido, Donald Rubin, and Bruce Sacerdote “Estimating the E¤ects of Un-
    earned Income on Labor Supply, Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from
    a Survey of Lottery Players,”NBER working paper 7001, 1999.

[29] Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio Primiceri “The Time Varying Volatility of Macro-
    economic Fluctuations,”mimeo, Northwestern University, 2005.

[30] King, Robert G., Charles Plosser, and Sergio Rebelo “Production, Growth and Business
    Cycles: I. the Basic Neoclassical Model,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 21: 195-232,
    1988.

[31] King, Robert G. and Sergio Rebelo “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,”in John Taylor
    and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1B, 928-1002, 1999.

[32] Lorenzoni, Guido “Imperfect Information, Consumers’Expectations and Business Cy-
    cles,”mimeo. MIT, 2005.

[33] Lucas, Robert and Edward Prescott, “Investment Under Uncertainty,” Econometrica,
    39, 659-681, 1971.

[34] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., Understanding Business Cycles, in: K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer,
    eds., Stabilization of the domestic and international economy, Carnegie-Rochester Con-
    ference Series on Public Policy, 5: 7-29, 1977.



                                            22
[35] Lucca, David “Resuscitating Time-to-Build,”mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal
    Reserve System, 2007.

[36] Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn and Laura Veldkamp, “Learning Asymmetries in Real Business
    Cycles,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 53: 753-772, 2006.

[37] Pigou, Arthur Industrial Fluctuations, MacMillan, London, 1927.

[38] Prescott, Edward C. and Michael Visscher “Organization Capital,” The Journal of
    Political Economy, 88: 446-461, 1980.

[39] Sargent, Thomas “Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under Rational
    Expectations,”Journal of Political Economy 86, 1009-1044, 1978.

[40] Stock, James H. and Watson, Mark W. “Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and
    Explanations,”FRB Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 28-30, 2003.

[41] Tauchen, George and Robert Hussey “Quadrature Based Methods for Obtaining Ap-
    proximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 592: 371–396,
    1991.




                                            23
7. Appendix: Adjustment costs and the value of the …rm

(not for publication)
       In this appendix we discuss the relation between the value of the …rm and Tobin’s mar-
ginal q, which is the value of an additional unit of installed capital. We …rst discuss results
in continuous time and then in discrete time. In both cases, we start by reviewing the classic
Hayashi (1982) result that marginal and average q coincide. We then show that this result
does not hold when adjustment costs take the form proposed by CEE or in the presence
of labor adjustment costs. We characterize the relation between marginal and average q in
these settings.

7.1. Continuous time results
7.1.1. Hayashi adjustment costs

To simplify we abstract from uncertainty. The …rm’s objective is to maximize its value,
measured in units of consumption at time zero:20
                                       Z    1
                                   1                                                           rt
                        max V0 =                t   [F (Kt ; Nt )       wt Nt    It =zt ] e         dt,                   (7.1)
                                   0   0

                                           K_ t = (It =Kt )Kt             Kt ,                                            (7.2)

where the concave function         (:) represents adjustment costs to investment and                                 t   repre-
sents the marginal utility of consumption. The function F (:) is homogeneous of degree one.
Written in our notation the key result in Hayashi (1982) is that:

                                                             0
                                                    V0 =         K0 ,                                                     (7.3)
                                                             0

where      t   is the Lagrange multiplier associated with (7.2). The ratio                            0= 0    represents the
value of an additional unit of installed capital at time zero. This equation implies that
average q, V0 =K0 , is equal to marginal q,             0= 0.    This property implies that the dynamics of
…rm value can be studied by simply characterizing the dynamics of                             t= t.       Without this result
computing the value of the …rm requires evaluating the in…nite sum in equation (7.1). The
key properties required for average and marginal q to coincide is that both the production
  20
    We introduce adjustment costs in the capital accumulation equation to increase the similarity between
the Hayashi model and the CEE model. The results that we describe continue to hold when the adjustment
costs are introduced as a cost to the …rm.



                                                          24
function and the adjustment cost function be homogeneous of degree one. Equation (7.3)
can be rewritten as:
                                                                                        K0
                                                               V0 =                0             .
                                                                          z0           (I0 =K0 )

7.1.2. CEE adjustment costs

The …rm’s problem when adjustment costs take the form proposed by CEE is:
                             Z 1
                           1
                 max V0 =         t [F (Kt ; Nt ) wt Nt It =zt ] e rt dt,
                                                   0     0

                                                       K_ t = [1              (xt =It )] It               Kt ,                                       (7.4)

                                                                          I_t = xt ,                                                                 (7.5)
                  0                    00
where (0) =           (0) = 1,              (0) > 0, and F (:) is homogeneous of degree one. Here both K0
and I0 are given, so investment is predetermined. The question we are interested in is: does
marginal q coincide with average q? The following proposition states that the answer is no.

Proposition 7.1. The value of the …rm is given by:

                                                                              0              !0
                                                               V0 =               K0 +             I0 ,
                                                                              0                0

where   t   and ! t are the Lagrange multipliers associated with (7.4) and (7.5), respectively.


Proof: The Hamiltonian for the …rm’s problem is:

             H=       t   [F (Kt ; Nt )             wt Nt         It =zt ] +             t   f[1          (xt =It )] It           Kt g + ! t x t .

The …rst-order conditions are:

                      _t =         t (r         + )             t F1 (Kt ; Nt ),                                                                     (7.6)
                                                                                                                 0
                      !_ t = r! t +                    t =zt         t   [1            (xt =It )]           t        (xt =It ) (xt =It ) ,           (7.7)
                                            0
                      !t =         t            (xt =It ),                                                                                           (7.8)
                      wt = F2 (Kt ; Nt ).                                                                                                            (7.9)

The two transversality conditions are:

                                                                                       rt
                                                               lim       t Kt e               = 0,
                                                               t!1
                                                                                       rt
                                                               lim ! t It e                   = 0.
                                                               t!1


                                                                                  25
It is useful to note that:
                                       d                                     h                                                 i
                                                  t Kt e
                                                                rt
                                                                         = _ t Kt + t K_ t                      r t Kt e                 rt
                                                                                                                                                 ,                                     (7.10)
                                       dt
and that:                                           Z       1
                                                                d                      rs
                                                                            s Ks e              dt =                0 K0 .                                                             (7.11)
                                                        0       ds
Using the law of motion for capital and equation (7.6) we have:
h                               i
    _ t Kt +     _
               t Kt       r t Kt = [ t (r + )                              t F1 (Kt ; Nt )] Kt + t                     f[1               (xt =It )] It                          Kt g   r t Kt .

Simplifying we obtain:

                      h                                  i
                          _ t Kt +       _
                                       t Kt        r t Kt =                      t F1 (Kt ; Nt )Kt                  +      t   [1                (xt =It )] It .                       (7.12)

Using (7.10), (7.11), and (7.12) we have:
                          Z 1
                                                                                                                                                               rt
                   0 K0 =     f t F1 (Kt ; Nt )Kt +                                                   t   [1             (xt =It )] It g e                          dt.
                                             0

Since F (:) is homogeneous of degree one in Kt and Nt :

                                           F1 (Kt ; Nt )Kt = F (Kt ; Nt )                                 F2 (Kt ; Nt )Nt .

Using this fact:
                Z              1
                                                                                                                                                                          rt
        0 K0 =                     f   t   [F (Kt ; Nt )                  F2 (Kt ; Nt )Nt ] +                   t   [1             (xt =It )] It g e                           dt.     (7.13)
                           0
                                                                                                      R1                            rt
Using equation (7.9) and adding and subtracting                                                           0         t It =zt e           dt to equation (7.13), we
obtain:                                                     Z       1
                                                                                                                                                         rt
                                   0 K0 =        0 V0   +                 [ t It =zt             t   [1          (xt =It )] It ] e                            dt.                      (7.14)
                                                                0
It is useful to note that:
                                            d                       rt                                                              rt
                                               ! t It e                    = [!_ t It + ! t xt                 r! t It ] e               ,                                             (7.15)
                                            dt
                                                Z 1
                                                                    d                  rs
                                                                       ! s Is e                 dt =            ! 0 I0 ,                                                               (7.16)
                                                        0           ds

                                                                                                                                                     0
         [!_ t It + ! t xt         r! t It ] = fr! t +                      t =zt           t   [1             (xt =It )]                    t           (xt =It ) (xt =It )g It
                                                                     0
                                                        +       t        (xt =It )xt            r! t It .

                                                                                     26
Simplifying:
                     [!_ t It + ! t xt       r! t It ] = f t =zt                          t   [1      (xt =It )]g It .             (7.17)

Using equations (7.15), (7.16), and (7.17), we have:
                                 Z 1
                                                                                                              rt
                        ! 0 I0 =     f t =zt  t [1   (xt =It )]g It e                                              dt.             (7.18)
                                         0

Using equations (7.14) and (7.18) we obtain:

                                                     0 K0     =       0 V0            ! 0 I0 .

Rearranging this expression gives us:

                                                                  0                 !0
                                                 V0 =                 K0 +                I0 ,
                                                                  0                   0

                                                          0                    0
                                         V0 =                 [K0 +                (x0 =I0 )I0 ] .
                                                          0


7.1.3. Labor adjustment costs

A similar result holds for labor adjustment costs. Suppose that the problem of the …rm is
given by:                                Z       1
                                   1                                                                                rt
                    max V0 =                          t   [F (Kt ; Nt )                   wt Nt       It =zt ] e         dt,
                                    0        0
                                          h                               i
                                    K_ t = 1                   (N_ t =Nt ) It                      Kt .

Then the value of the …rm is equal to:
                                                          h                               i
                                    V0 =             0
                                                              K0 +         0    _
                                                                               (N0 =N0 )N0 .
                                                     0


7.2. Discrete time results

We …rst state without proof a discrete-time version of the key result in Hayashi (1982) about
the relation between average and marginal q. We then analyze the relation between average
and marginal q in a model of the …rm with CEE adjustment costs.

7.2.1. Hayashi adjustment costs

The …rm’s problem is given by:

            V (K; A; z; ) = max              [AF (K; N )                   wN                 I=z] + E0 V (K 0 ; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 ),


                                                                      27
                                     K 0 = (I=K)K + (1                  ) K.                                                 (7.19)

The …rm takes as given the laws of motion for the marginal utility of consumption, the real
wage, and the aggregate stock of capital in the economy, K:



                                              w = w(A; z; K),                                                                (7.20)
                                                =     (A; z; K),                                                             (7.21)
                                          K0 = K(A; z; K).                                                                   (7.22)

   Marginal q, the value of an additional unit of installed capital is given by: 1= [z 0 (I=K)].

De…ne the end-of-period value of the …rm as:

                               V (K 0 ; A; z; ) = E0 V (K 0 ; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 ),

The value of the …rm can be written as:
                                     V (K 0 ; A; z; )     1
                                               0
                                                      = 0      .
                                            K          z (I=K)
CEE adjustment costs The value of the …rm is given by:

        V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) = max [AF (K; N )              wN          I=z] + E0 V (K 0 ; I; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 ),

                                                      I
                                K0 = I 1       + (1     ) K.                      (7.23)
                                         I 1
The …rm takes as given the law of motion for wages, the aggregate capital stock and the
marginal utility of consumption (equations (7.20), (7.21), and (7.22)).
   Our main result is summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 7.2. The end-of-period value of the …rm, V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ), is equal to:

                                                                             0       I                   I
               V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) =      (1     ) K + I=z +                                                         I ,
                                                                                 I       1           I       1

where    is the Lagrange multiplier associated with (7.23).

   To prove this proposition we start by stating the …rst-order conditions for I and K 0 :
                                                               I                             I                   I
        E0 V2 (K 0 ; I; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 ) = =z       1                      +       0
                                                                                                                         ,   (7.24)
                                                           I       1                     I       1           I       1

                                     E0 V1 (K 0 ; I; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 ) = .                                                      (7.25)

                                                      28
Optimizing out labor we can rewrite the …rm’s problem as:

      V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) = max [AF1 [k(w; A); 1] K                   wN           I=z] + E0 V (K 0 ; I; A0 ; z 0 0 ),

where the function K=N = k(w; A) is given by:

                                           AF2 (k(w; A); 1) = w.

De…ne the end-of-period value of the …rm as:

                              V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) = E0 V (K 0 ; I; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 ).

We now use the following proposition, which we prove below:

Proposition 7.3. V is homogeneous of degree one in K and I 1 .

      Using this proposition we can write:

            V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) = E0 V1 (K 0 ; I; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 )K 0 + E0 V2 (K 0 ; I; A0 ; z 0 ; 0 )I.

Using (7.24) and (7.25) we have:

                                                                          I                        0          I               I
         V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) = K 0 +            =z           1                         +                                              I.
                                                                      I       1                           I       1       I       1


Using equation (7.23) we can rewrite V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) as:

                                                                                   0           I                  I
                  V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) = (1               ) K + I=z +                                                      I.
                                                                                           I       1          I       1

The value of the …rm measured in consumption units, which we denote as V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ),
is:
                               V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) = V (K; I 1 ; A; z; )= ,
                                                                                   0           I                  I
                  V (K; I 1 ; A; z; ) =         (1        ) K + I=z +                                                     I.
                                                                                           I       1          I       1

      We now prove proposition 7.3. We start by writing the problem in sequence form and
deriving the …rst-order conditions:
                                         X
                                         1
                                                 t
                        V0 = max E0                  t   [At F (Kt ; Nt )         wt Nt                It =zt ] ,
                                          t=0




                                                            29
subject to (7.23). Optimizing out labor we can re-write the …rms problem as:

                                               X
                                               1
                                                      t
                           V0 = max E0                    t   fAt F1 [k(w; A); 1] Kt         It =zt g .
                                               t=0

The …rst-order conditions for this problem are:

                           t   = Et         t+1 At+1 F1   [k(wt+1 ; At+1 ); 1] +         t+1 (1       ) ,
                                                                                                                    2
                                   It                 0       It         It                       0   It+1   It+1
       t =zt   =   t   1                          t                               + Et     t+1                          .
                                  It    1                 It       1    It    1                        It     It
   Consider a contingent sequence for Kt+1 and It which is a solution to the …rst-order
conditions. Now suppose we multiply the initial conditions, K0 and I 1 , by a constant, .
We conjecture that the new solution is given by the old contingent sequence for Kt+1 and It
multiplied by . It is easy to verify that this solution satis…es the …rst-order conditions of
the …rm’s problem. As a result, both V (K; I 1 ; A; ) and V (K; I 1 ; A; ) are homogeneous
of degree one in K and I 1 .




                                                                   30
TABLE 1: ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS


One-sector model

                                               News A      News z
Maximum γ                                       0.650       0.400
Minimum adjustment costs, φ''(1)                0.370       0.400
Minimum elasticity of labor supply (1/(θ−1))    0.111       0.111
Maximum elasticity of utilization               2.500       5.000




Two-sector model
                                                    Contemporaneous shocks               News shocks
                                                                c            i               c           i
                                                  A            z          z        A         z           z
Maximum γ                                       0.600        1.000      0.110    0.009     0.006       0.006
Minimum adjustment costs, φ''(1)                0.010        0.010      0.010    1.100     1.000       1.100
Minimum elasticity of labor supply (1/(θ−1))    0.256        0.001      1.000    1.667     1.667       1.667
Maximum elasticity of utilization              infinity     infinity    2.800    0.300     0.300       0.250
TABLE 2: BUSINESS CYCLE MOMENTS

                                                  DATA                                 MODEL
                                                                                         Signal with
                                     1947-2004   1947-1983   1983-2004   No signal   Livingston-survey Perfect signal
                                                                                          precision
Std. Dev. Output                       1.56        1.88        0.97        1.10            1.00            0.94
Std. Dev. Hours                        1.51        1.88        1.00        0.78            0.71            0.67
Std. Dev. Investment                   4.84        5.41        3.69        3.45            3.33            3.30
Std. Dev. Consumption                  1.11        1.22        0.75        0.81            0.75            0.73
Correlation Output and Hours           0.86        0.88        0.87        1.00            1.00            1.00
Correlation Output and Investment      0.89        0.75        0.91        0.97            0.93            0.85
Correlation Output and Consumption     0.77        0.68        0.75        0.94            0.92            0.89
Sum of 4 coefficents in AR(4)          0.77        0.65        0.86        0.71            0.78            0.80
Number of Recessions                    14                                   9               9               9
                       Figure 1: Investment, earnings growth forecasts, and realized earnings



  Correlation (investment, earnings growth forecast) = 0.48             Correlation(investment,realized earnings) = ‐0.40


0.18                                                    0.025   0.050                                                       0.025
                Weighted long-term                                                   Total Earnings of
                median earnings growth                                               S&P500 firms/GDP
0.17            rate forecast, S&P500                           0.045
                                                                                     Investment of S&P500
                Investment of S&P500                                                 firms/GDP                              0 023
                                                                                                                            0.023
                                                        0 023
                                                        0.023
                firms/GDP
0.16                                                            0.040


0.15                                                            0.035
                                                        0.021                                                               0.021

0 14
0.14                                                            0 030
                                                                0.030

                                                        0.019                                                               0.019
0.13                                                            0.025


0.12                                                            0.020
                                                        0 017
                                                        0.017                                                               0 017
                                                                                                                            0.017

0.11                                                            0.015


0.10                                                    0.015   0.010                                                       0.015
                                                                        1985
                                                                        1986
                                                                        1987
                                                                        1988
                                                                        1989
                                                                        1990
                                                                        1991
                                                                        1992
                                                                        1993
                                                                        1994
                                                                        1995
                                                                        1996
                                                                        1997
                                                                        1998
                                                                        1999
                                                                        2000
                                                                        2001
                                                                        2002
                                                                        2003
                                                                        2004
        985
        986
        987
        988
        989
        990
        991
        992
        993
        994
        995
        996
        997
        998
        999
        000
        001
        002
        003
        004
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       19
       20
       20
       20
       20
       20




                                                                        2
                                                                        2
                                                                        2
                                                                        2
                                                                        2
                         Figure 2: One-sector model, response to news shocks
                                               Percentage deviations from steady state

             Output                                      Consumption                             Investment
 4                                    3
                                                                                         9
3.5                                  2.5                                                 8
 3                                                                                       7
                                      2
2.5                                                                                      6

                                     1.5                                                 5
 2
                                                                                         4
1.5
                                      1                                                  3
 1
                                                                                         2
                                     0.5
0.5                                                                                      1
 0                                    0                                                  0
      0        5               10          0                  5                 10           0       5              10




          Hours worked                                   News shock
                                      2

2.5
                                     1.5
 2


1.5                                   1

 1
                                     0.5
0.5
                                                                                                              z shock
                                                                                                              A shock
 0                                    0
      0        5               10          0                  5                 10
          Figure 3: Wealth effects on the labor supply of a one percent permanent real wage increase




                Response of hours worked (percent)                     Wealth effect on hours worked (percent)
 3                                                          0.3

                                                     GHH    0.2
2.5
              gamma = 0.001
                                                            0.1              gamma = 0.001
 2
                                                              0
                                                                                                                 GHH
1.5                                                         -0.1

                                                                             gamma = 0.25
              gamma = 0.25                                  -0.2
 1

                                                            -0.3

0.5
                                                            -0.4       KPR
               KPR
 0                                                          -0.5
      0              5         10            15        20          0       5             10            15              20
                                                                                                                     TFP aggregate shock
                                  Figure 4: Effects of contemporaneous shocks                                        TFP shock to consumption sector
                                                   Percentage deviations from steady state                           TFP shock to investment sector
             Output                          Consumption                          Investment                             Hours
 12                                 8                                  18                               8

                                    7                                  16                               7
 10
                                                                       14
                                    6                                                                   6
  8                                                                    12
                                    5                                                                   5
                                                                       10
  6                                 4                                                                   4
                                                                       8
                                    3                                                                   3
  4                                                                    6
                                    2                                                                   2
                                                                       4
  2
                                    1                                  2                                1

  0                                 0                                  0                                0
      0         5            10         0          5           10           0          5           10        0             5               10




Investment into consumption sector Investment into investment sector        Labor consumption sector             Labor investment sector
 15                                30                                  5                                15


                                   25
                                                                       4

 10                                20                                                                   10
                                                                       3
                                   15
                                                                       2
  5                                10                                                                   5

                                                                       1
                                    5


  0                                 0                                  0                                0
      0         5            10         0          5           10           0          5           10        0             5               10
                                                                                                                     TFP aggregate shock
                                              Figure 5: Effects of news shocks
                                                                                                                     TFP shock to consumption sector
                                                   Percentage deviations from steady state                           TFP shock to investment sector

             Output                          Consumption                          Investment                             Hours
 12                                 8                                  18                               8

                                    7                                  16                               7
 10
                                                                       14
                                    6                                                                   6
  8                                                                    12
                                    5                                                                   5
                                                                       10
  6                                 4                                                                   4
                                                                       8
                                    3                                                                   3
  4                                                                    6
                                    2                                                                   2
                                                                       4
  2
                                    1                                  2                                1

  0                                 0                                  0                                0
      0         5            10         0          5           10           0          5           10        0             5               10




Investment into consumption sector Investment into investment sector        Labor consumption sector             Labor investment sector
 15                                30                                  5                                15


                                   25
                                                                       4

 10                                20                                                                   10
                                                                       3
                                   15
                                                                       2
  5                                10                                                                   5

                                                                       1
                                    5


  0                                 0                                  0                                0
      0         5            10         0          5           10           0          5           10        0             5               10
                    Figure 6: Average recession in the model and in U.S. data

           Output                              Consumption                             Investment
  2                                1
1.5                                                                      4
  1                              0.5
                                                                         2
0.5
  0                                                                      0
                                   0
-0.5
 -1                                                                      -2
                                 -0.5
-1.5
                                                                         -4
 -2
                                  -1
-2.5                                                                     -6
       0       5      10                   0            5    10                 0             5          10




           Hours                                    z
                                   2
  2
1.5                              1.5
  1
                                   1
0.5
  0                              0.5

-0.5                               0
 -1
                                 -0.5
-1.5
                                                                                    U.S. data
 -2                               -1                                                model
                                                                                    95 percent confidence bound
-2.5
                                 -1.5
       0       5      10                   0            5    10
