                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     EXPLAINING IMPORT VARIETY AND QUALITY: THE ROLE OF THE INCOME
                             DISTRIBUTION

                                            Yo Chul Choi
                                           David Hummels
                                            Chong Xiang

                                        Working Paper 12531
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12531


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2006




The authors would like to thank seminar participants at the Midwest International Meetings, the Federal
Reserve Boards of Governors and Purdue, Oregon and Oregon State Universities for helpful comments.
 We thank Purdue CIBER and the NSF for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Yo Chul Choi, David Hummels, and Chong Xiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Explaining Import Variety and Quality: The Role of the Income Distribution
Yo Chul Choi, David Hummels and Chong Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 12531
September 2006
JEL No. D3, F1

                                           ABSTRACT


We examine a generalized version of Flam and Helpman’s (1987) model of vertical differentiation
that maps cross-country differences in income distributions to variations in import variety and price
distributions. The theoretical predictions are examined and confirmed using micro data on income
from the Luxemburg Income Study for 30 countries over 20 years. The pairs of importers whose
income distributions look more similar have more export partners in common and more similar
import price distributions. Similarly, the importers whose income distributions look more like the
world buy from more exporters and have import price distributions that look more like the world.

Yo Chul Choi
Research Department
The Bank of Korea
110, Namdaemun-ro 3-ga, Junggu,
Seoul 100-794
KOREA
cyc@bok.or.kr

David Hummels
Krannert School of Management
403 West State Street
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
and NBER
hummelsd@mgmt.purdue.edu

Chong Xiang
Krannert School of Management
403 West State Street
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310
cxiang@mgmt.purdue.edu
1. Introduction

   There is a large literature examining how international trade affects a nation’s income

distribution, but there is relatively little empirical work examining the reverse channel.

This is in large part because trade models commonly rule out income effects in order to

focus attention on supply considerations such as factor endowments or scale economies.

To the extent that richer demand structures with non-homothetic preferences are

employed they operate at the level of broad industries, for example, allowing poor

countries to devote relatively large income shares to commodity foodstuffs. In this paper

we investigate how the distribution of income within and across countries shapes patterns

of consumption and international trade in quality differentiated varieties within narrow

product categories.

   Our starting point is Flam and Helpman’s (1987) model of quality differentiation in

trade and we focus on the model’s demand side implications linking consumer incomes

to quality choice. As in Flam-Helpman, goods can be quality differentiated at some cost

so that higher prices reflect higher quality, and consumers use marginal income to buy

higher qualities rather than higher quantities of a differentiated good. This provides an

equilibrium mapping in which prices of goods consumed are rising in household income.

   This prediction is consistent with household evidence on consumer durables

purchases. Bils and Klenow (2001) use survey data for the US that reports household

income and purchase prices and estimate positive price-income slopes (or, “Quality Engel

Curves”). Our interest lies in cross-country comparisons where household consumption

choices are unobservable. We show that the model can be written in terms of national

income and price distributions which are, with some effort, observable. We provide a




                                          -2-
theorem showing that the difference in two countries’ price distributions for the quality

differentiated good is equal to the difference in their income distributions. Put another

way, countries with more similar income distributions have more similar product price

distributions and import from a larger number of common exporters.

    We also extend Flam and Helpman (1987) to the case of multiple differentiated goods

and multiple countries with different technologies.                  In this case the quality-price

relationship and price-income slopes vary endogenously across goods. However, our

result linking cross-country differences in price distributions to differences in income

distributions goes through precisely as before because the differencing removes cross-

commodity variation in the quality-price and price-income relationships.

    To examine our model’s predictions we must first construct theoretically appropriate

income and price distributions that are comparable within and across countries. This

disqualifies conventional and easily obtained measures of income differences that exploit

exclusively within country variation (such as Gini coefficients or income decile ratios) or

cross country variation (such as per capita income).1                    We employ internationally

comparable household income data from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) for 30

countries and 20 years. The LIS provides us with percentile level household income data

from which we construct income distributions for cross-country as well as inter-temporal

comparisons.

    We construct our price distributions using international trade data. Previous authors

have shown that prices vary substantially across exporters and covary with exporter

1
  Two countries might have similar degrees of within-country income inequality according to standard
measures such as the Gini coefficient or the 90/10 ratios of income, but have very different income means.
Similarly, two countries might have similar mean per capita income but difference variances. In both
instances, our theory would predict significant differences in price distributions across the two countries.



                                                   -3-
characteristics such as per-capita income and per worker supplies of capital and skilled

labor (Schott 2004, Hummels and Klenow 2005). Further, countries with high export

prices have larger, not smaller, shares of the markets in which they sell (Hallak 2005).

These facts point to the primacy of quality differentiation, as opposed to measurement

error, as an explanation for measured price variation. For each product we observe from

which exporters an importer buys, along with each exporter’s price and share of trade,

and from these construct price distributions for each importer and product.

   We find strong support for our model.            The difference in importers’ price

distributions are closely linked to the difference in their income distributions and the

importers with similar income distributions also have more export partners in common.

Our results are consistent with Murphy and Shleifer’s (1997) insight that rich countries

may not trade with less developed countries unless they can produce the high quality

goods demanded by high income consumers. Both findings hold when we make pairwise

comparisons of importers or when comparing an importer to the world as a whole, and

they are stronger for consumer goods than for capital or intermediate goods. Finally, our

results only hold up when we use the theoretically appropriate measures of differences in

income distributions; conventional measures of within-country income inequality

produce coefficients with the wrong signs in our regressions.

   Our work relates to the literatures on product variety in trade, quality differentiation

and non-homothetic preferences. Most of the empirical work in the product variety

literature employs horizontal differentiation models in which representative agent

consumers have love-of-variety preferences (e.g. Helpman and Krugman 1985). These

models have several characteristics that we highlight to contrast with our model. One,




                                           -4-
since consumers desire all foreign varieties, these models invoke fixed costs of trade to

explain why, in the data, countries import only small subsets of available varieties. Two,

utility is increasing in the number of varieties, so greater variety implies greater welfare

gains from trade. Three, consumers allocate expenditure shares independently of income.

Looking across markets, expenditure shares differ only because trade costs alter relative

prices of different varieties. In our model, a household desires a single quality

differentiated variety, while an economy as a whole desires subsets of the world’s

varieties dictated by its income distribution. There are no fixed costs of trade but

importers will choose not to access the foreign varieties whose qualities are too high or

too low for consumer incomes there. Countries whose income distributions span a wider

range can access more varieties with no particular welfare implications. Finally, an

importer’s expenditure shares on particular varieties depend on the income distribution

and so vary across countries even when these countries face a common set of prices.

   Most of the empirical work in the quality differentiation literature has focused on

linking price variation to exporter characteristics.       Some authors have provided

correlations with importer characteristics, showing that within product categories,

countries with high mean income per capita buy goods with higher mean prices (Hallak

2005, Hummels and Skiba 2004).          Our work differs in that it provides an explicit

structural linkage between non-homothetic preferences, income variation and product

prices. We also examine the entire distribution of incomes and prices, rather than just the

first moments.

   Our paper is also related to the literature on how non-homothetic preferences affect

trade patterns (e.g. Markusen 1986, Hunter 1991, Mitra and Trindade 2005, Reimer




                                           -5-
2005). Most of the work in this literature allows for differences in income-expenditure

paths across broad industries or product categories and relates cross-country differences

in these expenditures to differences in mean per capita incomes. An exception is Dalgin,

Mitra and Trindade (2004), who show that the imports of luxury goods are increasing,

(and imports of necessities are decreasing) in a measure of within-country income

equality. We differ from this literature in two respects. First, we highlight quality

differentiation as the source of the non-homotheticity and allow it to operate within rather

than across product categories. Second, our theory requires us to examine data on

income distributions both within and across countries. We show that income distribution

measures focused on purely within-country inequality (such as the income decile ratio)

are neither theoretically appropriate nor empirically useful for cross-country differences

in price distributions and numbers of export partners.

   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides the theory linking a country’s

income and import price distributions. Section 3 discusses our empirical specification.

Section 4 explains the construction of our income and price distribution data in detail.

Section 5 presents the empirical results and Section 6 concludes.



2 The Model

   Flam and Helpman (1987) provide a model in which heterogeneity in household

income is mapped into heterogeneity in optimal quality choice. We extend their model to

a multi-country, multi-good setting, with an analysis motivated by and focused on

empirical feasibility. That is, in an international context we are unable to empirically

observe household incomes and the qualities and prices of goods consumed at the




                                           -6-
household level. However, we can observe a country’s income distribution, as well as

the distribution of prices for imported goods.                 We provide propositions linking

differences in importers’ income distributions to differences in import price distributions.

      We start with a model with one differentiated good and identical technologies across

countries, and then extend our analyses to multiple goods and different technologies. We

develop a key empirical prediction in this section, and then discuss complications to the

stylized model that will subtly alter this prediction in section 3.



2.1 Identical Technologies and One Differentiated Good

      There are two goods, a homogeneous numeraire good and a vertically differentiated

good.     There are C countries. Each country c has population N c , with income I

distributed exogenously2 according to the probability distribution function (pdf) g c (.)

with support Gc .

      A consumer of income I chooses quantities of the numeraire, y, and the desired

quality, z ∈ [0, 1], of a single unit of the differentiated good in order to maximize

(1)      u ( y, z ) = yeα z s.t. y + p( z ) ≤ I ,

where α > 0 , α z is the elasticity of utility with respect to quality, p( z ) is the price of

the differentiated good with quality z, and the price of the numeraire is set to 1. We

assume that income is sufficiently high so that every consumer consumes the

differentiated good.

      We initially assume that all countries produce with an identical technology. The

2
 This assumption allows us to focus on the role of national and world income distributions in determining
quality demand, but we abstract from the feedback channels through which trade affects income, as in Flam
and Helpman (1987)’s seminal work.


                                                    -7-
marginal cost of producing quality is

(2)      MC ( z ) = eγ z w .

w represents the cost component that is common to all the quality levels. eγ z represents

the cost component that is unique to quality z and implies that the marginal cost increases

exponentially with z. γ z is the elasticity of the marginal cost with respect to quality. We

assume that there are no trade costs, and that there are perfectly competitive markets at

each quality level so that consumers in all countries face the same vector of prices

p( z ) = MC ( z ) .

      Figure 1 shows the utility maximization problem. The budget constraint DD is

concave because by equation (2), the higher is the quality level, z, the faster the price of

the differentiated good, p( z ) , increases with quality. When the indifference curve u(.) is

tangent to DD,

               1⎡      α                ⎤
(3)       z=     ⎢ log   + log I − log w⎥
               γ ⎣ α +γ                 ⎦

                                      α
(4)       p ( z ) = aI , where a =          .
                                     α +γ

                                                                                     α
Equation (4) indicates that a consumer with income I spends a fixed fraction a =          of
                                                                                   α +γ

his income on (one unit of) quality z.

      These equations enable us to write a country’s distribution of prices consumed in

terms of its distribution of household incomes, g c (.) . Equations (3) and (4) indicate that

optimal qualities (and therefore prices paid for the differentiated good) are monotonically

increasing in income. That is, for each quality z* there is some income level I ( z*) for




                                                -8-
which z* is the optimal quality. If there is no mass in the income distribution at I ( z*) ,

then z* is not produced or consumed in equilibrium. Conversely, for every I ( z*) with

positive mass, the quality z* will be produced and consumed.3

       Further, the number of people in country c consuming z* is equal to the number of

persons with income I ( z*) . As a consequence, the price distribution is a direct mapping

from the income distribution. The precise functional form of that mapping depends on

the elasticities of marginal cost and marginal utility with respect to z. For example,

suppose income is distributed log normally L( μ , σ 2 ) . Then the observed price

distribution is also distributed log normally L( μ a, σ 2 a 2 ) and its mean and variance are

directly proportional to the mean and variance of the income distribution, respectively.

As consumer gains from quality ( α ) rise, or the cost of producing quality ( γ ) falls, the

mean and variance of the price distribution also rise.

       For the more general income distribution g c (.) with support Gc , let f p ( I ) = aI be the

function mapping incomes to prices. Since prices are strictly increasing in income we

can use (4) to rewrite income as an inverse function of prices, or I = p / a . Then we have

a price distribution

                               ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
(5)         hc ( p( z )) = g c ⎜        ⎟⋅      with support H c = f p (Gc ) .4
                               ⎝ a ⎠ a

       Next, we describe cross-country differences in the price and income distributions.

Because all consumers world-wide face the same vector of prices and the concave budget

3
    This is an implication of assuming no fixed costs of production and perfectly competitive markets.
4
    For example, if Gc = [0, b], then Hc = [0, ab]. On the other hand, if f p ( I ) takes a more general form than

                                                    (   −1
                                                                )     −1
aI, then equation (5) becomes h( p ( z )) = g f p ( p ( z )) ⋅ [ f p ( p ( z ))]
                                                                                '
                                                                                    with support H c = f p (Gc ) ,
provided that f p ( I ) is strictly increasing in income and its inverse exists and is differentiable.



                                                        -9-
set shown in Figure 1, equation (5) holds for every country c. This means that the price

distribution of the differentiated good consumed in country c is mapped to its income

distribution and that cross-country differences in the distribution of income will be

reflected in the differences in the distribution of prices. We measure cross-country

differences in income and price distributions using the following dis-similarity index.5



Definition 1 Dis-similarity Index (DSI): The DSI for the pair of distributions with pdf’s

                                                                              1
    f1 (.) and f 2 (.) and supports S1 and S2 is DSI ( f1, f 2 ) ≡              ∫ | f1 ( x) − f 2 ( x) | dx , where
                                                                              2 S

S = S1 ∪ S2 , f1(.) is defined to be 0 for S – S1 and f2(.) defined to be 0 for S – S2.



       The DSI quantifies the difference between f1 (.) and f 2 (.) by calculating the vertical

distance between them at every point x and then aggregating these vertical distances. If

    f1 (.) and f 2 (.) are dis-similar, i.e. they lie far away from each other, the vertical

distances between them are large and so DSI ( f1, f 2 ) is large. Because both f1 (.) and

    f 2 (.) are pdf’s, DSI ( f1, f 2 ) exists and is bounded between 0 and 1.

       Writing out the income similarity index explicitly, we have

                                  1
(6)         IDSI ( g1 , g 2 ) ≡     ∫ |g1 (.) − g 2 (.) | dI where G = G1 ∪ G2.
                                  2 G

g1 ( I ) is the height of country 1’s income pdf at income level I and g1 ( I )dI is the share

of country 1’s population that has income I. The income dissimilarity index simply


5
    The DSI is half the L1 distance between the pdf’s f1 (.) and f 2 (.) . Another commonly used distance
                                      2
metric is the L2 ∫S [ f1 ( x ) − f 2 ( x )] dx . We have chosen the L1 metric because it enables our DSI index to
fall between 0 and 1.


                                                      - 10 -
measures the difference in population shares at each income level and then sums the

difference over the support of the income distribution.

      Writing out the price dissimilarity index explicitly, we have

                             1       ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1      ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
(7)       PDSI (h1, h2 ) ≡     ∫H g1 ⎜        ⎟ ⋅ − g2 ⎜        ⎟ ⋅ dp( z ) where H = f p (G ) .
                             2       ⎝ a ⎠ a           ⎝ a ⎠ a



Proposition 1 PDSI (hc , hc ' ) = IDSI ( g c , g c ' ) where c and c’ represent any country pair.

Proof: See Appendix 1.



      Behind Proposition 1 is a very simple idea. Prices are a one to one mapping from

income, so the quantity consumed of a good with price p ( z*) is just the number of

persons in a country with income I ( z*) , and the consumption share of good p ( z*) is just

the population share of persons with income I ( z*) . Thus the difference between the

consumption shares for p ( z*) in countries 1 and 2 is just the difference in their

population shares at I ( z*) . When integrating over differences in the price distributions

we simply recover the differences in the income distributions.

      For an example to illustrate Proposition 1, suppose that the income distributions of

countries 1 and 2 have the same support G1 = G2 = [0, b] so that G = [0, b] . Then

             1 ab ⎛ p( z ) ⎞             ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
PDSI (.) =     ∫0 | g1 ⎜        ⎟ − g2 ⎜          ⎟ | dp( z )
             2         ⎝ a ⎠             ⎝ a ⎠ a
             1
           = ∫0b | g1 (.) − g 2 (.) | dI                      .
             2
           = IDSI (.)

      We also find it useful to compare the income and price distributions of a country c




                                                      - 11 -
with the world distributions. The number of people with income I from country c equals

N c g c ( I )dI , while the number of people with income I worldwide equals ∑ c N c g c ( I )dI .

Let Gw be the support of the world income distribution (i.e. Gw is union of G1 , G2 , ...

GC ), N = ∑ c N c be the world population, and λc = N c / N be country c’s share in the

world population. Then the world income distribution has the pdf

(8)      g w (.) = ∑ c λc g c (.) with support Gw .

      Because every consumer consumes one unit of the differentiated good, the world

price distribution has the pdf

(9)      hw (.) = ∑ c λc hc (.) with support H w = ∪c H c ,

where H c is as defined in equation (5).



Corollary 1 PDSI (hc , hw ) = IDSI ( g c , g w ) for every country c, where g w (.) and hw (.) are

defined in equations (8) and (9), respectively.



Hereafter, we refer to the comparisons involving two countries c and c’ as the bilateral

comparisons and those involving a country c and the world as the multilateral

comparisons.



2.2 Multiple Differentiated Goods

      We extend the model to a multiple differentiated good setting to show that

Proposition 1 holds for each differentiated good. Let k = 1...K index the differentiated

goods and zk denote the quality of good k. Utility over the numeraire y and the K



                                                - 12 -
differentiated goods is given by

(10) u = y exp(∑ k α k zk ) .

The marginal cost of each differentiated good is given by equation (2) though γ may

differ across goods, i.e. MC ( zk ) = exp(γ k z ) w .

    As in equation (4), consumers spend a fixed fraction of their income on each

differentiated good, and the remaining implications go through. To be specific, the

mapping from prices to income for good k is given by

                          αk / γ k
(11)     pk ( z ) =                       I.
                      1 + ∑ lK=1α l / γ l

    Clearly, the slopes of the price-income relationship will differ across goods k.6 The

goods with high values of α k / γ k , that is, those for which there is a high ratio of marginal

utility to marginal cost of quality, will have a steep price-income slope. For a given

distribution of income, goods with high values for α k / γ k will also have price

distributions that have higher means and variances, just like in section 2.1. These price

distributions are then a measure of the endogenous degree of vertical differentiation that

the economy supports in equilibrium, as a function of technology, preferences, and the

distribution of income.

    However, the price dissimilarity index measures the difference between two

countries’ price distributions and the differencing removes the variation in the price-

income slopes across goods. Put another way, since prices for each good k are a one to

one mapping from income, the difference between the consumption shares for p ( zk *) in



6
 Bils and Klenow (2001) call these slopes “Quality Engel Curves” and use US household data to estimate
how they differ across a set of consumer durable goods.


                                                - 13 -
countries 1 and 2 is just the difference in their population shares at I ( zk *) . Thus:



Corollary 2 When there are many vertically differentiated goods k = 1...K,

PDSI k (hck , hck' ) = IDSI ( g c , g c ' ) for every good k.



2.3 Multiple Countries with Different Technologies

    Now we allow technologies to differ across supplying countries.           This creates two

difficulties related to the continuity of the price distribution: the price-income slope

varies discretely depending on which country is supplying the differentiated good, and in

the price distribution there are “holes”, i.e. interior qualities for which there is no

demand. However, as was the case with multiple goods described in section 2.2, we show

that both problems are eliminated by differencing two consuming countries’ price

distributions.

    For notational simplicity, we return to the one good case, though it is easily shown

that Corollary 2 holds when technologies differ across supplying countries. The marginal

cost of producing quality z in country j is

(12)     MC j ( z ) = exp(γ j z ) w j .

w j represents the cost differences (due to factor price or Ricardian technology

differences) that are common to all quality levels. exp(γ j z ) expresses the degree to

which country j has a comparative advantage in high or low quality levels. We continue

to assume that there are no trade costs, so that the consumers desiring quality z buy it

from the lowest marginal cost provider.

    The assumption on technology allows different suppliers to have a comparative


                                                     - 14 -
advantage in different ranges of quality and so creates kinks in the budget set and a

discontinuous relationship between prices and income.             Despite this complication,

equations (3) and (4) hold with small adjustments. To illustrate this point, we use the

two-country setting of Flam and Helpman (1987), where the North and the South have

technologies MCN ( z ) = exp(γ N z ) wN   and MCS ( z ) = exp(γ S z ) wS   with γ N < γ S   and

wS < wN . The North has the comparative advantage in high qualities.

   Figure 2 shows the utility maximization problem for a consumer with income I d and

u(.) is the indifference curve. Figure 2 is similar to Figure 1 except that the budget

constraint now has two segments. When quality is low, it is cheaper to produce the

differentiated good in the South and so the budget constraint is determined by the

Southern marginal cost (along the curve DST ). When quality is higher than at point T,

the budget constraint is determined by the Northern marginal cost (along the curve TDN ).

The indifference curve is tangent to both segments of the budget constraint; i.e. a

consumer with income I d is indifferent between buying the differentiated good from the

North and buying it from the South. Let z1 and z2 be the quality levels associated with

the tangent points.

   First, note that there is no demand, in the North or the South, for the qualities between

z1 and z2 .     Second, for the qualities that are actually supplied to the market,

[0, z1 ] ∪ [ z2 ,1] , equations (3) and (4) hold with the following adjustments: for incomes
below I d , γ S and wS replace γ and w, and for incomes above I d , γ N and wN replace γ

and w. That is, when the differentiated good is purchased from the South (North), the

price-income slope in (4) is determined by Southern (Northern) technology. However,


                                            - 15 -
two consumers living in different countries but with the same income face the same

price-income slope.

       More generally, let j = 1…J index supplying countries, with each j being the lowest

cost supplier of some set of qualities Z j . Let G j be the set of incomes for which some

qualities in the set Z j are the optimal quality choice so that consumers with I ∈ G j buy

the differentiated good from exporter j. Since every consumer buys the differentiated

good from somewhere, ∪ j G j = Gw (recall that Gw is the support of the world income

distribution). Then equation (4) becomes

                                                         α
(13)        p( z ) = a j I for I ∈ G j , where a j =            , for all j.
                                                       α +γ j

Rather than a single line of constant slope mapping incomes into prices, we have a set of

lines whose slopes are determined by the technology of the lowest cost producer for the

corresponding quality segment.

       To get the price distribution in consuming country c we must combine the more

complex expression for the price-income slopes (13) with country c’s income

distribution. Let f pj ( I ) = a j I and let Gcj = Gc ∩ G j . Gcj describes the set of incomes for

which consumers in country c buy the differentiated good from exporter j.7 Then the

price distribution of country c is still a transformation of its income distribution, but it is

discontinuous and must be evaluated separately over segments of the income distribution.




7
    Supplier j produces the range of qualities that appeal to consumers with income range G j , but incomes in
country c may span part, but not all, of the range.


                                                      - 16 -
Equation (5) becomes8

                                ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
             hc ( p( z )) = g c ⎜          ⋅       for p ( z ) ∈ f pj (Gcj ) , with support H c = ∪ j f pj (Gcj )
                                ⎜ a j ⎟⎟ a j
(14)
                                ⎝        ⎠

        Unlike in the identical-technology case, the support of the price distribution now

consists of disjoint intervals that correspond to the ranges of qualities actually supplied in

the world.             The definition of the dis-similarity index (DSI), and equation (6), the

expression for IDSI, do not change, but the expression for PDSI does change. Since the

support of the price distribution consists of disjoint intervals, PDSI equals the sum of

integrals over these intervals. Let G j = G1 j ∪ G2 j be the set of income with which a

consumer in country 1 or country 2 buys the differentiated good from exporter j. Then

the expression for PDSI becomes9

                                  1 C              ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1        ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
(15)         PDSI (h1, h2 ) ≡       ∑ j =1 ∫H j g1 ⎜⎜       ⎟⎟ ⋅ − g 2 ⎜⎜       ⎟⎟ ⋅ dp ( z )
                                  2                 ⎝ aj ⎠ aj           ⎝ aj ⎠ aj

where H j = f pj (G j ) .

        Although the expression for PDSI becomes more complex, Proposition 1 remains

intact. Consider first the “holes” in the price distribution, those qualities that are not

demanded by any income level and so not demanded by any country. Since these

qualities have zero consumption shares for both countries 1 and 2, they carry zero

weights in the price distribution for both countries and simply drop out when

differencing. Next consider the qualities actually supplied in the world. These segments



8
    Like (5), equation (14) still holds when f pj ( I ) takes a more general form than f pj ( I ) = a j I , provided that
    f pj ( I ) is strictly increasing in Gj, its inverse exists and is differentiable in Gj.
9
    Note that ∪ j G j = G1 ∪ G2 and so ∪ j H j = H 1 ∪ H 2 , where H1 and H2 are as defined in equation (14).



                                                             - 17 -
have different price-income slopes given by (13), but along each segment prices are still a

one to one mapping from income. Just as in the multi-good case, measuring cross

country differences in price distributions removes the differences in the price-income

slope. The difference between the consumption shares for the good with price p ( z*) in

countries 1 and 2 still equals the difference in their population shares at income I ( z*) .

   To illustrate equations (14) and (15), consider the Flam and Helpman (1987) two-

country example again. Suppose the support of the South’s income distribution is [0, bS]

and the support of the North’s income distribution is [0, bN], bN > bS. Consumers in both

countries with income [0, Id] buy the differentiated good from the South and those with

income (Id, bN] buy it from the North. The price distribution of the South is

           ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1                                        α
        gS ⎜        ⎟⋅  for p ( z ) ∈ [0, aS I d ] with aS =       and
           ⎝ aS ⎠ aS                                         α +γS

           ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1                                             α
        gS ⎜        ⎟⋅  for p ( z ) ∈ [aN I d , aN bS ] with aN =       .
           ⎝ aN ⎠ aN                                              α +γN

and similarly for the North. Calculating the PDSI gives us

                      1 aN bN      ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
         PDSI (.) =     ∫aN bS g N ⎜        ⎟   dp ( z )
                      2            ⎝ aN ⎠ aN
                    1               ⎛ p( z ) ⎞      ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
(16)               + ∫0aS I d | g N ⎜        ⎟ − gS ⎜        ⎟ | dp( z )
                    2               ⎝ aS ⎠          ⎝ aS ⎠ aS
                    1                ⎛ p( z ) ⎞      ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
                   + ∫aaNNIbdS | g N ⎜        ⎟ − gS ⎜        ⎟|   dp( z )
                    2                ⎝ N ⎠
                                       a             ⎝ N ⎠ N
                                                       a         a

                1 bN             1 I                             1 b
and IDSI(.) =     ∫bS g N (.)dI + ∫0 d | g N (.) − g S (.) | dI + ∫I dS | g N (.) − g S (.) | dI . Each of
                2                2                               2

the three terms in PDSI(.) equals its counterpart in IDSI(.) and so PDSI(.) = IDSI(.).




                                                  - 18 -
3 Empirical Specification

   Our model derives a direct linkage between a consuming country’s income

distribution and that country’s distribution of consumer prices for a particular quality

differentiated good. Proposition 1 shows that the difference in two countries’ price

distributions for a particular good is equal to the difference in their income distributions.

As we show in sections 2.2 and 2.3, examining cross-country differences in price

distributions also allows us to control for differences in the price-income slopes across

products and across suppliers.

   Unfortunately, it is not possible to get cross-country data on all sales prices within

some narrowly defined consumer good. However, it is possible to use import price data

to approximate the price distributions. Given the technology assumed in equation (12)

each exporting country j will specialize in a range of qualities, with a corresponding

range of export prices. By knowing the prices charged by each exporter j, as well as the

share of exporter j in importer c’s purchases, we can calculate the import price

distributions for importers c and c’ and the difference between them.

   We can then test two implications of the theory. The first directly follows from

Proposition 1, implemented across country pairs c-c’

(17)      PDSI (hc , hc ' ) = α 0 + β P IDSI ( g c , g c ' ) + ecc ' .

The price distributions for two importers can differ either because they buy from different

sets of exporters, or because they buy from similar sets of exporters but with different

shares.      For reasons we will describe below, international prices are subject to

measurement error and so we employ a second test that looks only at whether two

importers buy from a common set of exporters.



                                                           - 19 -
(18)      ln( N cc ' ) = α + β N ln( IDSI cc ' ) + ecc '

where N cc ' is the number of exporters countries c and c’ have in common.                     Following

the theory, let some exporter j produce quality z * . Then two importers will buy from

exporter j only if both have some population with income I ( z*) . The smaller the overlap

between two importer’s income distribution (i.e. the larger is their income dis-similarity

index), the fewer the exporters they will have in common.10

     In implementing regressions (17) and (18) we make three modifications. First, we

follow Corollary 2 and pool the observations across all the products. Second, Corollary 1

enables us to also compare an importer to the rest of the world. We do so by replacing the

bilateral price and income dis-similarity indices in (17) with the multilateral price and

income dis-similarity indices and replacing the number of common exporters in (18)

with the number of exporters. The multilateral comparisons have a more direct analogue

to the work that examines the level and growth of product variety across importers.

     Finally, models with fixed costs of trade as in Melitz (2003) suggest that countries

will import a larger set of varieties when the market is large and when trade costs are low.

We augment regressions (17) and (18) with measures of market size11 and trade costs for

the multilateral regressions or relative market size and distance between the importer

pairs for the bilateral regressions. This gives us four estimating equations. For the

bilateral comparisons we have

10
  Note that two exporters (e.g. Mexico and Poland) might have identical technology and so specialize in an
identical spectrum of quality. In this case, our theory does not say from which exporter two importers (e.g.
US and Germany) will buy quality z*, only that they will buy from someone. If the US buys only from
Mexico and Germany only from Poland, regression (18) would fail (i.e. β N = 0 ) but (17) would still hold
(i.e. β P > 0 ).
11
  We use GDP to measure market size. GDP is the product of population and GDP per capita, and GDP per
capita may be correlated with the mean of the income distribution. We also use population to control for
market size instead and find similar results..


                                                           - 20 -
                                                                 GDPct
(19)     ln( N cck 't ) = α F + β N ln( IDSI cc 't ) + β 2 ln(           ) + β3 ln DISTcc ' + ε cck 't
                                                                 GDPc 't

                                                          GDPct
(20)     PDSI cck 't = α F + β P IDSI cc 't + β 2 log(            ) + β3 ln DISTcc ' + ε cck 't ,
                                                          GDPc 't

where k indexes products, t indexes time and αF is a set of fixed effects we will explain

below. For the multilateral comparisons we have

(21)     ln( N ctk ) = α F + β N ln( IDSI cwt ) + β 2 ln(GDPct ) + β 3 ln MPct + ε ctk

(22)          k
         PDSI cwt = α F + β P IDSI cwt + β 2 ln(GDPct ) + β 3 ln MPct + ε ctk ,

                                                                  C
where w represents the world and MPct =                          ∑        GDPlt • dlc−1 is the market potential of
                                                             l =1,l ≠ c



country c (e.g. Hanson and Xiang 2004) and measures the “remoteness” of c with respect

to the world. We implement each of these regressions in cross-sections for each wave

(i.e. t does not vary) and include product fixed effects (α F = α k ) .12 We also discuss the

panel versions of these regressions in section 5.2.

     Representative agent models with homothetic preferences imply that a country’s

income distribution should have no effect on the number of goods it imports or their price

distribution, i.e. β N = 0 and β P = 0 . We take β N < 0 and β P > 0 as evidence for our

theory with quality differentiation and non-homothetic preferences.                                      Even though

Proposition 1 implies a more stringent test for the price distribution regressions,

α 0 = 0, β P = 1 , the model of section 2 is stylized. When confronting the data we face

difficulties due to missing domestic sales data, trade costs, and more general forms of

12
  Since IDSI does not vary across products, we have cluster samples and the observations within a cluster
might be correlated. We employ Wooldridge (2002)’s test for random effects and fail to reject the
hypothesis that the within cluster correlations are zero. We also employ robust standard errors (the
“cluster” command in STATA) and obtain similar results.


                                                        - 21 -
quantity choice.

     We use import price data to calculate price distributions, and so we will miss

domestic sales data, the portion of the price distribution that a country supplies to itself.

We cannot sign the biases in our estimates of β P in all cases, but we provide two results

in Appendix 1. First, recall the setup in Flam-Helpman (1987), where the higher income

country also produces higher quality goods.13 In this case omitting domestic sales will

truncate the higher income country’s price distribution from above, and truncate the

lower income country’s price distribution from below.                     This reduces the measured

variation in PDSI relative to IDSI and biases β P downward away from 1. Second, the

errors to the measured price distribution approach zero as the number of countries, C,

becomes large and the range of qualities each country supplies shrinks. Having relative

size controls in our estimating equations (19)-(22) also helps address this bias, and we

experiment with additional robustness checks in section 5.

     Our theory assumed away trade costs so that all importers would face the same lowest

cost supplier for each quality. With trade costs, a country might source a smaller range of

qualities from abroad and a larger range from itself, and this raises the same issues as

missing domestic sales data. Trade costs also imply that different countries might import

the same quality from different exporters, as discussed in footnote 10. We control for

trade costs using distance in the bilateral comparisons and market potential in the

multilateral comparisons.

     Finally, our theory assumed that every consumer would purchase one unit of the

differentiated good. In a more general setting, consumers might use marginal income to

13
  In the fully specified general equilibrium, higher incomes and the ability to produce higher quality goods
both stem from a larger endowment of skilled labor.


                                                   - 22 -
expand consumption both on a quantity and a quality dimension (Bils and Klenow 2001).

We derive the expressions for the price distribution and the price dis-similarity index,

PDSI, for this more general form of quantity choice in Appendix 1. However, the exact

relationship between PDSI and IDSI is complicated by interactions between the income

distribution and the functions mapping income into optimal quantity choice, and so we

cannot sign the bias to our estimates of β P .



4 Data

4.1 Income Data

     To facilitate cross-country and inter-temporal comparisons of income distributions,

we employ the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) data. The LIS data are a compilation of

the income survey data files of 30 countries, made comparable by rearranging or

reclassifying the income measures from national household budget surveys.

     Another widely used dataset on cross-country income distribution is Deininger and

Squire (1996) and its extensions by the World Bank (the DSWB).14 We have chosen the

LIS data for three reasons. One, the LIS is more consistent and better suited for cross-

country and inter-temporal comparisons of income distributions (Atkinson and

Brandolini 2001, Deaton 2003). It provides disposable household income (monetary

income after direct taxes and transfer payments), and allows us to make adjustments to

account for differences in family size. Two, the LIS allows us to calculate household

income at single percentile increments while the DSWB provides quintile level income

shares. Three, even though the LIS covers a smaller number of countries than the

14
  For other income distribution data see Chen and Ravallion (2001), Bourguignon and Morrisson (2002)
and Milanovic (2002).


                                                - 23 -
DSWB, our theory makes predictions that involve pair-wise comparisons of countries and

so we can still generate considerable cross-section variation in income distributions.

     As shown in Table 1, we have up to 30 countries at roughly 5 year intervals for the

period 1979-2001 (Wave 1 - Wave 5).                The starred countries in Table 1 have data for

only one or two years. In some other cases, data are missing for a wave and have been

estimated following a procedure detailed in Appendix 2. In Table 1 we mark such cases

with an “(e)”.

     Our theory requires us to construct and then compare income distributions across

countries. To construct a continuous income distribution from the discrete household

income data we perform a non-parametric kernel estimation using the “kdensity”

command in STATA (Deaton 1997). We use STATA’s default kernel, the Epanechnikov,

and STATA’s default bandwidth,15 and evaluate the densities of the distributions of all

the countries at the same income levels of $100, $200 ... $150,000.16 We then calculate

the differences in income distributions, both pair wise and relative to the “world”

following equations (6) and (8).             For our purposes the “world” consists of all the

countries in the LIS data in a given year.17 We then multiply the IDSI by 100.

     Figure 3 shows several measures of income dispersion for the LIS countries in Wave

5 (2000). The 3rd column reports the multilateral income dissimilarity index (IDSI) given

by equation (6). The 4th column reports a more conventional measure of within-country

income dispersion, the ratio of the 90th percentile income to the 10th percentile income, or

15
   The choice of kernel tends to be relatively unimportant in practice (e.g. DiNardo and Tobias 2001) and
STATA’s default bandwidth is based on Silverman (1986)’s optimal bandwidth.
16
   It is vital that the evaluations be at the same income levels; otherwise we would calculate many IDSI’s to
be 1. To see this, suppose we record country 1’s distribution as $10 and $20 with probabilities 0.5 and
country 2’s distribution as $10.1 and $19.9 with probabilities 0.5. Then we will calculate their IDSI as 1.
17
   Note that this builds in a correlation between the world income distribution and the individual countries’
distributions in our sample. We experiment with excluding country c from the construction of the world
distribution for comparison to country c and obtain similar results.


                                                   - 24 -
decile ratio. Finally, we normalize each country’s income relative to the US median

income ($24,094 = 100) and plot the range of income starting at the 10th percentile (P10)

and ending at the 90th percentile (P90). We arrange the countries in ascending order of

their decile ratios.

    While the decile ratio as a measure of income dispersion has some obvious appeal

(e.g., insensitivity to top/bottom coding, ease of understanding), it provides no

information about how much of the world income distribution a country’s income spans.

This can be seen by comparing the US and Mexico in Figure 3. The decile ratio for

Mexico (10.4) is nearly twice that of the US (5.4), but as the mean income levels for

Mexico are lower than those for the US, Mexico’s income distribution spans a much

smaller range than the US.

    Further, the decile ratio contains no information about how two countries’ income

distributions compare within the P10-P90 range. In contrast, our IDSI measure employs

data from all points in the income distribution and explicitly compares both the level and

distribution of two countries’ income. When the income distributions of two countries lie

far away from each other (e.g. the US and Mexico in Figure 3), the vertical distances

between them are large at each point in the distribution and IDSI is large. IDSI achieves

its maximal value of 100 if two countries have completely disjoint distributions and

achieves its minimal value of 0 if two countries have identical distributions.



4.2 Data on Import Prices and their Distributions

    The trade data to implement regressions (19)-(22) come from the world trade flows

database (the WTF) (Feenstra et. al., 2005) and the United Nations (UN) trade database.




                                           - 25 -
These data report bilateral import value and quantity at the SITC 4 digit level (roughly

1000 goods). To match the LIS income data wave 1 – 5, we use import data for 1980,

1985, 1990, 1995, and 1999.18

     These data allow us to count the number of exporters from whom an importer has

purchased a product in a given year (for multilateral comparisons), or the number of

common exporters from whom two importers have purchased a good (for bilateral

comparisons). These counts are used as the dependent variables in estimating equations

(19) and (21).

     The price data are more problematic and subject to measurement errors of three sorts.

First, we construct import prices using import unit values (value/quantity), but the

quantity units are unknown and are likely to be importer specific.19 Controlling for the

measurement error of this sort is critical for our application because we can not properly

calculate the difference between two importers’ price distributions unless we have

accurate data on the level of prices. Second, exporters may produce a range of qualities

within a product category, but we observe average prices rather than the entire range.

Third, quantity (but not value) data are missing for some of the importers

     Accordingly, we extract exporter-specific signals from the noise of the raw data in the

following way. For each SITC 4 digit product k, we observe the raw prices (unit values)

for some subset of importer c – exporter j pairs. We regress the log price on importer-

product and exporter-product fixed effects plus bilateral distance.

(23)     ln pcjt
             k
                 = α ctk + α kjt + β tk Distancecj + ε cjtk

Bilateral distance sweeps out Alchian-Allen effects in pricing (Hummels and Skiba 2005)
18
  The WTF 2000 data has some technical problems (Feenstra et al. 2005), so we use 1999 data.
19
  Some importers might report quantities in weight terms, either kilograms or pounds, while others use
counts. See also Hummels and Klenow (2005).


                                                        - 26 -
and the importer-product fixed effects absorb the variation in unit values that arises from

differences in units.

    We use the exporter-product fixed effects as our measure of export prices,

n
ln p kjt = αˆ kjt . This implies that any importer c buying product k from exporter j faces this

common export price. In addition to removing importer-specific measurement errors,

regression (23) provides us with (estimated) exporter prices even for those importers for

whom no quantity data are reported.

    A drawback of this approach is that we may lose useful variation across importers in

the price charged by a particular exporter. For example, suppose that Germany produces

a range of car qualities (and prices). While Mexico imports cars from the lower end of the

range, the US may import the entire quality range. Unfortunately, we are unable to

separate this true variation in German export prices from importer-specific measurement

errors, and so we err on the side of removing all the importer-specific variation.

    Does this approach yield sensible export price data? We know from previous work

using different data that prices are highly correlated with exporter’s per capita income

(Schott 2003, Hummels and Klenow 2005). We regress log prices on exporter per capita

GDP and product fixed effects, using both the raw price data, ln pcjt
                                                                  k
                                                                      , and our estimated

        n
prices, ln p kjt .

      ln pcjt
          k
              = −0.97 + .246 ln(Y jt / L jt ) + α tk + ecjt
                                                        k
                                                                R 2 = 0.48
      n
      ln p kjt = −2.95 + .233ln(Y jt / L jt ) + α tk + ecjt
                                                        k
                                                                R 2 = 0.94

There is no statistically significant difference in the exporter per capita GDP coefficient.

However, the regression using our estimated prices has almost twice the R2 of the




                                                       - 27 -
regression using the raw data. This suggests that our estimated prices are much cleaner

measures than the raw prices.

     We use these estimated prices to construct a price distribution for each importer c,

                                                                        n
product k and wave t in the following way. We take the estimated prices ln p kjt of every

exporter j, and weigh them by the share of j in importer c’s purchases of k (this share is

zero if j does not ship to c).20 The resulting distribution is discrete and we again employ

the nonparametric kernel estimation to obtain a smooth price distribution. Finally, we

take the differences in the price distributions (either relative to another importer c’ or to

the world) to obtain the price dis-similarity indices following Definition 1.21 We then

multiply the PDSI by 100.



5. Results

     We calculate the coefficient of variation (standard deviation/mean) for the key

variables in regressions (19)-(22) using the data of all countries and all waves and report

the results in Table 2. Not surprisingly, the variables for the bilateral comparisons have

more variation (relative to the means) than those for the multilateral comparisons. Figure

4 plots the simple average of the multilateral PDSI across all products against the

multilateral IDSI for wave 2 and shows a clear positive correlation between these two

variables.     Their correlation coefficient is a significant 0.42.                   Figure 5 is the



20
   We use the value shares, even though quantity shares are more consistent with theory, because quantity
data are missing for a significant number of observations (e.g. 34% of the observations for wave 1). We
experiment with dropping the observations with missing quantity data, or imputing the missing quantities
as values divided by the prices estimated using equation (23), and then constructing price distributions
using quantity shares. The results are almost identical to Tables 3-6
21
   The “world” consists of those countries for whom we have income measures from LIS, not the entire
sample of world trade flows.


                                                  - 28 -
corresponding scatter plot for the bilateral PDSI and IDSI; again, the positive correlation

is unmistakable, with a statistically significant correlation coefficient of 0.51.



5.1 Main Regression Results

   Table 3 reports the results of estimating the multilateral PDSI regression (22) by

wave. The dependent variable is the multilateral price dis-similarity index (PDSI). In the

top panel we estimate the base regression with the multilateral income dis-similarity

index (IDSI) as the only regressor, and in the bottom panel we include the additional

control variables of log GDP and log market potential. For the base regression, the

coefficients on the multilateral IDSI are positive and precisely estimated for all waves,

ranging from 0.2 (wave 5) to 0.45 (wave 2). These coefficients are somewhat smaller

when we include the additional controls, but the positive correlation between IDSI and

PDSI remains significant. That is to say, the countries whose income distributions are

most different from the world also have import price distributions that are most different

from the world, consistent with our theory. On the other hand, our control variables have

the expected signs: small domestic markets and those farthest from suppliers have price

distributions less similar to the world.

   Table 4 is organized similarly to Table 3 and reports the bilateral PDSI regression

(20). Like in Table 3, the coefficients on (the bilateral) IDSI are positive and significant

for all waves, with or without the additional controls of log distance and the absolute

value of the log difference in GDP. Again our control variables have the expected signs:

the countries of different sizes have dissimilar price distributions, as do the countries far

away from one another. The latter is important as Proposition 1 rests on the assumption




                                            - 29 -
that trade costs are negligible (so that all importers face a similar price vector) whereas

trade costs are likely to matter in the data. Thus it is reassuring that introducing the

additional control variables does not substantially alter the coefficients on IDSI.

     Table 5 reports the results of the number-of-export-partner regression (21). Unlike

for the PDSI regressions (20) and (22), theory does not provide a specific functional form

for regression (21) and so we report the log linear specification in the top panel and the

linear specification in the bottom panel. The linear specification has more observations

because it includes the zero values and also has lower adjusted R2. In both specifications

the coefficients on (the multilateral) IDSI are negative and precisely estimated, and they

range from -0.11 to -0.47 for the log linear specification.22 Put another way, the countries

whose income distributions are more similar to the world source from a larger set of

export partners, consistent with our theory. On the other hand, country size is positively

correlated with the number of export partners for most waves but market potential has

limited impacts.

     Table 6 is organized similarly to Table 5 and reports the results of the number-of-

common-export-partner regression (19), again estimated with both log linear and linear

specifications. Again, consistent with our theory, the coefficients on IDSI are negative

and significant and they range from -0.17 to -0.25 for the log linear specification: the

countries with dissimilar income distributions have fewer export partners in common,

consistent with our theory. Distant countries also have fewer export partners in common.



5.2 Robustness Exercises


22
   It is misleading to directly compare the coefficients on IDSI for the log linear specification with the
linear specification because the former are elasticities but the latter are derivatives of levels on levels.


                                                     - 30 -
     We also explore whether the changes in income distribution within a country over

time induce changes in this country’s import price distribution. We do so by pooling

over waves 1-5 and estimating regressions (19)-(22) in panels. Since the set of countries

with available income data varies by wave and the multilateral PDSI and IDSI change

with the country composition of the data, we restrict our sample to the set of countries

(those without a “*” in Table 1) whose data are available for all waves. We also include

country-pair by product or country by product fixed effects to focus on inter-temporal

variation. The results for the panel regressions are weaker than those for the cross-

section regressions in Tables 3-6: the IDSI coefficients are much smaller in magnitude

and sometimes not significant. This is likely because most of the variation in the PDSI

and IDSI is cross-sectional. For example, an analysis-of-variance shows that the cross-

country variation of the multilateral PDSI is over 28 times the inter-temporal variation.

     So far we have pooled over all product codes available in the data. One may be

concerned that our theory maps household incomes into consumer product prices and so

may be less appropriate for intermediate or capital goods.23 We use the UN Broad

Economic Classification system to separate the SITC product codes into consumption,

intermediate and capital goods and then re-run regressions (19)-(22) for each of the three

categories, employing all controls.24 To save space we only report the IDSI coefficients

and their standard errors for the consumption goods regressions in Table 7. They are

significant and have the expected signs and are similar in magnitude to those in Tables 3-

23
   If high quality consumption goods are made using high quality intermediate and capital goods in the
country of consumption then the idea behind the theory goes through as before. It is more problematic in
cases, like Mexico, where a lower income country imports high quality intermediates in order to produce
high quality consumption goods for export to the US.
24
    We also experimented with separating the SITC products into manufacturing goods (SITC 5-8) and
commodities (SITC 0-4), or into differentiated, reference priced and homogeneous goods using the Rauch
(1999) classification. The results for regressions (19)-(22) are similar between these categories.



                                                - 31 -
6. The IDSI coefficients for the intermediate and capital goods regressions are also

significant and have the expected signs in most cases, although they tend to be smaller in

magnitude than those for the consumption goods regressions.

       Our measure of income dissimilarity, IDSI, is derived from theory and it uses both

within- and cross-country information on income distribution. Does a more conventional

and less theoretically appropriate measure also work? We replace the multilateral IDSI

in regressions (21)-(22) with the decile ratio (the ratio of the 90th percentile income to the

10th percentile income), a measure that reflects only within-country inequality. Suppose

that all countries had identical median incomes so that the decile ratio were a sufficient

statistic for an importer’s income range relative to other countries’. Then according to

our theory, the decile ratio should be positively correlated with the number of exporters

and negatively correlated with our multilateral PDSI measure. Yet the opposite is true as

shown in Table 8: the coefficients on the decile ratio are significant and of the wrong

signs in all cases. One reason is that the countries with especially large decile ratios (e.g.

Mexico, Russia) also have very low median incomes and span but a small portion of the

world income distribution. We conclude that employing the theoretically appropriate

income measure is critical to our results.

       Previous studies (e.g. Hallak 2005, Hummels and Skiba 2004) have shown that rich

countries tend to import high priced goods. Does a positive correlation between the first

moments of the income distribution and price distribution drive our results? If so,

dropping the poorest countries should weaken our results. We drop the 8 countries with

the lowest per capita income25 from our sample, re-calculate the PDSI and IDSI and

obtain very similar results. The IDSI coefficients are sometimes larger and sometimes
25
     They are Russia, Romania, Estonia, Slovak Republic, Poland, Hungary, Mexico and Czech Republic.


                                                  - 32 -
smaller than in Tables 3-6. Thus our results are not driven by the first moments of the

income and price distributions.

   Our theory refers to the entire consumption price distribution but our data include

only import prices and exclude domestic sales. We have partially dealt with this by

including market size and trade cost controls in regressions (19)-(22), and we also try the

following for the bilateral regressions (19)-(20). For importer c’, we have all the sales

data except domestic sales originating in c’. When comparing importer c to c’ we want a

common reference set of countries. Accordingly, we eliminate country c exports to c’ so

that country c sales are missing from the sales data for both countries. Re-calculating the

bilateral PDSI in this manner and re-running regressions (19)-(20), we obtain results

almost identical to Tables 4 and 6.



6. Conclusion

   In this paper, we investigate how the distribution of income shapes patterns of

consumption and international trade in quality differentiated varieties within narrow

product categories. We extend Flam and Helpman (1987) to the case of multiple

differentiated goods and multiple countries with different technologies. We show that

cross-country differences in the distribution of income lead to differences in variety

consumed and in the distribution of product prices. Our extension provides two critical

empirical benefits. One, by deriving results in terms of national income and price

distributions we are able to evaluate a model that predicts heterogeneity in household

consumption decisions without needing household consumption data.               Two, the

relationship between income, product quality and product may vary widely across




                                          - 33 -
products and this can confound efforts to use price data as a signal of quality. The

differencing removes cross-product variation in price-income slopes and allows us to

make a clean evaluation of income distribution effects.

   To test these predictions we employ microdata on income from household surveys for

30 countries over 20 years to construct income distributions within and across countries.

We provide an easy to implement methodology for extracting useful information on

export prices from the noise of raw trade data and construct price distributions. We find

strong support for the predictions of our model. The pairs of importers whose income

distributions look more similar have more export partners in common and more similar

import price distributions. Importers whose income distributions look more like the

world buy from more exporters and have import price distributions that look more like

the world.

   Our findings, based on a structural model with quality differentiation, show that a

country’s income distribution shapes its import demand in important ways. This view of

trade patterns lies in stark contrast to the dominant models of horizontal product

differentiation in the trade literature, which provide no role for heterogeneous consumers

or income differences in explaining trade patterns. Further, our findings lend support to

Murphy and Shleifer’s (1997) insight that developing countries may have limited access

to developed countries’ markets because the goods they produce lack the high qualities

that high-income consumers demand.

   Finally, there is a rich theoretical literature on quality differentiation in trade in which

authors combine vertical differentiation with non-homothetic preferences and income

distributions to shed light on many questions that are difficult for horizontal




                                            - 34 -
differentiation models to answer. They show that one country’s income re-distribution

policy may affect another country’s income distribution (Flam and Helpman 1987,

Matsuyama 2000), that absolute poverty and per capita growth can be sustained

simultaneously in a fully integrated world economy (Funk 1998), that an export boom

may push a country into industrialization in the presence of a large middle class (Murphy,

Shleifer and Vishny 1989), and that an improvement in the productivity of one industry

may trigger the take-off of a series of industries one after another (Matsuyama 2002).

While we do not directly address these implications, our paper is a first step in taking the

common elements of these models—the interactions of vertical differentiation with non-

homothetic preferences and income distribution—to the data.




                                           - 35 -
References

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Andrea Brandolini, 2001. “Promise and Pitfalls in the Use of
‘Secondary’ Data-Sets: Income Inequality in OECD Countries as a Case Study”, Journal
of Economic Literature, 39 (3), 771-799.

Atkinson, A.B., Lee Rainwater, and Timothy Smeeding, 1995, Income Distribution in
OECD countries: Evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study, Social Policy Studies
No. 18, Paris, France: OECD.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, 2001, Quantifying Quality Growth, American Economic
Review, 91(4), pp. 1006-2001.

Bourguignon, Francois and Christian Morrisson, 2002. “Inequality Among World
Citizens: 1820-1992”, American Economic Review, 92(4), 727-744.

Buhmann, Brigitte et al., June 1988, Equivalence Scales, Well-Being, Inequality, and
Poverty: Sensitivity Estimates across Ten Countries Using the Luxembourg Income
Study (LIS) Database, Rev. Income Wealth, 34(2), pp. 115-42.

Chen, Shaohua and Martin Ravallion, 2001. “How Did the World’s Poorest Fare in the
1990s?”, Review of Income and Wealth, 47(3), 283-300.

Dalgin, M., D. Mitra, and V. Trindade, Inequality, September 2004, Nonhomethetic
Preferences, and Trade: A Gravity Approach, NBER Working Paper No. 10800, pp. 1-34.

Deaton, Angus, 2003. “Health, Inequality, and Economic Development”, Journal of
Economic Literature, 41(1), 113-158.

Deaton, A., 1997, The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
Development Policy, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire, 1996. “A New Data Set Measuring Income Inequality”.
World Bank Economic Review, 10, 565-591.

DiNardo, John and Justin L. Tobias, 2001. “Nonparametric Density and Regression
Estimation”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(4), 11-28.

Dollar, David and Kraay, Aart, 2002. “Growth is Good for the Poor”, Journal of
Economic Growth, 7, 195-225.

Feenstra, R. C., R. E. Lipsey, H. Deng, A. C. Ma and H. Mo, 2005, World Trade Flows,
1962-2000, NBER Working Paper No. 11040.

Flam, H. and E. Helpman, 1987, Vertical Product Differentiation and North-South Trade,
American Economic Review, 77(5), pp. 810-822.



                                         - 36 -
Funk, Peter, 1998. “Satiation and Underdevelopment”, Journal of Development
Economics 57, 319-341.

Gottschalk, P. and T.M. Smeeding, 1997, Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings and
Income Inequality, Journal of Economic Literature, XXXV(June), pp. 633-687.

Hallak, J. C., 2005, Product Quality and the Direction of Trade, Journal of International
Economics, forthcoming.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Chong Xiang. "The Home Market Effect and Bilateral Trade
Patterns." American Economic Review, September 2004, 94(4), 1108 – 1129.

Helpman, E. and P. Krugman, 1985, Market Structure and Foreign Trade, MIT Press,
Cambridge (Mass.).

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, October 2002, Penn World Table
Version 6.1, Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania
(CICUP).

Hummels, D. and P. J. Klenow, 2005, The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Trade,
American Economic Review Vol. 95, No 3, pp. 704-723.

Hunter, Linda, 1991. “The Contribution of Nonhomothetic Preferences to Trade”, Journal
of International Economics, 30 (3-4), 345-358.

Markusen, James, 1986. “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach”,
American Economic Review 76(5), 1002-1011.

Matsuyama, K., 2000, A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under
Nonhomothetic Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and
North-South Trade, Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), pp. 1093-1120.

Matsuyama, Kiminori, 2002. “The Rise of Mass Consumption Societies”, Journal of
Political Economy, 110(5), 1035-1070.

Melitz, Marc J., November 2003, The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations
and Aggregate Industry Productivity, Econometrica Vol. 71, No. 6, pp. 1695-1725.

Milanovic, Branko, 2002. “True World Income Distribution, 1988 and 1993: First
Calculation Based on Household Surveys Alone”, Economic Journal, 112, 51-92.

Mitra, Devashish and Vitor Trindade, 2005. “Inequality and Trade”, Canadian Journal of
Economics 38(4), 1253-1271.




                                          - 37 -
Murphy, K. M. and A. Shleifer, 1997, Quality and Trade, Journal of Development
Economics, 53, pp. 1-15.

Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer and R. Vishny, 1989, Income Distribution, Market Size, and
Industrialization, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104 (3), pp. 537-564.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 2005. “The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty and ...
Convergence, Period”, forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Schott, P. K., 2004, Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International
Trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, Issue 2, pp. 647-678.

Silverman, B.W., 1986. “Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis”, London:
Chapman and Hall.

Stokey, N. L., 1991, The Volume and Composition of Trade Between Rich and Poor
Countries, Review of Economic Studies, 58(1), pp. 63-80.




                                         - 38 -
                                                    Appendix 1 Theory
1. Proof of Proposition 1
    Consider the setting of section 2.3, in which technology differs across supplier
countries. Since ∪ j G j = G1 ∪ G2 = G (see footnote 9), we can re-write equation (6) as
          1 C
IDSI(.) =   ∑ j =1 ∫G j | g1 (.) − g 2 (.) | dI . Since fpj(I) = ajI is strictly increasing in Gj (see
          2
                                                           p( z )          p( z )
equation (13)), ∫G j | g1 (.) − g 2 (.) | dI = ∫H j | g1 (        ) − g2 (        ) | dp ( z ) for all j and so
                                                            aj              aj
                 1 C                   p( z )          p( z ) 1
IDSI(.) =           ∑ j =1 ∫H j | g1 (        ) − g2 (         ) | dp( z ) = PDSI(.), where the last equality is
                 2                      aj              aj         aj
by equation (15).
    Suppose that fpj(.) takes a more general form than ajI, but fpj(.) is strictly increasing in
Gj, its inverse exists and is differentiable in Gj. Then PDSI =
 1 C
   ∑ j =1 ∫H j | g1 ( f pj ( p( z )) − g 2 ( f pj ( p( z )) | [ f pj ( p ( z )]′dp ( z ) . The same steps as above go
                         −1                     −1                −1

 2
through and PDSI(.) = IDSI(.). Q.E.D.
2. Missing Domestic Sales Data I
    Consider the setting of section 2.3 again and let Λc be the range of qualities that
country c supplies. Assume that
Assumption A1 As C → +∞, ∫Λc mdz → 0 for all c and any finite number m.
Below we show that
Proposition A1 As C → +∞, βP → 1 in regression (17) under Assumption A1.
Proof: Let h1’(.) denote the price distribution of country 1 that we observe in our data.
Suppose that country 1 supplies the quality range with the set of prices H1S. Let the
probability mass of H1S be P(H1S) = ∫H1S h1 ( p ( z ))dp( z ) , where h1(.) is as defined in
                                      1
equation (14). Then h1’(p(z)) =                h1(p(z)) if p(z) ∈ H1 – H1S, the set of country
                                 1 − P( H 1S )
1’s import prices, and h1’(p(z)) = 0 if p(z) ∈ H1S, the set of country 1’s domestic sales
                                                 1
prices. Likewise, for country 2, h2’(.) =                h2(.) if p(z) ∈ H2 – H2S and h2’(.) = 0
                                           1 − P( H 2S )
if p(z) ∈ H2S, where P(H2S) = ∫H 2S h2 ( p ( z ))dp( z ) .
    H1 – H1S is a subset of ∪ dHdS, where d = 2, … C, because when country 1 buys
quality p(z) from abroad, it must buy it from some other country. For the set B ≡ (H1 –
H1S) ∩H2S, by Assumption 1,
(A1) ∫B | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp( z ) → 0 as C → +∞.
For the rest of the set H1 – H1S, we observe both countries 1 and 2’s price distributions
                         1                                1
and so h1’(.) =                   h1(.) and h2’(.) =               h2(.). Thus by equation (A1),
                  1 − P( H 1 ) S
                                                     1 − P( H 2S )
          ∫H1 − H1S | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) =
                     '         '
(A2)
                                      1                    1
                      ∫H1 − H1S − B |        h1 (.) −              h2 (.) | dp ( z ) + ∫B | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp( z )
                                1 − P ( H1 )
                                          S
                                                      1 − P( H 2 )
                                                               S


                                         1                    1
                   → ∫H1 − H1S |                h1 (.) −               h2 (.) | dp( z ) as C → +∞.
                                   1 − P ( H1 )
                                             S
                                                         1 − P( H 2S )
By Assumption 1, as C → +∞, P(H1S) → 0, P(H2S) → 0 and
(A3) ∫H1S | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp ( z ) → 0 as C → +∞.
Thus equation (A2) becomes
(A4) ∫H1 − H1S | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp( z ) → ∫H1 − H1S | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) as C → +∞.
By equations (A3) and (A4), for the set H1,
       ∫H1 | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) = ∫H1 − H1S | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp ( z ) + ∫H1S | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp ( z )
              '          '                            '        '                          '        '


                   → ∫H1 − H1S | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) → ∫H1 | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) as C → +∞.
Likewise, for the set H2,
       ∫H 2 | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) → ∫H 2 | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) as C → +∞.
                '       '


Therefore, as C → +∞, the PDSI that we observe in the data, ∫H1 ∪ H 2 | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp( z ) ,
approaches the true PDSI, ∫H1 ∪ H 2 | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) . Since the true PDSI equals IDSI by
Proposition 1, our βP estimate approaches 1. Q.E.D.
3. Missing Domestic Sales Data II
    Consider the setting of section 2.3 again. Suppose that country 1 is rich and country 2
is poor. Assume that
Assumption A2 Country 1 specializes in high qualities and they are not demanded by
country 2; country 2 specializes in low qualities and they are not demanded by country 1.
Below we show that
Proposition A2 For countries 1 and 2, the PDSI observed in the data is no larger than
IDSI.
Proof: Let h1’(.) denote the price distribution of country 1 observed in the data and let
H1D denote the set of prices for the high qualities country 1 produces. Since country 1
supplies H1D and only H1D to itself and we do not observe domestic sales data, h1’(p(z)) =
                                       1
0 if p(z) ∈ H1D and h1’(p(z)) =                h1(p(z)) if p(z) ∈ H1 – H1D, the set of country
                                  1 − P ( H1 )
                                            D


1’s import prices, where P(H1D) = ∫H1D h1 ( p( z ))dp( z ) is the probability mass of H1D and
                                                                            1
h1(.) is as defined in equation (14). Likewise, for country 2, h2’(.) =              h2(.) if
                                                                       1 − P( H 2D )
p(z) ∈ H2 – H2D and h2’(.) = 0 if p(z) ∈ H2D, where h2’(.) is the observed price
distribution of country 2, H2D is the set of prices for the low qualities that country 2
produces and P(H2D) = ∫H 2D h2 ( p( z ))dp( z ) .
   Over H1D, h2’(.) = h2(.) = 0 by Assumption A2. Thus
(A5) ∫H1D | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp( z ) = 0, ∫H1D | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) = ∫H1D h1 (.)dp( z ) = P(H1D).
Likewise, over H2D, h1’(.) = h1(.) = 0 by Assumption A2 and
                                                                                                               D
          ∫H 2D | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) = 0, ∫H 2D | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) = ∫H 2D h2 (.)dp( z ) = P(H2 ).
                   '        '
(A6)
On the other hand, over the set R ≡ H1 ∪ H 2 − H1D − H 2D ,
                                                   1                     1
(A7) ∫R | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp ( z ) = ∫R |              h1 (.) −                h2 (.) | dp( z )
                                              1 − P ( H1 )
                                                        D
                                                                    1 − P ( H 2D )
                                       P ( H1D )             P ( H 2D )
          = ∫R | h1 (.) − h2 (.) +                h1 (.) −               h2 (.) | dp ( z )
                                     1 − P( H1D )          1 − P( H 2D )
                                                P( H1D )                        P( H 2D )
          ≤ ∫R | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp ( z ) +             ∫ 1h (.) dp ( z ) +              ∫ h2 (.)dp ( z )
                                              1 − P( H1D ) R                  1 − P( H 2D ) R
       = ∫R | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp ( z ) + P(H1D) + P(H2D),
where the last equality is by Assumption A2. By (A5) ~ (A7)
(A8) ∫H1 ∪ H 2 | h1' (.) − h2' (.) | dp( z ) ≤ ∫H1 ∪ H 2 | h1 (.) − h2 (.) | dp( z ) .
Since the true PDSI equals IDSI by Proposition 1, the observed PDSI is no larger than
IDSI. Q.E.D.
    For the country pairs consisting of one rich country and one poor country, Proposition
A2 implies that missing domestic sales data is likely to compress the variation in PDSI
relative to IDSI, resulting in βP < 1 in regression (17).
4. General Form of Quantity Choice
    To minimize notation, consider the setup with identical technologies of section 2.1.
The derivations below can be easily extended to the cases of different technologies across
supplier countries or multiple differentiated goods. Let fq(I) be the quantity of the
differentiated good consumed by each consumer with income I. In country 1, the number
of people with income I0 is N1g1(I0)dI and they pay the price aI0 (see equation (4)) for
N1fq(I0)g1(I0)dI units of the differentiated good. Since the total quantity of consumption
by country 1 is N1Q1 with Q1 ≡ ∫G1 f q ( I ) g1 ( I )dI , the probability mass for country 1’s
price distribution at price aI0 (i.e. the fraction of the differentiated good with price aI0) is
h1(aI0)dp(z) where
                     1       p( z ) ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
(A9) h1 ( p ( z )) =    fq (         ) g1 ⎜   ⎟⋅ .
                     Q1        a          ⎝ a ⎠ a
Thus h1(.) is the pdf of country 1’s price distribution and its support is H1 = fp(G1).
                                                   1       p( z )      ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
Likewise, country 2 has the pdf h2 ( p ( z )) =       fq (        ) g2 ⎜        ⎟ ⋅ with support H2 =
                                                   Q2       a          ⎝ a ⎠ a
fp(G2) and Q2 ≡ ∫G2 f q ( I ) g 2 ( I )dI .
    Equation (A9) is equation (5), country 1’s price distribution in section 2.1, augmented
by fq(.)/Q1, which represents quantity weights. Weighting is necessary because quantity
differs across prices and larger weights go to the prices with larger quantities. If fq(I) = 1
(or a constant), fq(.) = Q1, the same quantity weight goes to all prices and equation (A9) is
the same as equation (5). If fq(.) increases in income, so does fq(.)/Q1 (Q1 is a constant);
larger quantity weights go to higher prices and (A9) has a fatter right tail than (5).
    On the other hand, the IDSI for countries 1 and 2 is still by equation (6) but the PDSI
becomes
                   1      1       p( z ) ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1       p( z )      ⎛ p( z ) ⎞ 1
(A10) PDSI (.) =     ∫H      fq (       ) g1 ⎜    ⎟−   fq (        ) g2 ⎜        ⎟ dp ( z ) ,
                   2 Q1            a         ⎝ a ⎠ Q2        a          ⎝ a ⎠a
where H = fp(G). Unfortunately, it is hard to derive the exact relationship between IDSI
and PDSI because it depends on how g1(.), g2(.) and fq(.) vary and how they interact with
each other. We use two numerical examples to illustrate this point below.
     Suppose that the probabilities of I1 (low income) and I2 (high income) are both 0.5 for
country 1 and they are 0.6 and 0.4, respectively, for country 2. Then IDSI = 0.2. Further,
suppose that fq(I1) = 1. When fq(I2) = 1.4, PDSI = 0.2011 > IDSI, but when fq(I2) = 1.8,
PDSI = 0.1948 < IDSI. Thus the general form of quantity choice may either strengthen or
weaken the correlation between IDSI and PDSI and imply βP >1 or βP < 1 in regression
(17).
                                           Appendix 2 Data
1. Income Data
     From the LIS we extract disposable household income (DPI), a commonly used
measure in the analysis of income inequality. DPI includes monetary income after direct
taxes and transfer payments. The data are in local currency values and we convert them
to real US dollar values using the PPP data from Penn World Tables 6.1. DPI omits
indirect taxes, benefits from public spending such as those from health care, education, or
most housing subsidies, and wealth, except to the extent that it is represented by cash
interest, rent, and dividends. The DPI data are available at the level of households rather
than consumers. Since household sizes vary, and consumption needs vary by age, we
adjust the income measure using an adult equivalence scale (AES). Total household
income is divided by the number of equivalent adults in order to get a measure of
household “equivalent” income. Buhmann et al. (1988) propose a succinct parametric
approximation to equivalence scales that summarizes the wide range of scales in use:
        Adjusted Income = DPI / Household Size E .
The equivalence elasticity E ∈ [0,1] represents economies of scale in household size. We
employ the LIS Equivalence Scale (E = 0.5), a commonly used scale among researchers
who study income inequality using the LIS data (e.g. Atkinson et al. 1995). An
alternative popular approach explicitly employs data on the numbers of adults and
children in the household. This approach is only feasible for a limited subset of our data.
     Once we have calculated adjusted income from each household in the survey, we
calculate the level of income for households at each percentile of the distribution.
     Some of our countries have one (occasionally, two) wave of data missing. The
literature has shown that quantile income levels within a country tend to follow smooth
trends over time (e.g. Dollar and Kraay 2002, Sala-i-Martin 2005) and this finding is
consistent with the patterns we see in the LIS data. Accordingly, for each un-starred
country with missing data, we estimate linear income trends by percentile using the data
of the available waves and then extrapolate the data for the missing wave(s).
     Specifically, we fit linear trends for Australia, France, Italy, Mexico and Switzerland,
and their average R2 is 0.87. We fit log linear trends for Austria, Belgium, Finland,
Ireland, Luxemburg, Netherlands, Poland and Spain, and their average R2 is 0.91. We do
not extrapolate Hungary’s wave 1 data due to poor fit (and Hungary’s wave 1 trade data
do not exist anyway), nor do we extrapolate Russia’s data before wave 3 because Russia
was part of the Soviet Union.
2. Miscellaneous Issues
    The raw income data for Russia 1992 have an unreliable scale (the median income is
$2569329) and so do the raw data for Israel 1979, Poland 1986 and Russia 1995. We
rescale these data in the following way. For each country, we find a wave with a reliable
scale (wave t) and calculate the ratio of this country’s median income (Y50) to its real per
capita GDP in PWT 6.1 (CGDP) for wave t. We then impute the median income for wave
s as Yˆ50, s = CGDPs × (Y50,t/CGDPt) and impute the bth percentile income (Yb) for wave s
as Yˆ = Yb,s × ( Yˆ /Y50,s). For Russia we use 2000 as wave t and for Israel and Poland
    b,s           50, s

we use 1986 and 1992, respectively.
    The WTF does not have trade quantity data for wave 1 (1980) and so we use the UN
trade data instead. However, the WTF data use the 4-digit SITC Rev. 2 classification
whereas the UN data use 5-digit SITC Rev. 1. We follow Feenstra et al. (2005) and
concord the SITC Rev. 1 codes to SITC Rev. 2 in the following way (this concordance is
available from us upon request). First, the 5-digit Rev. 1 codes are truncated to the 4-digit
level. Second, the 4-digit Rev.1 codes are matched to the corresponding 4-digit Rev.2
codes using the maximum count of the Rev.2 frequency. In a tie, the maximum is given
to the first 4-digit Rev.2 code listed numerically. Finally, if many Rev.1 codes are
matched to a single Rev.2 code we aggregate these Rev.1 codes.
         Figure 1 Quality Choice with Identical Technologies


     y
                           u(.)

           A




                                                 A

     0                                                         z




         Figure 2 Quality Choice with Different Technologies

y
          u(.)
AS




BN

                  T




                      BS                    AN
             z1                   z2                               z
                                            Figure 3 The Range of Incomes for Wave 5
                        Multilateral                                                                                        Decile Ratio
Year Country            IDSI                                                                                                   P90/P10


2000   Norway           34.8                                                                                                          2.8
2000   Finland          33.8                                                                                                          2.9
2000   Sweden           32.2                                                                                                          3.0
1999   Netherlands      30.6                                                                                                          3.1
1999   Slovenia         37.6                                                                                                          3.2
2000   Austria          29.9                                                                                                          3.2
2000   Luxembourg       42.8                                                                                                          3.2
2000   Germany          28.6                                                                                                          3.3
2000   Belgium          28.0                                                                                                          3.3
1999   Hungary          53.4                                                                                                          3.6
1999   Poland           49.6                                                                                                          3.6
2000   Taiwan           23.8                                                                                                          3.8
2000   Canada           28.3                                                                                                          3.9
2000   Italy            21.7                                                                                                          4.5
2000   Ireland          20.6                                                                                                          4.6
1999   United Kingdom   17.8                                                                                                          4.6
2000   Spain            19.0                                                                                                          4.8
2001   Israel           16.6                                                                                                          5.0
2000   Estonia          40.3                                                                                                          5.1
2000   United States    29.5                                                                                                          5.4
2000   Russia           53.6                                                                                                          8.4
2000   Mexico           47.3                                                                                                         10.4


       Average          32.7                                                                                                          4.3

Notes: The data are normalized using the U.S. median income ($24,094 = 100). P10 and P90 are the 10th and 90th percentile incomes,
respectively and the lengths of the bars represent the gap between P10 and P90.
                                                  Figure 4 The Average Multilateral PDSI and Multilateral IDSI for Wave 2

                                                                                                       Taiwan
Average Multilateral Price Dis-similarity Index                                                                                              Poland
                                            50                                                                                       Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                  Mexico

                                                                        Ireland
                               45




                                                                           Israel

                                                               Australia                    Austria
                   40




                                                                                                Norway

                                                                                                  Finland
                                                                                                    Canada
                                                                                            Belgium-Luxembourg
                                                                                           Denmark  Switzerland
                                                                                            Spain
                                                                                               Sweden
      35




                                                                                       Netherlands

                                                             Italy                      United States

                                                                          Germany
                                                            United Kingdom
                                                                   France
                         30




                                                   10                     20                  30             40             50                                                60
                                                                                   Multilateral Income Dis-similarity Index

                                                       Figure 5 The Average Bilateral PDSI and Bilateral IDSI for Wave 2

                                                                                                 pl-tw
                                                                                           hu-tw
                                            60




                                                                           ie-tw                hu-ieie-pl
Average Bilateral Price Dis-similarity Index




                                                                                                                              at-tw
                                                                                                                              mx-pl                   ie-mx
                                                                                                                                                  ch-tw
                                                                         il-tw    nl-tw   it-tw                                         dk-tw
                                                                                                                                     hu-mx
                                                                                                fr-tw sw-tw               ie-us         nw-tw                                     at-mx
                                                                                                                               fi-tw              as-pl                mx-nlch-pl
                                                                                                                                                                 pl-us ch-hu
                                                                                                                                                               at-pl                  ch-mx
                                                                      es-tw                            ge-tw
                                                                                                    tw-uk   il-pl                  nl-pl                     hu-us     nw-pl
                                                                                                                                                                   hu-nw
                                                                                          es-pl hu-il                      hu-nlit-pl pl-uk
                                                                                                                           hu-it              as-hu       mx-tw
                                                                                                                                                          at-huit-mxdk-pl  ca-pl dk-mx
                                                                                                                                                                       ca-hu
                                                                                                                                                                            mx-sw
                                                                                                                                                                                     mx-nw
                                                                                   es-hu                                           fr-hufr-pl ge-plpl-sw
                                                                                                                                                     il-mx
                                                                                                                                                                 fi-pl
                                                                                                                                                                dk-hu
                                                                                                                                                                    mx-uk
                                                                                                                                                                                   fi-mx
                                                                hu-pl ch-us as-at as-be        as-ie at-us                   il-us hu-uk es-mx    ca-tw fi-hu fr-mxge-mx ca-mx
                                                                                                                                          ge-hu
                                                                                                                                              hu-sw
                          50




                                                                                          ge-ieas-ch                                      tw-us                         as-mxmx-us
                                                         ie-il                    ie-uk         nw-us           at-ie                 ca-ie
                                                                         ie-it
                                                                          es-ieas-nw       as-nlas-ilat-ca as-tw nl-us ch-ie
                                                                                         dk-us
                                                                   ca-chas-itfr-ieas-dk                        fi-us
                                                                                                                  fi-ie
                                                                               ie-nl       ca-nwie-sw it-us                             ca-il
                                                                                                                                          es-us
                                                                                    as-fige-il                     as-esie-nw
                                                                                                               fr-us
                                                                                                                         dk-ie
                                                                                                                          sw-us   ca-nl
                                                                          il-it
                                                                           as-fr                              ca-fi        il-nw
                                                                                                                 at-ilca-itdk-il
                                                                                 at-ge
                                                                                    il-ukas-sw be-x+
                                                                     at-nwas-ge   ca-dk                           fi-il ca-fr
                                                                   as-uk                                                               ch-il
                                                                      es-il il-nlfr-il            il-sw uk-us ge-us
                                                                                                       it-nw
                                                                                                      ch-fi      ch-ge ca-ge ca-sw  at-es es-nw ca-es
                                                                                    at-uk
                                                                                      at-sw    ge-nw
                                                                                            at-it                 nl-nw
                                                                           ge-nl                              ca-uk                        dk-es
         40




                                                               at-fi             ch-nw
                                                                                 fi-ge at-be  nw-uk   fi-nl
                                                                                            as-us
                                                                                              es-nl   fr-nw es-ge
                                                                                                     dk-ge         es-sw ch-sw es-fi
                                                                            at-dk        fi-fr
                                                                                        at-fr fi-it as-ca   ch-uk                                   ch-es
                                                                         ch-dk
                                                                      ge-it
                                                                   ca-us         nl-sw
                                                                                     it-sw              dk-it
                                                                                                      at-nl
                                                                        it-nl nl-uk fi-uk nw-sw
                                                                     ge-sw                              es-uk
                                                                                                      es-fr         ch-it
                                                                                                                    dk-nl
                                                             it-uk                            dk-uk dk-fr            ch-fr ch-nl
                                                                dk-nw fr-sw         sw-uk es-it
                                                                                 fi-sw
                                                               fr-it                         at-ch
                                                                                   dk-fi                   dk-sw
                                                                        fr-nl
                                                               fr-ge
                                                                fr-ukge-uk
                                                                         fi-nw
                         30




                                                   0                            20                40                  60                                                     80
                                                                                  Bilateral Income Dis-similarity Index
                           Table 1 The Coverage of the LIS Income Data

                   Abbre-    Wave 1      Wave 2      Wave 3               Wave 4          Wave 5
    Country        viation around 1980 around 1985 around 1990          around 1995      around 2000
Australia            AS         1981         1985           1989            1994           2000(e)
Austria              AT        1981(e)       1987          1990(e)          1995            2000
Belgium              BE        1981(e)       1985           1992            1995            2000
Canada               CA         1981         1987           1991            1994            2000
Czech Republic*      CZ           .            .            1992            1996              .
Denmark*             DK           .          1987           1992              .               .
Estonia*             EE           .            .              .               .             2000
Finland               FI       1981(e)       1987           1991            1995            2000
France               FR         1981         1984           1989            1994           1999(e)
Germany              GE         1981         1984           1989            1994            2000
Greece*              GR           .            .              .             1995            2000
Hungary*             HU           .         1985(e)         1991            1994            1999
Ireland               IE       1981(e)       1987          1990(e)          1995            2000
Israel                IL       1979(a)       1986           1992            1997           2001(b)
Italy                 IT       1981(e)       1986           1991            1995            2000
Luxembourg           LX        1981(e)       1985           1991            1994            2000
Mexico               MX        1981(e)       1984           1989            1996            2000
Netherlands          NL        1981(e)       1987           1991            1994            1999
Norway               NW         1979         1986           1991            1995            2000
Poland               PL        1981(e)      1986(a)         1992            1995            1999
Romania*             RO           .            .              .             1995              .
Russia*              RL           .            .           1992(a)         1995(a)          2000
Slovak Republic*     SK           .            .            1992            1996              .
Slovenia*             SI          .            .              .             1997            1999
Spain                ES         1980        1985(e)         1990            1995            2000
Sweden               SW         1981         1987           1992            1995            2000
Switzerland          CH         1982        1985(e)         1992           1995(e)          2000
Taiwan               TW         1981         1986           1991            1995           2000(b)
United Kingdom       UK         1979         1986           1991            1995            1999
United States        US         1979         1986           1991            1994            2000

     Notes: In each cell is the actual year for which the LIS income data are available for a

     given country and a given wave. A “(e)” indicates that the data have been extrapolated

     using the available data of the same country. A “(a)” indicates that the data have been

     rescaled because the scale of the raw data is unreliable. A “(b)” indicates that an adjacent

     year’s PPP data have been used to convert the raw data into US dollars. The countries

     without a “*” have income data for all the five waves.
                                  Table 2 Summary Statistics

                  Variables         Mean/Std. Deviation     Number of Obs.

                  IDSI(c,W)                2.868                85,133

                  ln IDSI(c,W)             9.631                85,133

                  IDSI(c,c')               1.539               900,617

                  ln IDSI(c,c')            4.397               900,617

                  PDSI(c,W)                1.833                74,212

                  PDSI(c,c')               1.783               770,039

                  N(c)                     1.047                85,133

                  ln N(c)                 -0.084                76,622

                  N(c,c')                  0.906               899,252

                  ln N(c,c')               0.101               741,813



Notes: “IDSI” means income dis-similarity index and “PDSI” means price dis-similarity

index. For IDSI and PDSI, “(c, W)” denotes the multilateral comparison (i.e. country c

relative to the world) and “(c, c’)” denotes the bilateral comparison (i.e. country c relative

to c’). “N(c)” means the number of export partners for country c and “N(c,c’)” means the

number of common export partners for c and c’. “ln” means logs.
                Table 3 The Multilateral Price Dis-similarity Index Regression

                                           Dependent Var: PDSI(c,W)
                        Wave 1        Wave 2        Wave 3        Wave 4          Wave 5
IDSI(c,W)               0.341***     0.452 ***     0.310 ***     0.271 ***       0.194 ***
                         0.023         0.015         0.017         0.012           0.013

Constant               28.649 ***    27.082 ***    28.023 ***    28.589 ***      31.513 ***
                         0.583         0.426         0.536         0.426           0.412

Number of Obs.           9,288        14,840       15,225 ***     17,789          17,070

Adjusted R²              0.25          0.28          0.28          0.28            0.28


IDSI(c,W)              0.130 ***     0.371 ***     0.147 ***     0.075 ***        0.023 *
                         0.029         0.016         0.018         0.014           0.014

ln GDP(c)              -2.379 ***   -2.5114 ***    -3.244 ***    -2.894 ***      -3.360 ***
                         0.205         0.162         0.119         1.070           0.099

ln MP(c)               0.317 ***     -0.250 ***     0.076 *      0.049 ***       0.177 ***
                         0.067         0.066         0.044         1.183           0.034

Constant               58.956 ***    61.846 ***    72.811 ***    70.469 ***      77.028 ***
                         2.696         1.727         1.735         2.240           1.374

Number of Obs.           9,288        14,840        15,225       17,789 ***       17,070

Adjusted R²              0.26          0.31          0.32          0.31            0.33


Notes: This table reports the results of regression (22), with (the bottom panel) and

without (the top panel) the additional explanatory variables that control for market size

and trade costs. We do not report the product fixed effects to save space. Standard errors

are in italics. “***”, “**” and “*” indicate significance levels of 1%, 5% and 10%,

respectively.
                 Table 4 The Bilateral Price Dis-similarity Index Regression
                                              Dependent Var: PDSI(c,c')
                        Wave 1       Wave 2          Wave 3          Wave 4       Wave 5
IDSI(c,c')             0.085 ***     0.229 ***       0.151 ***       0.091 ***   0.075 ***
                         0.005        0.003           0.003           0.002        0.002

Constant               41.963 ***   38.279 ***      39.344 ***      40.538 ***   41.461 ***
                         0.182        0.125           0.098           0.086        0.087

Number of Obs.          73,977       142,038        151,483 ***      209,547     192,994

Adjusted R²              0.21          0.20            0.22               0.21     0.22


IDSI(c,c')             0.069 ***     0.188 ***       0.123 ***       0.077 ***   0.051 ***
                         0.005        0.003           0.003           0.002        0.002

GDPgap(c,c')           1.201 ***    0.5526 ***       1.206 ***       0.920 ***   1.809 ***
                         0.076        0.056           0.052           0.040        0.038

ln Dist(c,c')          2.964 ***     2.869 ***       2.867 ***       2.306 ***   2.356 ***
                         0.072        0.055           0.049           0.042        0.045

Constant               17.809 ***   16.364 ***      15.941 ***      21.706 ***   20.878 ***
                         0.574        0.424           0.390           0.334        0.361

Number of Obs.          73,977       142,038         151,483         209,547     192,994

Adjusted R²              0.23          0.21            0.24               0.23     0.24


Notes: This table reports the results of regression (20), with (the bottom panel) and

without (the top panel) the additional explanatory variables that control for market size

and trade costs. “GDPgap(c, c’)” is the absolute value of the log difference in GDP for

countries c and c’. We do not report the product fixed effects to save space. Standard

errors are in italics. “***”, “**” and “*” indicate significance levels of 1%, 5% and 10%,

respectively.
                      Table 5 The Number of Export Partners Regression

                                                 Dependent Var: ln N (c)
                     Wave 1          Wave 2             Wave 3              Wave 4       Wave 5
ln IDSI(c,W)        -0.280 ***      -0.466 ***         -0.225 ***          -0.114 ***   -0.116 ***
                      0.020           0.014              0.016               0.014        0.014

ln GDP(c)           0.171 ***       0.177 ***          0.275 ***           -0.020 ***   0.282 ***
                      0.006           0.005              0.003               0.033        0.003

ln MP(c)             0.004 *        0.035 ***           -0.001             0.338 ***    0.002 **
                      0.002           0.002              0.002               0.036        0.001

Constant            -1.230 ***      -1.042 ***         -2.730 ***          -3.703 ***   -3.243 ***
                      0.113           0.077              0.077               0.089        0.067

Number of Obs.        9,596          15,350             15,699              18,333       17,644

Adjusted R²           0.26             0.35              0.37                0.42         0.43

                                                  Dependent Var: N (c)
IDSI(c,W)           -0.017 ***      -0.016 ***         -0.008 ***          -0.004 ***   -0.004 ***
                      0.001           0.001              0.001               0.001        0.001

ln GDP(c)           0.200 ***       0.368 ***          0.312 ***           -0.772 ***   0.297 ***
                      0.006           0.010              0.006               0.043        0.004

ln MP(c)             -0.004 *       0.012 ***            0.001             1.228 ***    0.004 **
                      0.002           0.004              0.002               0.048        0.002

Constant            -0.856 ***      -3.017 ***         -2.604 ***          -4.664 ***   -2.555 ***
                      0.085           0.106              0.085               0.092        0.060

Number of Obs.       10,314          18,414             17,160              20,020       19,225

Adjusted R²           0.25             0.13              0.15                0.30         0.23


   Notes: This table reports the results of regression (21) for the log linear (the top panel)

   and linear (the bottom panel) specifications. We do not report the product fixed effects to

   save space. Standard errors are in italics. “***”, “**” and “*” indicate significance

   levels of 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                   Table 6 The Number of Common Export Partners Regression
                                                Dependent Var: ln N(c,c')
                     Wave 1           Wave 2           Wave 3              Wave 4        Wave 5
ln IDSI(c,c')       -0.173 ***       -0.280 ***       -0.224 ***          -0.253 ***    -0.176 ***
                      0.003            0.003            0.002               0.002         0.002

GDPgap(c,c')        -0.024 ***       0.0430 ***         0.018 *           -0.023 ***    -0.083 ***
                      0.002            0.001             0.001              0.001         0.001

ln Dist(c,c')       -0.106 ***       -0.104 ***        -0.100 ***         -0.014 ***    -0.005 ***
                      0.002            0.001             0.001              0.001         0.001

Constant             1.554 ***        1.771 ***        1.522 ***          1.020 ***     0.794 ***
                       0.016            0.012            0.011              0.010         0.010

Number of Obs.        73,825          134,582           146,247           201,172        185,987

Adjusted R²            0.20             0.30             0.28               0.26          0.25

                                                Dependent Var: N(c,c')
IDSI(c,c')          -0.013 ***       -0.015 ***      -0.011 ***           -0.012 ***    -0.008 ***
                      0.000            0.000           0.000                0.000         0.000

GDPgap(c,c')        -0.034 ***       0.0263 ***         -0.002            -0.024 ***    -0.077 ***
                      0.003            0.003             0.002              0.002         0.002

ln Dist(c,c')       -0.136 ***       -0.197 ***        -0.177 ***         -0.077 ***    -0.082 ***
                      0.003            0.003             0.002              0.002         0.002

Constant             2.615 ***        3.109 ***        2.844 ***          2.136 ***     2.163 ***
                       0.022            0.020            0.018              0.016         0.020

Number of Obs.        86,658          174,016           172,808           242,187        223,583

Adjusted R²            0.08             0.10             0.09               0.07          0.04



     Notes: This table reports the results of regression (19) for the log linear (the top panel)

     and linear (the bottom panel) specifications. “GDPgap(c, c’)” is the absolute value of the

     log difference in GDP for countries c and c’. We do not report the product fixed effects

     to save space. Standard errors are in italics. “***”, “**” and “*” indicate significance

     levels of 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                               Table 7 The Results for Consumption Goods

                                   Wave 1        Wave 2       Wave 3        Wave 4       Wave 5

Multilateral PDSI, Reg. (22)
                                    -0.008      0.420 ***    0.121 ***     0.100 ***    0.093 ***
                                     0.063        0.036        0.039         0.031        0.028

Bilateral PDSI, Reg. (20)
                                   0.068 ***    0.268 ***    0.179 ***     0.122 ***    0.094 ***
                                     0.012        0.008        0.006         0.004        0.004

Multilateral N, Reg. (21)
                                  -0.241 ***    -0.546 ***   -0.153 ***    -0.242 ***   -0.261 ***
                                    0.043         0.033        0.035         0.032        0.029

Bilateral N, Reg. (19)
                                  -0.205 ***    -0.385 ***   -0.260 ***    -0.350 ***   -0.244 ***
                                    0.008         0.007        0.005         0.004        0.004



    Notes: This table reports the coefficients on the income dis-similarity index, IDSI, and

    their standard errors when regressions (19)-(22) are run for consumption goods only. We

    use the UN Broad Economic Classification system to designate which products are

    consumption goods.         Standard errors are in italics.   “***”, “**” and “*” indicate

    significance levels of 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                               Table 8 The Results Using the 90-10 Decile Ratio

                                    Wave 1         Wave 2         Wave 3           Wave 4       Wave 5

Multilateral PDSI, Reg. (22)

               P90/P10(c)           5.455 ***     3.324 ***      1.776 ***        1.038 ***    1.132 ***
                                      0.276         0.141          0.106            0.101        0.076

               ln GDP(c)           -4.046 ***     -5.368 ***     -4.001 ***       -6.170 ***   -3.646 ***
                                     0.167          0.165          0.113            1.063        0.091

               ln MP(c)             0.714 ***     0.423 ***      0.091 ***          3.112      0.222 ***
                                      0.065         0.065          0.043            1.182        0.032

               Constant            59.202 ***     85.276 ***    79.913 ***         70.947      75.928 ***
                                     1.777          1.473         1.427            2.105         1.119

               Number of Obs.        9,288         14,840         15,225           17,789       17,070

               Adjusted R²            0.29          0.31           0.33             0.32         0.34

Multilateral N, Reg. (21)

               P90/P10(c)          -0.186 ***     -0.150 ***     -0.094 ***       -0.083 ***   -0.065 ***
                                     0.009          0.008          0.005            0.004        0.003

               ln GDP(c)            0.317 ***     0.494 ***      0.352 ***        -0.530 ***   0.321 ***
                                      0.005         0.010          0.006            0.043        0.004

               ln MP(c)            -0.026 ***     -0.018 ***       0.000          0.997 ***     -0.001
                                     0.002          0.004          0.002            0.048        0.001

               Constant            -1.814 ***     -4.024 ***     -2.994 ***       -4.566 ***   -2.654 ***
                                     0.056          0.092          0.071            0.086        0.049

               Number of Obs.        10,314        18,414         17,160           20,020       19,225

               Adjusted R²            0.25          0.14           0.16             0.31         0.25



      Notes: This table reports the results of regressions (21) and (22) with the income dis-

      similarity index, IDSI, replaced by the decile ratio. Standard errors are in italics. “***”,

      “**” and “*” indicate significance levels of 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
