                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DOES IT PAY, AT THE MARGIN, TO WORK AND SAVE? -- MEASURING EFFECTIVE
       MARGINAL TAXES ON AMERICANS' LABOR SUPPLY AND SAVING

                                        Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                           David Rapson

                                        Working Paper 12533
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12533


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2006




We thank Jane Gravelle, Alexi Sluchynsky, and Adam Looney for critical advice and comments.
This paper builds and draws on Gokhale, Kotlikoff, and Sluchynsky (2002).

© 2006 by Laurence J. Kotlikoff and David Rapson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does It Pay, at the Margin, to Work and Save? -- Measuring Effective Marginal Taxes on
Americans' Labor Supply and Saving
Laurence J. Kotlikoff and David Rapson
NBER Working Paper No. 12533
September 2006
JEL No. H1,H2,H3

                                               ABSTRACT

Building on Gokhale, Kotlikoff, and Sluchynsky's (2002) study of Americans' incentives to work full
or part time, this paper uses ESPlanner, a life-cycle financial planning program, in conjunction with
detailed modeling of transfer programs to determine a) total marginal net tax rates on current labor
supply, b) total net marginal tax rates on life-cycle labor supply, c) total net marginal tax rates on saving,
and d) the tax-arbitrage opportunities available from contributing to retirement accounts. In seeking
to provide the most comprehensive analysis to date of fiscal incentives, the paper incorporates federal
and state personal income taxes, the FICA payroll tax, federal and state corporate income taxes, federal
and state sales and excise taxes, Social Security benefits, Medicare benefits, Medicaid benefits, Foods
Stamps, welfare (TAFCD) benefits, and other transfer program benefits. The paper offers four main
takeaways. First, thanks to the incredible complexity of the U.S. fiscal system, it's impossible for anyone
to understand her incentive to work, save, or contribute to retirement accounts absent highly advanced
computer technology and software. Second, the U.S. fiscal system provides most households with
very strong reasons to limit their labor supply and saving. Third, the system offers very high-income
young and middle aged households as well as most older households tremendous opportunities to arbitrage
the tax system by contributing to retirement accounts. Fourth, the patterns by age and income of marginal
net tax rates on earnings, marginal net tax rates on saving, and tax-arbitrage opportunities can be summarized
with one word -- bizarre.

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kotlikoff@bu.edu

David Rapson
270 Bay State Rd
Department of Economics
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
rapson@bu.edu
I. Introduction

       Households both want and need to understand the incentives they face at the

margin for working and saving. Yet any American seeking to understand her total

effective net marginal tax on either choice faces a daunting challenge. First, she needs to

consider a host of taxes and transfers including federal personal income taxes, federal

corporate income taxes, federal payroll taxes, federal excise taxes, state personal income

taxes, state corporate income taxes, state sales taxes, state excise taxes, Social Security

benefits, welfare benefits (TAFDC), Supplemental Security Income benefits (SSI),

Medicaid benefits, Medicare benefit, food stamps, nutrition benefits (WIC), and energy

assistance benefits (LIHEAP). Second, she needs to understand in very fine detail how

each of these taxes and transfers is calculated. Third, she needs to understand the

interactions of the different tax and transfer programs. Fourth, she needs to consider the

fact that these taxes and transfers are paid and received over time. And fifth, she needs to

have a method for translating all of these interconnected time-dated tax payments and

benefit receipts into a simple and comprehensible statement of her marginal reward for

working and saving.

       This paper uses ESPlannerTM (Economic Security PlannerTM) in conjunction with

detailed modeling of non-Social Security transfer programs (ESPlanner incorporates

Social Security) to generate total effective (net) marginal taxes on labor supply and

saving for stylized American households. It also examines the tax arbitrage opportunity

available to households from saving in either a) 401(k), traditional IRA, or other tax-

deferred retirement accounts or b) Roth IRAs, Roth 401(k)s, or other Roth accounts.

       The paper builds and draws on Gokhale, Kotlikoff, and Sluchynsky (2002) which




                                             1
studied the incentives of Americans to work full or part time. That study showed that the

overall tax/transfer system is progressive, particularly at the very low end of the earnings

distribution, that all households face very high marginal taxes on the choice of working

full or part time, that many low- and moderate-income households face substantially

higher marginal taxes on working full or part time than do high-income households, and

that many low-income households face confiscatory taxes on switching from full to part

time work or from switching from full-time work by one spouse to full-time work by

both spouses.

       The value added of this paper relative to Gokhale, Kotlikoff, and Sluchynsky

(2002) is that we consider the marginal net taxes on working extra hours in the current

year, working extra hours throughout one’s career, and increasing one’s current saving.

We also examine the tax arbitrage opportunity available to different households from

contributing to a) 401(k), traditional IRA, or similar tax-deferred accounts or b) Roth

IRAs, Roth 401(k)s, or other Roth accounts.

       With the exception of certain very low-earning households, we find high to very

high marginal net tax rates – ranging from 24 to 45 percent -- on current and life-cycle

labor supply. These calculations are made at particular levels of pre-tax and pre-transfer

earnings and are based on discrete increments in earnings. As we also demonstrate,

marginal net tax rates on current and life-cycle labor supply are astronomical over much

smaller increments in gross earnings at particular levels of earnings at which income and

asset eligibility tests of particular tax and transfer programs become relevant.

       The Congressional Budget Office’s (2005) recent study of effective tax rates on

labor supply reports much lower marginal rates, particularly for low-income households,




                                              2
than those we report. The reason is that the CBO ignores transfer payments and federal

and state sales and excise taxes.

       At low incomes (when transfer benefits are often linked directly to income) our

estimates of marginal effective rates are 80 to 100 percentage points higher than the CBO

in some cases. For example, 60 year old couples earning $10,000/yr are within the EITC

phase-in region, which results in a CBO estimated marginal rate of -40%. However, at

this income they also face a one-for-one reduction in food stamps. After accounting for

all of the relevant transfer programs, the resulting effective marginal rate is 50%, or 90

percentage points higher than the CBO estimate. Aside from these few extreme cases, the

differences are smaller, but still substantial. Our estimates for low- to mid-income

households are 30 to 50 points higher than the CBO, and 10 to 25 points higher for mid-

to high-income households.

       In addition to finding high to very high marginal net taxes on labor supply for

virtually all American households, we also find high to very high marginal net tax rates

on saving for most households. For some low-income households, we find astronomical

net tax rates on saving; for these households higher saving means higher future assets and

higher asset income, which can reduce eligibility for transfer payments via asset and

income tests. Finally, we find huge arbitrage opportunities for particular households of

particular ages and earnings levels from contributing to either tax-deferred retirement

accounts or Roth IRAs, Roth 401(k)s, or other Roth accounts.

       The paper provides four main takeaways. First, thanks to the incredible

complexity of the U.S. fiscal system, it’s essentially impossible for anyone to understand

her incentive to work, save, or contribute to retirement accounts absent highly advanced




                                            3
computer technology and software.        Second, the U.S. fiscal system provides most

households with very strong reasons to limit their labor supply and saving. Third, the

system offers very high-income young and middle aged households as well as most older

households tremendous opportunities to arbitrage the tax system by contributing to

retirement accounts. Fourth, the patterns by age and income of marginal net tax rates on

earnings, marginal net tax rates on saving, and tax-arbitrage opportunities can be

summarized with one word – bizarre.

       We proceed in section II by laying out our methods for measuring total marginal

net taxes on working additional hours and on saving. Section III describes ESPlanner

and its use in this paper. Section IV presents our stylized households. Section V presents

results, and Section VI concludes.



II. Measuring Total Effective Marginal Tax Rates and the Tax Arbitrage

Opportunities Afforded by Retirement Accounts

       Economists measure the gain from extra work or saving in terms of its potential

impact on consumption. The gain from extra current work is typically measured in terms

of its maximum impact on current consumption. Thus, if a worker earns an extra $100

this year, permitting this year’s consumption to rise, at most, by $50, we say the worker

faces a 50 percent effective marginal tax on her labor supply. The terms “effective”

reference marginal taxes paid net of marginal transfer payments received. Since a large

component of some households’ incomes, particular those of low income households,

comes from government transfer programs, including such payments in the analysis of

earnings and saving incentives is essential.




                                               4
         Of course working and earning more in the current year is just one potential

margin of choice when it comes to expanding labor supply. We say “potential” because

some workers may be in jobs in which the hours they work are pre-set by their employer

and can’t be changed. For such workers, the only way to adjust their annual hours

worked is to switch jobs.

         In this paper we calculate net marginal tax rates on working additional hours in

just the current year. But we also determine the net marginal incentives associated with

permanently adjusting annual hours worked by switching from a job with a low fixed-

level of annual hours to one with a high fixed-level of annual hours. We refer to such a

job change as an increase in life-cycle labor supply. To measure this net tax rate we

compare the change in the present value lifetime income before any taxes and transfer

payments arising from a uniform increase in annual hours (and earnings, since we

consider fixed real wages per hour) to the change in the present value of lifetime

spending permitted by this additional labor supply.

         Our third marginal tax of interest is that on extra saving. The gain from extra

saving can be measured in terms of the impact on future consumption of forgoing a fixed

amount of current consumption. Consider, for example, a two-period (youth and old age)

framework. In the absence of any effective marginal tax on saving, reducing current

consumption when young by $100 would lead to an increase in consumption when old,

measured in present value, of exactly $100. If consumption when old, measured in

present value, rises by only $50, the saver faces a 50 percent marginal net tax on saving.1

         Our analysis involves, of course, households that live for many years, not just two


1 Alternatively, we can say that the tax on future consumption is 100 percent since the price, measured in
present value, of consuming $100 when old has risen from $50 to $100.


                                                     5
periods. When there is more than one period (more than one future year) in which to

consume, there is no standard definition of the effective tax rate on saving. One could,

for example, consider how much reducing this year’s consumption by, say, $100 will

increase the present value of future consumption spending assuming the additional future

spending power is all allocated to next year’s consumption. Alternatively, one could

allocate all the future spending power to consumption 10 years out, or 20 years out, or in

any future year one chooses. One could also spread the extra spending power uniformly

over all future years. Each such choice will generate a different measure of the effective

tax rate. The reason is that the longer one pushes out the allocation of the extra spending

power, the higher will be the effective tax rate thanks to the nature of compounding.

       Our response to this surfeit of computable saving tax rates is to present the saving

rate associated with reducing current consumption and raising all future consumption

levels by the same percentage. More precisely, we compare the present value increase in

future spending that can be financed by a given reduction in current spending assuming

that spending in each future year rises by the same percentage.

       Our final goal is to illustrate the arbitrage opportunities available to households

for saving in either a) 401(k), traditional IRA, or tax-deferred accounts or b) Roth IRAs,

Roth 401(k)s, or other Roth accounts. As described below, we arrange this analysis such

that one can directly compare the arbitrage the arbitrage opportunities from contribution

to tax-deferred accounts with those from contributing to Roth IRAs, Roth 401(k)s, or

other Roth accounts.




                                            6
Accounting for Transfer Payments

        Both marginal earnings and marginal saving can alter the amount of transfers

received, which will, in turn, affect the calculation of effective tax rates. As is well

known, marginal-transfer schedules are highly non-linear.                        For example, in

Massachusetts – the state in which we assume our stylized households reside, a

household is eligible to receive welfare (TAFDC) if its assets are below $2500. If this

household currently receives welfare and holds $2499 in assets, an additional dollar

saved will render it TAFDC-ineligible.            As another example, consider a two-parent

family that earns $25,736 per year in labor income and has two dependent children. In

Massachusetts, this family is eligible to receive nearly $14,000 in transfers, most of

which come from Medicaid.2 Earning an additional dollar or, indeed, an extra penny,

causes the family to lose Medicaid eligibility.

        Accounting for government transfer programs in the estimation of tax rates raises

three issues. One is simply their accurate measurement, which requires taking into

account each program’s eligibility, income, and asset tests.                 This is a significant

undertaking given that ESPlanner does not compute transfer payments apart from Social

Security benefits. As described in the Appendix, our transfer benefit calculator assesses

household eligibility for each of the transfer programs and applies all applicable income

and asset taxes in determining benefit levels.

        The second issue is the fungibility of transfer payments. Certain benefits, like

Medicare and Medicaid, are in-kind and must be consumed in the year received. Others,

like TAFDC and, potentially, Food Stamps are fungible. Ideally, one would want to enter


2 In assuming that eligible households receive average benefits from transfer programs like Medicaid to
particular households we are ignoring the insurance value of these programs


                                                  7
fungible benefits as special receipts in ESPlanner and treat non-fungible benefits as

consumption in the year they are received. But given the time involved in entering a

large number of fungible special receipts in a large number of ESPlanner profiles, we

opted to treat all transfer payments as non-fungible, i.e., as consumed in the year they are

received.

         A third challenge in incorporating transfer payments is identifying the precise

point at which marginal net tax rates spike. As is well known, marginal net tax rates can

be extremely high at certain levels of earnings and saving because of the discontinuous

nature of tax and transfer schedules.3 The examples just sighted in which earning extra

penny of income trigger major losses in TAFCD and Medicaid benefits are cases in point.

Identifying these spikes requires considering very small increments in earnings and

saving in the range of earnings and saving where such spikes are known to occur. Our

initial analysis uses discreet increments equal to the maximum of $100 or 1 percent of

earnings to determine the general pattern of labor supply incentives. We then consider

much smaller increments to determine precisely where marginal net tax rates spike.



Calculating Marginal Net Taxes on Current Labor Supply

         To calculate marginal net tax rates on current labor supply we simply calculate

the marginal income net of taxes and gross of transfer payments that would be generated

from earning additional income in the current year and then assume this additional net

income is spent in the current year.4 To determine how much current net income rises for



3 If one could earn infinitesimal amounts, effective marginal net tax rates in these cases would be infinite.
But since the smallest increment one can earn is a penny, effective marginal net tax rates, while potentially
extremely high, are finite.
4 In maintaining fixed current saving, we’re ensuring no change in future incomes and transfer payments


                                                     8
a given increment in current earnings, we run each of our stylized households through

ESPlanner as well as through our annual transfer benefit calculator twice – first, based on

their initial levels of earnings and then based on an incremented level of earnings.

        Equation (1) provides a formula for the our net tax rate, τ c , on current labor

supply. In the formula, ∆E stands for the change in current-year labor earnings, ∆T for

the change in current-year taxes, ∆X for the change in current-year transfer payments

received, θ s for the state sales tax, and θ e for the rate of federal excise taxation.5


                   ∆E − ∆T + ∆X
(1)      τc = 1−                      .
                   (1 + θ s + θ e )∆E

                                                                                         ∆T − ∆X
Note that the standard formula for the net tax rate on labor supply is τ c =                     . But
                                                                                           ∆E

the standard formula ignores sales and excise taxes; i.e., it treats both θ s and θ e as

equaling zero. This is clearly inappropriate since sales and excise taxes, like income and

payroll taxes, limit the amount of actual consumption (not consumption expenditure) a

worker can enjoy by working more and earning more income.6 Dividing the change in

expenditure associated with additional earnings ( ∆E - ∆T - ∆X ) by the sales- and excise-

tax inclusive consumer price of a dollar of expenditure, (1+ θ s + θ e ), determines how




with one exception – future Social Security benefits. These benefits are potentially changed due to the
presence of higher current earnings in the worker’s ultimate earnings record. Including the impact of these
Social Security benefit changes on current consumption is a goal of our future research. However, it’s
important to bear in mind that Social Security benefit changes, to the extent they arise, can only influence
current spending insofar as the worker (or household to which the worker belongs) is not liquidity
constrained. Many of our stylized households are so constrained.
5 The sales tax in Massachusetts is 5%, and the federal excise tax accounts for approximately 0.9% of
aggregate consumption in the U.S. Hence, we set θ s = 0.05 and θ e = 0.009.
6 Sales and excise taxes also represent taxes on wealth since, like earnings, when wealth is spent, the
spender pays these taxes and ends up getting less actual consumption than would otherwise be the case.


                                                     9
much actual consumption a worker ends up with if she increases her earnings by ∆E .7



Calculating Marginal Net Taxes on Life-Cycle Labor Supply

            We define the net marginal tax on life-cycle labor supply, τ l , in (2).

                              PV∆C
(2)         τl = 1−                         ,
                      (1 + θ s + θ e ) PV∆E

where PV C denotes the change in the present value of total consumption and other “off-

the-top” spending (on housing, insurance premiums, and special expenditures) and PV E

denotes the change in the present value of lifetime earnings arising from a uniform

increase in annual earnings. As discussed in more detail shortly, the discount rate used

to form these present values is the return before both corporate and individual taxes.

            To calculate PV C we a) use ESPlanner to calculate the present value of total

spending (consumption spending, housing spending, special expenditures, and insurance

premiums) given base-case annual earnings and b) add to this present value of total

spending the present value of transfer payments accruing to the household given

ESPlanner’s calculated annual time path of annual total income and assets. Next we

increase annual household earnings by a fixed amount each year (specifically, 1 percent

of each household’s assumed fixed annual real earnings) through retirement and use

ESPlanner plus our transfer calculator to obtain new present values of remaining lifetime

earnings and total spending. Differencing the new and previously derived present values

of total spending provides the numerator in (2). The denominator is determined by

7 In a static setting a worker’s budget constraint is (1+ θ s + θ e )C = w(1- ), where is the sum of income
and payroll tax rates and w is the pre-tax wage. But one can rewrite this constraint as
C = w(1- )/(1+ θ s + θ e ). Letting e stand for the effective tax rate on labor supply, we have C = w(1- e),
where   e
            = 1 - (1- )/(1+ θ s + θ e ), which is the same as equation (1).


                                                           10
simply forming the present value of annual increases in pre-tax and pre-transfer payments

earnings.

         Since ESPlanner smooths households’ living standards subject to borrowing

constraints, it will spend extra earnings in a given year on consumption in all years

provided doing so does not violate the user-specified limit on borrow. For purposes of

calculating τ l we specify this limit at zero. To the extent that borrowing constraints

permit, ESPlanner will freely spend in one year earnings generated in another. In so

doing, the program will alter the time path of regular asset, regular asset income, and

taxes levied on regular asset income. Hence, our tax rate τ l on life-cycle earnings will

pick up more than simply taxes levied on earnings. It will also capture marginal taxation

of saving. Thus, we don’t claim τ l to represent solely a marginal net tax on life-cycle

earnings, but rather a marginal net tax on increased annual earnings that is then subject to

as much consumption smoothing as possible.8



Calculating Effective Marginal Taxes on Regular Saving

         As indicated, we measure the effective tax rate on saving assuming that the

reduction in 2005 spending is allocated uniformly to all future periods such that the living

standard in all future periods rises by the same percentage. To effect this outcome in

ESPlanner we do two things. First, we permit all our stylized households to borrow as

much as the need in order to fully smooth their living standards as well as to use

8 Roughly two-thirds of young American households appear to be liquidity constrained (see Kotlikoff,
Marx, and Rizza, 2006). This doesn’t necessarily mean that they have zero current fungible assets. Instead
it means that their living standard per person in the future will be higher than it is in the present and that
whatever saving they are doing is for purposes of smoothing their living standards in the short or medium
runs. Like typical young households, all but the highest earning of our stylized young households are
liquidity constrained.



                                                     11
additional current saving to effect a uniform rise in their future living standards.9 Second,

we raise the program’s living standard index for all years from 2006 onward by 10

percent and compared the increase in the present value of consumption spending from

2006 onward with the associated reduction in consumption spending in 2005. This

second step leads the program to lower current consumption spending, while increasing

future consumption spending each year by the same percentage, thus effecting a uniform

rise in living standard in all future years.

        The discount rate used to determine the present value change in future

consumption, all measured in 2005 dollars, is 7.0 percent, which is our assumed pre- all

taxes real rate of return. This pre-tax return is the return one would receive before the

application of any federal and state personal or corporate income taxes. In using this

return, we are, in effect, incorporating marginal effective corporate capital income taxes

as well as marginal effective personal capital income taxes.

        To see why one needs to discount at the pre- all taxes return, consider a two-

period framework with lifetime household budget constraint given by

(3)      c y + c o /(1 + r ) = e y + eo /(1 + r ) − T y − To /(1 + r ) .


The return r is pre all taxes. The terms cy and co stand for consumption when young and

old. The terms ey, eo, Ty, and Tc stand, respectively, for pre-tax earnings when young, pre-

tax earnings when old, net taxes paid when young, and net taxes paid when old. Net

taxes here are comprehensive; for example, taxes when old include, in the U.S. context,

corporate income taxes, personal capital income taxes, personal labor income taxes, state


9 In assuming that all of our stylized households are able to borrow, we don’t mean to suggest that such
borrowing is feasible. Instead, we seek to understand how our tax-transfer system affects the incentive to
save were households actually able to do so.


                                                        12
income taxes, payroll taxes, sales taxes, and excise taxes net of all manner of available

transfer payments.

         Consumption, earnings, and taxes when old are discounted at rate r. For a given

reduction in current consumption equal, say, to cy, the marginal net tax rate on saving,

s,   is given by


                 ∆T y + ∆To /(1 + r )
(4)       τs =                          .
                            ∆c y

The formula for         s   tells us the percentage degree to which the present value of future

consumption, co/(1+r), fails to rise by the same amount (in absolute value) that current

consumption falls; i.e., were          s to   equal zero, co/(1+r) would equal - cy according to (3)

under our assumption that e y + eo /(1 + r ) don’t change.

           Note that if one knows r and the value of                           co, one can compute

∆T y + ∆To /(1 + r )                          ∆co /(1 + r )
                            by calculating                  and subtracting 1 from the resulting ratio.
         ∆c y                                   − ∆c y

Now we know r, but how do we determine co? For purposes of this study, the answer is

that we use ESPlanner to determine                    co (actually, the change in each future year’s

consumption).

         To be clear, ESPlanner is operating not off the budget constraint (3), but off the

following budget constraint,

(4)       c y + c o /(1 + r n ) = e y + eo /(1 + r n ) −T y −Ton /(1 + r ) ,

where rn is the return households earn pre-individual capital income taxes, but post

corporate income taxes and Tno are individual income taxes paid when old (i.e., Tno does

not include corporate income tax payments).                        Given the assumed linearity of the


                                                         13
corporate income tax, the two budget constraints (3) and (4) are mutually consistent, so

there is no problem using (4) to determine co and then plugging this amount into the

formula 1 - co/(1+r)/ - cy to form the desired marginal net tax rate on saving. To see

this, write rn = r(1- c), where        c   is the corporate income tax rate. If one substitutes this

expression for rn in (4) and notes that To - Tno = (eo –Ty –cy) r          c   (i.e., the two variables

differ by the amount of the corporate tax revenue), one arrives at (3).



Return Assumptions Used in Running ESPlanner

         In running ESPlanner we enter an 8.33 percent nominal rate of return. Given our

3 percent inflation rate assumption, this translates into a 5.17 percent post-corporate tax

real return.10 We use a 7.0 percent real pre-corporate tax rate of rate (the r in equation

(3)) to do the discounting needed to form tax rates on life-cycle labor supply and saving.

We arrived at these values based on consultations with Jane Gravelle.



Assessing the Tax-Arbitrage Opportunities in Contributing to Retirement Accounts

         So far we’ve considered only marginal net taxation of regular saving. But much

of household saving is currently being done within either 401(k) and other tax-deferred

retirement accounts or within Roth IRAs, Roth 401(k)s, or other Roth accounts.

Contributing to these accounts does not, however, necessarily entail any reduction in

current consumption. Indeed, contributing to these accounts represents a tax arbitrage

opportunity if, as we’ve been assuming, households are not liquidity constrained.

         To assess these tax-arbitrage opportunities we measure the increase in the present

value of all consumption -- current as well as future – per net dollar contributed to either

10 The formula for the real return is actually (1+i)/(1+ )-1.


                                                     14
type of retirement account. The “net” in “per net dollar” refers to the contribution net of

current taxes saved. Thus, if we have a household contribute X to a 401(k) account and it

saves the household Y in current taxes, we define the net dollar contribution to be X–Y.

This is the amount by which the household’s liquid assets are reduced by the transactions.

Since Roth contributions are made before tax and do not affect current taxable income,

we consider contributions of size X-Y in order to maintain comparability with respect to

our analysis of contributions to tax-deferred accounts.

       Our analysis here does not include any marginal employer matching contribution.

The reason is that we want to understand the pure tax arbitrage incentives presented by

retirement “saving” as opposed to the incentive to “save” in retirement accounts

presented by employers.



III. Using ESPlanner to Measure Total Effective Marginal Tax Rates

       The methods discussed above to calculate marginal net taxes on life-cycle labor

supply and on saving require the use of a dynamic life-cycle model that jointly calculates

all future taxes and transfer payments.      ESPlanner is clearly one such model.        It

determines a household’s highest sustainable living standard within each non-liquidity

constrained interval of its life and the consumption, saving, and term life insurance

holdings needed to smooth the household’s living standard within each non-constrained

interval. The program uses dynamic programming in forming its recommendations.

Dynamic programming is needed to deal both with potential borrowing constraints and

with non-negativity constraints on life insurance holdings.

       The program takes into account the following user-specified inputs: the




                                            15
household’s state of residence, current and future planned children and their years of

birth, current and future regular and self-employment earnings, current and future special

expenditures and receipts (as well as their tax status), current and future levels of a

reserve fund, current regular and retirement account balances, current and future own and

employer contributions to retirement accounts (with Roth account contributions treated

separately), current and future primary and vacation home values, mortgages, rental

expenses, and other housing expenditures, current and future states of residence, ages of

retirement account withdrawals, ages of initial Social Security benefit receipt, past and

future covered Social Security earnings, desired funeral expenses and bequests, current

regular saving and life insurance holdings, the economies of shared living, the relative

cost of children, the extent of future changes in Social Security benefits, the extent of

future changes in federal income taxes, FICA taxes, and state income taxes, current and

future pension and annuities (including lump sum and survivor benefits), the degree to

which the household will annuitize its retirement account assets, and values of future

earnings, special expenditures, receipts, and other variables in survivor states in which

either the head or her spouse/partner is deceased.

         The living standard of members of a household is defined by ESPlanner as the

amount of consumption expenditure an adult would need to make to enjoy as a single

person with no children the same living standard she enjoys in the household. The

equation relating a household’s living standard per member to its total consumption

expenditure takes into account economies in shared living and the relative cost of

children.11 Consumption expenditure is defined by ESPlanner as all expenditures apart


11 Let C stand for a household’s total consumption expenditure, s for its living standard per equivalent
adult, ki for the number of children age i, i for relative cost of a child age i, N for the number of adults, and


                                                       16
from special expenditures, such as college tuition for children, housing expenditures,

taxes, life insurance premiums, regular saving, and contributions to retirement accounts.



ESPlanner’s Tax Calculations

           ESPlanner makes highly detailed federal income, FICA, and state-specific

income tax as well as Social Security benefit calculations. These tax and benefit levels

are the only non-user specified variables influencing the program’s consumption

smoothing calculations.

           The program’s federal and state income-tax calculators determine whether the

household should itemize its deductions, compute deductions and exemptions, deduct

from taxable income contributions to tax-deferred retirement accounts, include in taxable

income withdrawals from such accounts as well as the taxable component of Social

Security benefits, check, in the case of federal income taxes, for Alternative Minimum

Tax liability, and calculate total tax liabilities after all applicable refundable and non-

refundable tax credits including the Earned Income Tax Credit, the Child Credit, and the

Saver’s credit. These federal and state tax calculations are made separately for each year

that the couple is alive as well as for each year a survivor may be alive.

           Given the non-linearity of tax functions, one can’t determine a household’s tax

rates in future years without knowing its regular asset and other taxable income in those

years. But one can’t determine how much a household will consume and save and thus

have in asset income in future years without knowing the household’s future taxes.

Hence, there is a chicken and egg problem -- a simultaneity problem -- that needs to be

  for the degree of economies of shared living. The relationship between C and s in a given year
is C   = s ( N + Σθ i k i )ν .
                       i




                                              17
resolved to make sure that consumption and saving decisions are consistent with the

future tax payments they help engender.



ESPlanner’s Social Security Benefit Calculations

       In determining Social Security benefits the program takes full account of the

earnings test, early retirement reduction factors, the delayed retirement credit, the re-

computation of benefits, the family benefit maximum, the phase-in to the system’s

ultimate age-67 normal retirement age, as well as offset and windfall elimination

provisions.

       ESPlanner’s survivor tax and benefit calculations for surviving wives (husbands)

are made separately for each possible date of death of the husband (wife).           I.e.,

ESPlanner considers separately each date the husband (wife) might die and calculates the

taxes and benefits a surviving wife (husband) and her (his) children would receive each

year thereafter. Moreover, in calculating survivor-state specific retirement, survivor,

mother, father, and child dependent and survivor Social Security benefits, ESPlanner

takes account of all the just-mentioned benefit adjustment factors.



Checking the Calculations

       Each component of ESPlanner’s tax code and transfer calculator, whether it be

the basics of the 1040 form, the provisions of the Earned Income Tax Credit, the details

of the Alternative Minimum Tax, the tax treatment of housing capital gains, the taxation

of Social Security benefits, the TAFDC earnings test, the payment in the case of low-

income households of Medicare premiums by Medicaid, etc. -- has been rigorously




                                            18
checked on a component by component basis. This is not to say that no bugs were found.

On the contrary, a goodly number were found thanks to independent checking over the

years by three software engineers and four economists as well as a large number of

ESPlanner users, including professional financial planners, who have examined the tax

and Social Security benefit calculations with extremely sharp eyes.12



ESPlanner’s Algorithm

        ESPlanner generates recommended levels of annual consumption expenditure,

saving, and term life insurance holdings. All recommendations are presented in today’s

dollars. Consumption in this context is everything the household gets to spend after

paying for its “off-the-top” expenditures – its housing expenses, special expenditures, life

insurance premiums, special bequests, taxes, and net contributions to tax-favored

accounts.     Given the household’s demographic information, preferences, borrowing

constraints, and non-negativity constraints on life insurance, ESPlanner calculates the

highest sustainable and smoothest possible living standard over time, leaving the

household with zero terminal assets (apart from the equity in homes that the user has

chosen not to sell) if either the household head, her spouse/partner, or both live to their

maximum ages of life.



12 Indeed, in the case of Social Security benefit calculations, a number of individual users and financial
planners have double checked ESPlanner’s Social Security’s benefit calculations with those produced by
Social Security Administration’s detailed ANYPIA calculator. A number have complained that
ESPlanner’s calculated benefits were too high. As they were told, ESPlanner’s benefit projections accord
precisely with those of the ANYPIA calculator in the case of users whose covered earnings all lie in the
past. But in the case of users with projected future covered earnings, ESPlanner’s projection of future
benefits differ from the ANYPIA’s projection for a simple reason. The ANYPIA calculator assumes no
future rise in the U.S. price level and no future real wage growth. This seems remarkable until one realizes
that the government doesn’t want to be in a position of implicitly promising higher benefits than it knows
for sure it will pay.



                                                    19
        The amount of recommended consumption expenditures needed to achieve a

given living standard varies from year to year in response to changes in the household’s

composition. Moreover, the relationship between consumption and living standard in a

given year is non-linear for two reasons.                First, a non-linear function governs the

program’s assumed economies of shared living, with the function depending on the

number of equivalent adults. Second, the program permits users to specify that children

are less or more expensive than adults in terms of delivering a given living standard. The

default setting is that a child is 70 percent as expensive as an adult. Hence a household

with 2 adults and 2 children is specified, under the default assumptions, to entail 3.4

equivalent adults.

        The program’s recommended consumption also rises when the household moves

from a situation of being liquidity constrained to one of being unconstrained. Finally,

recommended household consumption will change over time if users intentionally

specify, via the program’s standard of living index, that they want their living standard to

change.

        Dealing with the simultaneity issues as well as the borrowing and non-negative

life insurance constraints all within a single dynamic program appears impossible given

the large number of state variables such an approach entails.13                     To overcome this


13 The simultaneity issue with respect to taxes mentioned above is just one of two such issues that need to
be considered. The second is the joint determination of life insurance holdings of potential decedents and
survivors. ESPlanner recognizes that widows and widowers may need to hold life insurance in order to
protect their children’s living standard through adulthood and to cover bequests, funeral expenses, and
debts (including mortgages) that exceed the survivor’s net worth inclusive of the equity on her/his house.
Accordingly, the software calculates these life insurance requirements and reports them in its survivor
reports. However, the more life insurance is purchased by the potential decedent, the less life insurance
survivors will need to purchase, assuming they have such a need. But this means survivors will pay less in
life insurance premiums and have less need for insurance protection from their decedent spouse/partner.
Hence, one can’t determine the potential decedent’s life insurance holdings until one determines the
survivor’s holdings. But one can’t determine the survivor’s holdings until one determines the decedent’s
holdings.


                                                    20
problem, ESPlanner uses an iterative method of dynamic programming. Specifically, the

program has two dynamic programs that pass data to one another on an iterative basis

until they both converge to a single mutually consistent solution to many decimal points

of accuracy.

       One program takes age-specific life insurance premium payments as given and

calculates the household’s consumption smoothing conditional on these payments. The

other program takes the output of this consumption smoothing program -- the living

standard in each year that needs to be protected – as given. This second program

calculates how much life insurance is needed by both potential decedents and their

surviving spouses/partners.

       This iterative procedure also deals with our two simultaneity issues. The trick

here is to form initial guesses of future taxes and survivor life insurance holdings and

update these guesses across successive iterations based on values of these variables

endogenously generated by the program in the previous iteration. When the program

concludes its calculations, current spending is fully consistent with future taxes and vice

versa, and the recommended life insurance holdings of heads and spouses/partners are

fully consistent with the recommended life insurance holdings of survivors.



Accounting for Employer-Paid FICA Taxes and Corporate Income Taxes

       Since users enter their earnings net of employer-paid FICA taxes ESPlanner does

not explicitly calculate these taxes. Nor does it explicitly calculate corporate income

taxes since users enter their expected returns net of such taxes. From an economics

perspective, employer-paid payroll taxes are no less of a burden or a work or saving




                                            21
disincentive than are those paid directly by employees.          Indeed, there is only one

economic difference between employer-paid and employee-paid payroll taxes; employer-

paid payroll taxes are excludable from the calculation of adjusted gross income in

determining federal personal income tax liability, whereas employee-paid payroll taxes

are not.

           Our procedure for including the employer FICA tax is to input into ESPlanner a

given increase in earnings, say X (where X is either an increase in current earnings or an

increase in the present value of future earnings), and compare the associated increase in

spending not with X, but with X plus the additional FICA tax paid on X. This sum

represents the full pre-tax compensation being paid to the household.

           Like employer-paid payroll taxes, corporate income taxes, both federal and state,

also reduce the return to input suppliers. But unlike payroll taxes, where the input supply

is labor, the input supply relevant to the corporate income tax is household saving. This

saving helps finance corporations, and when corporations have to pay taxes, they can’t

pay as high a return to their investors. To capture this discrepancy between the pre- and

post-corporate tax rates of return, we use the pre-corporate tax discussed above in all the

discounting used to form present values. However, in actually running ESPlanner, we

enter the post-corporate return as an input in the program since, to repeat, ESPlanner

doesn’t calculate corporate taxes.




Non-Social Security Transfers

           As indicated, our transfer calculator determines the level of benefits of seven




                                              22
government programs available to residents of Massachusetts: Transitional Aid to

Families with Dependent Children (TAFDC), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Food

Stamps, Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women with Infants and Children

(WIC), Medicare, Medicaid, and Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program

(LIHEAP). For each year of potential life of our stylized households, we consider

whether the household is eligible for the transfer based on it demographics, income, and

assets and, if eligible, compute the appropriate benefit level taking into account any

relevant earnings and asset tests. These provisions can include earnings deductions, net

income adjustments (such as non-reimbursed out-of-pocket medical expenses), child

deductions, and housing deductions. Often the earnings tests are tied explicitly to the

federal poverty lines, which vary by the number of household members.



IV. Our Stylized Households

        Our stylized households consist of either single individuals or married couples,

whose spouses are the same age. We consider households age 30, 45, and 60. Both the

single-headed households and the married households have two children to whom they

gave birth at ages 27 and 29. Table 1 lists key assumptions about the seven single and

seven married households we consider. The single households have initial labor earnings

ranging from $0 to $250,000. For the married couples, the spread is double that of the

singles, i.e., it ranges from $0 to $500,000. All household heads and spouses retire and

start collecting Social Security benefits at age 65. Earnings between the household’s

current (2005) age and retirement at the beginning of age 65 are assumed to remain fixed

in real terms.




                                           23
       Each household is assumed to have a home, a mortgage, and non-mortgage

housing expenses. The 30 year-old households have initial assets equal to a quarter of a

year’s earnings.   The older households are assumed to have the same assets that

ESPlanner determines the 30 year-olds to have at the age at which we consider the older

households. The households are also assumed to incur non-housing expenses, the most

significant component of which is annual college tuition. For ease of implementation,

and to avoid unrealistic profiles, tuition is assumed to be a quarter of a year’s earnings,

subject to a ceiling of $50,000 per child. The households pay these amounts each year for

four years for each child when the child is age 19 to 22.

       The final assumption to discuss concerns longevity. The default assumption in

ESPlanner is that users have maximum ages of life of 100. Since the program is focused

on economic security, this seems appropriate; users may live this long and need to plan

for this eventuality. But for purposes of understanding the marginal net taxes households

pay, on average, the appropriate longevity assumption is expected, rather than maximum

lifespan. Hence, for this analysis, we run the stylized households through ESPlanner

under the assumption that household heads and their spouses or partners live to age 85.

This is greater than current life expectancy at birth, but seems appropriate given that we

are considering households age 30, 45, and 60.



V. Results

       Tables 2 and 3 present our calculated marginal net tax rates on current labor

supply for couples and singles, respectively. The increment we consider in current

earnings is the maximum of $100 or 1 percent of current earnings. Consequently, the




                                             24
marginal net tax rates we compute are relative to this increment. We discuss below

marginal net tax rates over 1 penny increments in earnings.

       The first impression one gets from glancing at these tables is that marginal rates

calculated with respect to the aforementioned discrete earnings increments are either

moderate or high for essentially all households except for very low-earning young and

middle age couples as well as middle aged singles. For all households with $20,000 or

more in annual earnings, marginal net tax rates range from 24 percent to 45 percent.

       The relationship of marginal rates to income is anything but monotonic in

earnings. Nor does it take on the U-shaped pattern suggested by optimal income tax

theory (see Diamond, 1998). Take couples age 30. The marginal rate is –14 percent at

$10,000 in earnings, 42 percent at $20,000, 24 percent at $50,000, 37 percent at $75,000,

46 percent at $150,000, 37 percent at $200,000, and 44 percent at $500,000.

       In addition to anomalous patterns of marginal rates with income, holding age

constant, there are also unusual patterns with respect to age, holding income fixed. Take

singles earning $10,000. Thirty-year old members of this group face a marginal net tax

rate of 72 percent. Were they age 45, their marginal rate would be –10 percent. And

were they 60, their marginal rate would be 39 percent. As another example of the

surprising relationships between age and marginal rates, note that rates fall with age for

couples with $30,000 in earnings, but rise with age for couples with $75,000 in earnings.



Explaining Patterns of Work Incentives by Age and Earnings

       How does one make sense of these findings? Well, the size of each marginal net

tax rate is easily traced to underlying marginal changes in particular taxes or transfer




                                            25
payments. Take, for example, married households age 30 that earn $10,000 per year.

Their –14 percent net tax rate reflects the major marginal subsidy being provided to them

by the Earned Income Tax Credit; this subsidy significantly exceeds the marginal payroll

and sales and excise taxes they pay on additional earnings.14 If this same household were

to earn $20,000, rather than $10,000, its marginal net tax rate would be 42 percent rather

than -14 percent. The reason is that at this higher earnings level, the EITC is being

clawed back at a rate of more than 20 cents on the dollar. In addition, the household

pays, at the margin, FICA and state income taxes and also gets hit by sales and excise

taxes.

         Next consider the $10,000 couple, but at age 60.                      Unlike their younger

counterparts, this couple is no longer eligible for the EITC because it no longer has young

children and its earnings exceed the income cutoff. On the other hand, the couple does

receive Food Stamps. But because it has no young children, the couple is in the Food

Stamps claw back range, where it loses 24 cents in Food Stamps per dollar earned. This

marginal tax in conjunction with the 15.3 employer and employee FICA, the

Massachusetts 5.3 percent income tax, the Massachusetts 5.0 percent sales tax, and the .9

percent assumed federal excise tax rate delivers a net marginal rate of 51 percent.15

         As a third example of one’s ability to precisely trace the anomalous nature of

these marginal net taxes, consider 30 year old singles who earn only $10,000 per year.

Unlike their married counterparts who face a 14 percent subsidy on additional current

earnings, these single households face a 72 percent marginal net tax. The major

difference between the two cases involves the clawback of TADFC. Because the single

14 This household pays no state income tax at the margin.
15 To be clear, there are interactions in the separate marginal net tax provisions, so these rates are not
simply additive for this or any other household.


                                                   26
household’s family size is smaller, it faces the TADFC clawback of 100 cents on the

dollar when it earns $10,000, whereas the married household faces this effective marginal

tax only at a higher earnings level.

       Surprisingly, if the $10,000 single household is age 45 rather than age 30, the

marginal net tax is –10 percent rather than 72 percent.           What explains this huge

difference? The answer has to do with the TAFDC benefit. Because the 45 year-old

single household has older children, it no longer qualifies for the TAFDC daycare

allowance or, consequently, any TAFDC benefits.         At the margin it therefore faces no

TAFDC clawback tax. On the other hand, its earnings are so low that it’s in the Earned

Income Tax Credit’s positive subsidy range. This subsidy is sufficiently high to produce

a negative net marginal tax on labor supply notwithstanding the state, FICA, sales, and

excise taxes this household must pay on marginal earnings.

       If we advance this household’s age by another 15 years and consider it at age 60,

we find it again faces a very high, positive marginal net tax, in this case 39 percent.

Because this household’s children are now grown, it finds itself in the EITC clawback

range, which contributes significantly to the total net marginal tax it faces.

       Tracing each household’s marginal net tax on supplying more current earnings is

one thing. Understanding why anyone would intentionally design a fiscal system with

such a bizarre pattern of work incentives by age and earnings is another. The explanation

is that these patterns are unintended. Indeed, for federal and state government officials to

have intentionally designed these incentives would have required them to know what they

were doing. But, to our understanding, this is the very first study to have incorporated all




                                              27
of the major federal and state tax-transfer programs.16 Thus, those who designed this

sausage could literally not have known what they were doing.

        But why didn’t they try to find out? The answer is that no single government body

is responsible for the overall structure of our fiscal incentives. Instead, the twenty or so

major tax-transfer programs/provisions that combine to produce these bizarre incentives

are being set by various federal and state governmental committees/bodies each of whom

ignore, for the most part, the workings of the others and focus only on the details of the

program/provision over which they have responsibility.



Marginal Net Tax Rates on Life-Cycle Labor Supply

        Table 4 presents marginal life-cycle net tax rates for our 30-year old households.

In these calculations, the increment in annual earnings is the maximum of $100 or 1

percent of each year’s earnings. First consider couples. Their net tax rates are generally

similar to the current marginal tax rates reported in Table 2 for 30 year-old couples. The

main differences occur at $10,000, $50,000, and $500,000 in income. At these income

rates the life-cycle net tax rates are significantly higher than the current-year rates. This

is not to suggestion that life-cycle rates are always higher for given income levels. There

are several income levels in tables 2 and 4 at which the life-cycle rates are lower.

        For single households age 30, life-cycle and current-year marginal rates are very

different for earnings below $125,000, but quite similar at that level of earnings and

above. Take the $10,000 earnings case. The current-year marginal net tax rate is 72

16 To its credit, the Congressional Budget Office has been providing Congress with detailed studies of
marginal effective federal income tax rates. But Congressional Budget Office (2005) and prior studies do
not include state income taxes, sales or excise taxes, or any of the seven major transfer programs included
here. Moreover, these studies do not use a dynamic/intertemporal model and, consequently, can not
address saving or life-cycle labor supply incentives.



                                                    28
percent, whereas the life-cycle rate is only 2 percent. At $75,000 in earnings, the life-

cycle rate is 76 percent, whereas the current-year rate is 37 percent. Part of what is going

on here is that low-income households that are eligible for Medicaid, TAFDC, and other

welfare benefits in the current year will not be receiving these benefits throughout their

lives because of changes in their household demographics and levels of non-labor

income.



Budget Constraints

        Now that we’ve provided a broad brush overview of marginal net tax rates

measured over discrete intervals, we turn to a more detailed analysis of the highly non-

linear and complex budget constraints facing typical earners. The figures at the end of

the paper show current year and lifetime budget constraints. The current year budget

constraints relate current year net income to current year gross income. The slope of this

constraint determines the current year marginal net tax rate.                   The lifetime budget

constraints show how the present value of lifetime spending varies with annual real

earnings, where we’re assuming the same annual earnings in all years of work.17 The

slope of this budget constraint determines what we’ve been referring to as the life-cycle

marginal net tax rate. We also present figures indicating marginal net tax rates on current

labor supply as well as the marginal net tax rates on life-cycle labor supply confronting

30 year-old households.

        Take, as an example, the figure relating current net income to current gross

income for 45 year-old couples. And consider a $25,000 initial total household earnings


17 The present value of lifetime spending includes here the present value of non-Social Security transfer
payments, which, to recall, we are treating as being consumed/spent in the year received.


                                                   29
level, which is close to what the head and spouse would collectively earn were they to

work full time at the minimum wage. This income places the couple about 30 percent

above the federal poverty line, but is low enough that the whole family is eligible for

Medicaid benefits in Massachusetts.      Recall that this household has two dependent

children, both of whom are college bound. It also has a $75,000 house with a fifteen year

remaining mortgage whose balance is just over $30,000.

       Because of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), Medicaid, and other benefits

provided by federal and state transfer programs, this household has net income of just

over $40,000 per year. If the couple earns additional wage income, several things will

happen. First, every additional dollar earned will generate a clawback of the EITC at the

rate of 21 cents per dollar earned.      More importantly, if the couple earns enough

additional income, it will lose eligibility for roughly $15,000 in Medicaid benefits. The

figure showing marginal net tax rates levied on this household’s current labor supply

identify where these rates become extremely high. This occurs at points where the

households’ incomes exceed income-test thresholds for the various transfer programs.

       One way to appreciate the size of work disincentives facing this household is to

ask how much more it must earn, after losing all its benefits, to achieve the same living

standard it enjoys when earning $25,000 and receiving all its benefits. The answer is

roughly $50,000. I.e., the couple has to double its earnings simply to break even with

respect to maintaining its living standard. Such high net taxes apply to all low-income

households, regardless of age or marital status.

       The life-cycle labor supply budget figures as well as their associate marginal net

tax-rate diagrams also indicate kinks and high rates of marginal net taxes but these kinks




                                             30
and high rates don’t necessarily line up with those associated with current labor supply.

These life-cycle figures tell us not just about the incentives to work more each year, but

also about the incentives to take costly steps, such as enhancing one’s education or

switching to a more demanding job, that will raise one’s annual earnings for a given level

of labor supply by raising one’s hourly wage rate.

       To further appreciate the nature of life-cycle labor supply disincentives, consider

our 60 year-old couple earning only $10,000. For this couple earning $55,000 a year for

the duration of its working life is only marginally better than earning $10,000. The

$10,000/yr household has remaining lifetime spending of $473,000 whereas the

$55,000/yr household will spend $480,000. As can be seen in the figure below, all

households with incomes between $10,000 and $55,000 will have lower remaining

lifetime spending than the $10,000 household. The reason is simple: between $12,000

and $13,000/yr in income, the couple loses its Medicaid benefits in retirement, thanks to

the Medicaid asset test, and between $17,000 and $18,000/yr in income it loses Medicaid

benefits from age 60-65. These losses (which occur every year between age 60 and death)

amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars in present value.

       Younger households face similar life-cycle budget constraints, but the life-cycle

labor supply disincentives are considerably smaller. This is because Medicaid

expenditures comprise a larger fraction of remaining lifetime consumption at age 60 than

age 30 or 45. Discounting these future losses to present value and recognizing that

younger couples have far more years of working over which to make up the transfer

losses makes clear why younger households are not as adversely affected. For 30 year old

couples and singles, they must earn $10,000 to $15,000/yr more to overcome their loss of




                                            31
Medicaid when it occurs; 45 year olds must earn $15,000-25,000/yr more; and, to repeat,

60 year olds must earn $25,000-$45,000/yr more.



Measuring Marginal Net Taxes on Saving

       Tables 5 and 6 present our marginal net tax rates on regular and retirement

account saving by age and earnings levels. The increment in current saving we consider

ranges from $500 to $5,500 depending on the household’s earnings level. Consider first

the regular saving findings for couples. Most of the net tax rates fall in the range of 20

to 40 percent. The highest rate is 52 percent, which applies to 30 year-old households

making $500,000 per year.        This is part of a pattern for young and middle-aged

households in which the net tax rate on regular saving rises with income. But for 60

year-old couples, the rate is 39 percent at the lowest earnings level, then falls to 22

percent and then climbs to 36 percent for households with $500,000 in earnings.

       The regular saving net tax rates for singles are far a-field from those for couples.

For very low-earning, young and middle aged singles, the rates are astronomical

reflecting the impact of asset tests on various transfer benefits. At higher incomes and at

older ages, the rates range from around 20 percent to around 40 percent. Above $34,000

in annual earnings these rates generally rise.



Measuring Retirement Account Tax Arbitrage Opportunities

       Tables 5 and 6 present our findings on tax arbitrage via contributions to tax-

deferred retirement accounts, which we reference as “401(k)”-type accounts and Roth

accounts. As indicated above, the results are presented in terms of cents of arbitrage gain




                                             32
per dollar of net contribution.

        Take, as an example, the 401(k) results for our 45 year-old couples with $70,000

in total annual household earnings. At the margin, these households can increase the

present value of their lifetime consumption by 23.3 cents for every dollar they contribute

on net (net of their immediate tax savings) to a tax-deferred retirement account. This is a

significant money machine. But it’s de minimis compared with the 154.7 cent money

machine available to 30 year-old couples with $500,000 in annual earnings. On the other

hand, it’s huge compared with the .7 cent money machine available to 30-year old single

households with earnings of $15,000.

        As the two tables indicate, the arbitrage opportunities are greatest for high-earning

young and middle-aged households and for older households. That said, the pattern of

arbitrage opportunities by age and earnings is far from monotonic with respect to either

age or by earnings. Take singles households with $35,000 in annual earnings. The size

of their 401(k) money machine is 16.3 cents at age 30, 64.9 cents at age 45, and 32.0

cents at age 60. Or consider couples age 60. If they earn $20,000 per year in total, their

401(k) money machine generates 171.1 cent per net dollar contributed. With $70,000 in

annual earnings, their 401(k) machine produces only 28.0 cents per net dollar

contributed. But at $500,000 in annual earnings, the machine has improved. It now

produces 49.2 cents per net dollar contributed.

        The Roth arbitrage opportunities are uniformly smaller than the 401(k)-type

arbitrage opportunities.18 Nonetheless, they can be quite substantial. For example, 45-

year old singles earning $100,000 per year stand to receive 32.1 cents per dollar placed in


18 This analysis abstracts from potential future tax hikes that could significantly limit the marginal
arbitrage gain available from contributing to tax-deferred retirement accounts.


                                                 33
a Roth account.19        The top Roth arbitrage opportunity is that of couples age 30 with

$500,000 in annual earnings. Their money machine generates 121.9 cents for free for

each dollar they place in a Roth account.

        As in the case of marginal net tax rates on labor supply and saving, one can

decipher the reason a particular arbitrage opportunity is of a given size. In this regard,

the 5.7 cent and 171.1 cent respective arbitrage opportunities of 30 and 60 year-old

couples earning $20,000 are worth comparing. The 30 year-olds have zero (or very small

positive) federal tax obligations at age 30, before considering the EITC.                        To take

advantage of the federal Saver’s Credit, they must be paying positive federal taxes.

        The Saver’s Credit, enacted in 2001, matches low-income households’ retirement

account contributions by as much as dollar for dollar, but it does so by reducing their tax

payments to the extent these payments are positive; i.e., the Saver’s Credit is not

refundable, making many low-income households ineligible for it.

        Our 60 year-old couple with $20,000 is low-income, but is eligible for the Saver’s

Credit. The reason is that the couple no longer has dependent children. With fewer

deductions, its adjusted gross income is higher than that of its 30 year-old analogue,

resulting in a higher (positive) federal tax liability. So when these households contribute

to a 401(k) vehicle, they not only reduce their current taxes by exempting their

contribution to the 401(k) from their taxable income; they also reduce them because of

the Saver’s Credit. These factors, in combination with the fact that these households will

be in very low tax brackets in the future, explain the fantastic size of this arbitrage

opportunity.


19 Note that all contributions to Roth accounts are on a net basis because there is no reduction in current
taxes associated with adding to one’s Roth account.


                                                    34
        Interestingly, the same age-60 couple has a much smaller arbitrage potential if it

contributes not to a 401(k)-type vehicle, but to a Roth account. In this case, the money

machine spews forth only 47.5 cents per dollar contributed. The reasons this machine

does so poorly compared to the 401(k) machine number two.                   First, the Roth

contributions generate no immediate reduction in taxes. Hence, there is no ability, as

there is with the 401(k) contribution, to arbitrage between current high and future low

marginal tax brackets. Second, each dollar of net contribution to a 401(k) entails a larger

gross contribution than in the case of a contribution to a Roth account. Since the Saver’s

Credit is paid on the basis of the gross contribution, not the net contribution, a given net

contribution to a 401(k)-type account generates a much larger Saver’s Credit than does

the same size net contribution made to a Roth account.

        Another comparison between arbitrage incentives that’s worth making is that

between 45 year-old 401(k) contributing couples who earn $25,000 per year and those

who earn $35,000. The lower-earning couple is again not eligible to receive the Saver’s

Credit because of its negligible federal tax obligations, whereas the higher earning couple

is so eligible.

        A final arbitrage opportunity worth highlighting is that of 30 year-old couples

with $500 in total annual earnings. These couples can earn 154.7 cents for free per net

dollar placed in a 401(k)-type account. This reflects the value of their current tax saving,

the fact that they are in much lower tax brackets in the future, and their ability to benefit

from tax-deferral (the ability to earn capital income on a tax-free basis). As the size of

the corresponding Roth arbitrage opportunity makes clear, the deferral advantage for this

household is significant.




                                             35
V. Conclusion

        The study of effective marginal tax rates is hardly new.20 Nor is the observation

that transfer programs can dramatically affect effective marginal tax rate calculations, and

that marginal rates depend critically and sensitively on household demographic and

economic circumstances. But what is new here is the inclusion in one study of all the

major tax and transfer programs/elements that materially affect incentives to work and

save. On the tax side, this list includes federal and state personal income, corporate

income, sales and excise, and payroll taxes. On the transfer side, the list includes Social

Security, Medicare, Medicaid, Food Stamps, and TAFDC benefits.

        America’s tax-transfer system confronts the vast majority of American

households with either high, very high, or astronomically high total effective marginal tax

rates on labor supply and saving.            It also provides very substantial tax arbitrage

opportunities to a subset of households, particularly those with high incomes or advanced

ages.

        The pattern of net marginal tax rates and arbitrage opportunities with respect to

age, marital status, and earnings is quite simply all over the map. But this is what one

would expect given the amazing complexity of the fiscal system, the fact that the various

components of the system are being developed with little or no thought to their

interaction, and that the various governmental bodies responsible for the different

elements of our tax-transfer system appear to make little or no attempt to understand the

overall work and saving disincentives as well as arbitrage opportunities they are


20 Recent contributions to the literature on marginal net tax rates include CBO (2005) and Feenberg and
Poterba (2003).


                                                  36
producing.




             37
                                    References

Congressional Budget Office, “Effective Marginal Taxes on Labor Income,” November
2005.

Diamond, Peter, “Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern for
the Optimal Marginal Rates,” American Economic Review, 88 (1), March 1998, 83-95.

Feenberg, Daniel and James Poterba, “The Alternative Minimum Tax and Effective
Marginal Tax Rates,” NBER Working Paper No. 10072, April 2003.

Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Alexi Sluchynsky, “Does It Pay to
Work,” NBER Working Paper no. 9095, August 2002.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Ben Marx, and Pietro Rizza, “Americans’ Dependency on Social
Security,” Boston University, 2006. posted at
http://people.bu.edu/kotlikof/Americans%27%20Dependency%20on%20Social%20Secur
ity1.pdf




                                         38
                                           Table 1

                           Characteristics of Stylized Households


                                     Single Households

   Total
                         Annual                                  Monthly     Annual
  Annual    Assets at              House                                                Annual Home
                        College                 Mortgage         Mortgage   Property
Household    Age 30                Value                                                Maintenance
                        Expense                                  Payment     Taxes
 Earnings
 $10,000     $2,500     $2,500     $30,000          $24,000        $300      $300          $150

 $15,000     $3,750     $3,750     $45,000          $36,000        $450      $450          $225

 $25,000     $6,250     $6,250     $75,000          $60,000        $750      $750          $375

 $35,000     $8,750     $8,750    $105,000          $84,000       $1,050     $1,050        $525

 $50,000    $12,500     $12,500   $150,000          $120,000      $1,500     $1,500        $750

$100,000    $25,000     $25,000   $300,000          $240,000      $3,000     $3,000       $1,500

$250,000    $62,500     $50,000   $750,000          $600,000      $7,500     $7,500       $3,750

                                    Married Households

   Total
                         Annual                                  Monthly      Annual      Annual
  Annual    Assets at               House
                        College                     Mortgage     Mortgage    Property      Home
Household    Age 30                 Value
                        Expense                                  Payment      Taxes     Maintenance
 Earnings
 $20,000     $5,000     $5,000     $60,000           $48,000       $600       $600          $300

 $30,000     $7,500     $7,500     $90,000           $72,000       $900       $900          $450

 $50,000     $12,500    $12,500    $150,000         $120,000       $1,500     $1,500        $750

 $70,000     $17,500    $17,500    $210,000         $168,000       $2,100     $2,100       $1,050

$100,000     $25,000    $25,000    $300,000         $240,000       $3,000     $3,000       $1,500

$200,000     $50,000    $50,000    $600,000         $480,000       $6,000     $6,000       $3,000

$500,000    $125,000    $50,000   $1,500,000        $1,200,000    $15,000    $15,000       $7,500




                                               39
                                                                Table 2
                       Marginal Net Tax Rates on Current-Year Labor Supply (Couples)

                                                 Total Annual Household Earnings ($000s)

Age          10         20            30            50            75              100            150           200          300          500
30          -14.2%     42.5%        42.3%          24.4%        36.9%            37.0%          45.9%      36.8%        43.9%        44.0%
45          -11.4%     41.7%        41.8%          35.8%        36.1%            36.1%          45.1%      35.9%        40.9%        43.2%
60          50.9%      32.0%        36.3%          36.5%        45.5%            45.5%          47.7%      43.2%        45.8%        45.0%




                                                                Table 3
                        Marginal Net Tax Rates on Current-Year Labor Supply (Singles)

                                                 Total Annual Household Earnings ($000s)

Age          10         20            30            50            75              100            125           150          200          250

30          72.3%      42.9%        42.9%          37.0%        37.0%            36.1%          36.2%      36.9%        42.0%        41.5%

45          -9.8%      42.9%        42.6%          37.0%        36.9%            36.1%          36.1%      36.9%        42.0%        41.5%

60          39.5%      37.3%        37.7%          46.4%        45.5%            38.8%          38.8%      44.0%        45.0%        44.0%




                                                                Table 4
                                  Marginal Net Tax Rates on Life-Cycle Labor Supply

                                                            Couples
                                       Total Annual Household Earnings ($000s)

      10          20         30             50             75              100            150            200          300          500
     2.1%      40.2%      40.1%            32.3%         36.6%            33.3%          42.2%          41.6%        42.8%        49.6%

                                                                Singles
                                       Total Annual Household Earnings ($000s)

      10          20         30             50             75              100            125            150          200          250
     0.8%      34.7%      36.7%            32.6%         34.6%            39.5%          37.3%          37.7%        40.3%        41.3%




                                                                   40
                                      Table 5

                     The Marginal Net Taxation of Saving

                                     Couples

                     Marginal Effective Tax on Regular Saving

                        Total Household Annual Income ($000s)

Age    20       30            50         70        100           200      500

30    20.5%    20.1%        20.5%      23.3%      24.9%         32.0%    51.5%

45    20.1%    21.4%        22.0%      22.6%      25.9%         30.3%    43.4%

60    38.6%    22.1%        22.0%      27.9%      34.1%         34.3%    36.5%

                            401(k) Arbitrage Opportunity

                        Total Household Annual Income ($000s)

Age    20       30            50         70        100           200      500

30     5.7¢     5.6¢         5.9¢       8.6¢      20.4¢         53.9 ¢   154.7¢

45     6.2¢     7.5¢         24.1¢     23.3¢      21.4¢         44.1¢    79.9¢

60    171.1¢   183.9¢        46.4¢     28.0¢      36.1¢         47.7¢    49.2%

                            Roth Arbitrage Opportunity

                        Total Household Annual Income ($000s)

Age    20       30            50         70        100           200      500

30     1.1¢     0.9¢         1.2¢       3.9¢      19.1¢         33.4¢    121.9¢

45     1.1¢     2.9¢         4.0¢       4.4¢      17.6¢         30.8¢    57.0¢

60    47.5¢    48.0¢         16.2¢     15.6¢      25.3¢         23.9¢    27.8¢




                                        41
                                     Table 6

                   The Marginal Net Taxation of Saving

                                     Singles

                   Marginal Effective Tax on Regular Saving

                       Total Household Annual Income ($000s)

Age     10       15           25         35         50          100     250

30    82.7%    260.4%       18.8%      18.7%      20.4%        25.5%   30.6%
45    109.4%   19.6%        19.7%      20.1%      20.2%        30.7%   39.2%
60    20.5%    41.4%        22.0%      23.4%      30.3%        37.6%   35.8%

                           401(k) Arbitrage Opportunity

                       Total Household Annual Income ($000s)

Age     10       15           25         35         50          100     250

30     1.0¢     0.7¢         5.5¢      16.4¢       5.4¢        31.0¢   73.4¢
45     5.8¢     5.9¢         6.6¢      64.9¢       18.0¢       33.8¢   69.4¢
60    47.7¢    76.2¢        64.1¢      32.0¢       42.0¢       33.6¢   55.4¢

                           Roth Arbitrage Opportunity

                       Total Household Annual Income ($000s)

Age     10       15           25         35         50          100     250

30     1.0¢     0.7¢         0.6¢       0.6¢       2.2¢        28.6¢   53.3¢
45     1.3¢     0.9¢         1.7¢       9.6¢       1.4¢        32.1¢   50.6¢
60     7.1¢    23.9¢        35.0¢       9.6¢       18.2¢       28.0¢   26.5¢




                                       42
Summary Graphs:
COUPLES
                                                                           Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                         30 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

                       60



                                           Net Income
                       50                                                                                          Loss of
                                           Net Income = Gross Income
                                                                                                                    Parent          Loss of
                                                                                                                   Medicaid         Children
 .




                                                                    Loss of TAFDC                                                   Medicaid
                       40                                            due to asset
                                                                         test
 Net Income ($'000s)




                       30

                                        Loss of Food
                                          Stamps

                       20




                       10




                       -
                                0   2      4        6    8   10    12    14   16    18   20      22    24    26    28   30    32    34     36     38    40   42    44     46     48    50
                                                                                               Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                           Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                        30 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

                       500


                       450


                       400
                                           Net Income
 .




                       350                 Net Income = Gross Income

                       300
 Net Income ($'000s)




                       250


                       200


                       150


                       100


                           50


                       -
                                0   25         50       75   100   125     150     175   200     225       250    275   300   325    350        375    400   425    450        475    500
                                                                                               Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                      43
                                                                 Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                          30 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

120%

             Loss of Food
            Stamps results
100%           in infinite                                                                                                Loss of Child
                effective                    End reduction in                                                           Medicaid results in
             marginal tax                    TAFDC (lost due                                                             infinite effective
                                              to asset test)                                                               marginal tax
80%

                                                                         Loss of Parent
               Start                                                   Medicaid results in
60%           marginal                                                  infinite effective
            reduction in                                                  marginal tax
              TAFDC
                                                                                                                                                              End EITC
40%                                                                                                                                                           clawback



20%



                                                          Enter EITC
 0%                                                        clawback
                                                             range


-20%
       0      2.5     5      7.5       10      12.5        15     17.5       20      22.5       25     27.5       30     32.5       35     37.5       40     42.5       45     47.5       50
                                                                                   Annual Income ($000's)



                                                                 Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                           30 Year Old Couples $50,000-$500,000/yr

120%



100%




80%



60%



40%



20%



 0%



-20%
       50

            65

                 80

                      95

                           110

                                 125

                                       140

                                              155

                                                    170

                                                           185

                                                                 200

                                                                       215

                                                                             230

                                                                                    245

                                                                                          260

                                                                                                275

                                                                                                      290

                                                                                                            305

                                                                                                                  320

                                                                                                                        335

                                                                                                                              350

                                                                                                                                    365

                                                                                                                                          380

                                                                                                                                                395

                                                                                                                                                      410

                                                                                                                                                            425

                                                                                                                                                                  440

                                                                                                                                                                        455

                                                                                                                                                                              470

                                                                                                                                                                                    485

                                                                                                                                                                                          500




                                                                                   Annual Income ($000's)




                                                                                            44
                                                                       PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                     30 Year Old Couples

                                 800

                                                      PV Lifetime Spending with Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
                                 700                  PV Lifetime Spending No Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
 .




                                                                                                             Loss of child Medicaid
                                 600                                                                       results in infinite effective
                                                                                                                  marginal tax
 PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                 500



                                 400



                                 300
                                                                                                             Loss of child Medicaid
                                                                                                           results in infinite effective
                                 200                                                                              marginal tax


                                 100



                                   0
                                        0   2.5   5       7.5    10    12.5   15    17.5    20    22.5     25     27.5     30     32.5     35   37.5   40   42.5   45   47.5   50
                                                                                            Annual Gross Incom e ($'000s)




                                                                       PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                     30 Year Old Couples

                                 8000


                                 7000
                                                          PV Lifetime Spending with Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
.




                                                          PV Lifetime Spending No Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
                                 6000
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                 5000


                                 4000


                                 3000


                                 2000



                                 1000


                                   0
                                                          5
                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                                                          0
                                                                          5
                                  15
                                  30
                                              45
                                              60
                                                        75
                                                        90
                                   0




                                                       10
                                                       12
                                                                       13
                                                                       15
                                                                       16
                                                                       18
                                                                       19
                                                                       21
                                                                       22
                                                                       24
                                                                       25
                                                                       27
                                                                       28
                                                                       30
                                                                       31
                                                                       33
                                                                       34
                                                                       36
                                                                       37
                                                                       39
                                                                       40
                                                                       42
                                                                       43
                                                                       45
                                                                       46
                                                                       48
                                                                       49




                                                                                            Annual Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                     45
                                                               Marginal Lifetime Effective Tax Rate
                                                               30 Year Old Couples $0-$50,000/yr

120%
                                                                 Loss of parent Medicaid
                                                                results in infinite effective                      Loss of child Medicaid
                                                                       marginal tax                              results in infinite effective
100%
                                                                                                                        marginal tax
                        Loss of food
                       stamps due to
                         asset test
80%



60%



40%



20%



 0%



-20%
       0                               10                                  20                                   30                                  40                                  50
                                                                                 Annual Income ($000's)



                                                           Marginal Lifetime Effective Tax Rate
                                                         30 Year Old Couples $50,000-$500,000/yr

120%



100%




80%



60%



40%



20%



 0%



-20%
       50

            65

                 80

                      95

                           110

                                 125

                                       140

                                             155

                                                   170

                                                         185

                                                               200

                                                                     215

                                                                           230

                                                                                  245

                                                                                        260

                                                                                              275

                                                                                                    290

                                                                                                          305

                                                                                                                320

                                                                                                                      335

                                                                                                                            350

                                                                                                                                  365

                                                                                                                                        380

                                                                                                                                              395

                                                                                                                                                    410

                                                                                                                                                          425

                                                                                                                                                                440

                                                                                                                                                                      455

                                                                                                                                                                            470

                                                                                                                                                                                  485

                                                                                                                                                                                        500




                                                                                 Annual Income ($000's)




                                                                                         46
                                                                                   Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                                45 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

                      60




                      50                                 Net Income
                                                                                                                                       Lose parent
                                                         Net Income = Gross Income
                                                                                                                                        Medicaid
.




                      40
Net Income ($'000s)




                      30



                                                                                                                                   Lose child
                      20                                                                                                            Medicaid




                      10




                      -
                               0
                                   1.5
                                         3
                                              4.5
                                                     6
                                                         7.5
                                                               9
                                                                   10.5
                                                                          12
                                                                               13.5
                                                                                      15
                                                                                           16.5
                                                                                                  18
                                                                                                        19.5
                                                                                                               21
                                                                                                                    22.5
                                                                                                                           24
                                                                                                                                25.5
                                                                                                                                        27
                                                                                                                                             28.5
                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                         31.5
                                                                                                                                                                33
                                                                                                                                                                      34.5
                                                                                                                                                                             36
                                                                                                                                                                                  37.5
                                                                                                                                                                                         39
                                                                                                                                                                                              40.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     42
                                                                                                                                                                                                          43.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      46.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   49.5
                                                                                                               Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                   Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                                45 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

                      500


                      450


                      400
                                                     Net Income
.




                      350                            Net Income = Gross Income


                      300
Net Income ($'000s)




                      250


                      200


                      150


                      100


                          50


                      -
                               0         25         50    75       100     125        150         175      200       225        250       275       300         325      350       375        400     425        450         475      500
                                                                                                                 Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                                       47
                                                        Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                 45 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

100%



                                                                           Lose                           Lose child
80%                                                                       parent                           Medicaid
                                                                         Medicaid



60%




40%

                                                                   Enter EITC
                                                                    clawback                        End EITC                    Lose
                                                                      range                         clawback                  LIHEAP
20%
                                                                                                      range

                                                  EITC transfers
                                                     plateau
 0%




-20%
       0    2        4    6    8     10    12   14     16     18    20     22     24     26   28     30      32    34   36    38     40   42    44     46    48   50
                                                                         Annual Income ($000's)



                                                           Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                     45 Year Old Couples $50,000-$500,000/yr

100%




80%




60%




40%




20%




 0%




-20%
       50       75       100   125        150   175     200        225      250        275    300      325        350   375        400    425    450        475   500
                                                                          Annual Income ($000's)




                                                                                  48
                                                                     PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                   45 Year Old Couples

                                700



                                600
.




                                500                                                        Lose
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                                                                         Medicaid in
                                                                                         middle age

                                400


                                                        Lose SSI,
                                300                   Medicaid, and
                                                     some Medicare
                                                      when old, and
                                                     food stamps in
                                200                    middle age                                             PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                                              No Tax

                                100



                                 0
                                                          10

                                                               12

                                                                      14

                                                                            16

                                                                                 18

                                                                                      20

                                                                                            22

                                                                                                  24

                                                                                                         26

                                                                                                               28

                                                                                                                    30

                                                                                                                            32

                                                                                                                                 34

                                                                                                                                       36

                                                                                                                                             38

                                                                                                                                                  40

                                                                                                                                                        42

                                                                                                                                                             44

                                                                                                                                                                   46

                                                                                                                                                                         48

                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                 0

                                       2

                                           4

                                                6

                                                     8




                                                                                            Annual Gross Incom e ($'000s)




                                                                     PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                   45 Year Old Couples

                                6000



                                                          PV Lifetime Spending with Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
                                5000
                                                          PV Lifetime Spending No Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
.
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                4000




                                3000




                                2000




                                1000




                                  0
                                       0   25   50       75    100    125    150   175     200    225    250     275     300     325   350    375      400   425   450    475   500
                                                                                           Annual Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                    49
                                                                                Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                             60 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

                      60




                      50

                                                  Net Income
.




                                                  Net Income = Gross Income
                      40
Net Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                             Loss of
                      30                                                                                     Medicaid
                                                                                                             Benefits



                      20




                      10




                      -
                                                            10

                                                                 12

                                                                         14

                                                                                   16

                                                                                          18

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                           22

                                                                                                                  24

                                                                                                                         26

                                                                                                                                   28

                                                                                                                                          30

                                                                                                                                                     32

                                                                                                                                                           34

                                                                                                                                                                   36

                                                                                                                                                                             38

                                                                                                                                                                                   40

                                                                                                                                                                                           42

                                                                                                                                                                                                     44

                                                                                                                                                                                                            46

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   48

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                          0

                               2

                                        4

                                             6

                                                       8




                                                                                                            Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                             60 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

                      500


                      450


                      400
                                             Net Income
.




                      350                    Net Income = Gross Income
Net Income ($'000s)




                      300


                      250


                      200


                      150


                      100


                          50


                      -
                               0
                                   15
                                        30
                                             45
                                                  60
                                                       75
                                                            90
                                                                 105
                                                                       120
                                                                             135
                                                                                   150
                                                                                         165
                                                                                               180
                                                                                                     195
                                                                                                           210
                                                                                                                 225
                                                                                                                       240
                                                                                                                             255
                                                                                                                                   270
                                                                                                                                         285
                                                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                     315
                                                                                                                                                           330
                                                                                                                                                                 345
                                                                                                                                                                       360
                                                                                                                                                                             375
                                                                                                                                                                                   390
                                                                                                                                                                                         405
                                                                                                                                                                                               420
                                                                                                                                                                                                     435
                                                                                                                                                                                                           450
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 465
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       480
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             495




                                                                                                           Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                                   50
                                                          Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                   60 Year Old Couples Earning $0-$50,000/yr

100%




80%



                                                                      Loss of
60%                                                                   Medicaid
                                                                      Benefits



40%



                                     End Food
20%                                   Stamps
                                     clawback



 0%




-20%
                                10

                                        12

                                              14

                                                   16

                                                         18

                                                              20

                                                                    22

                                                                         24

                                                                              26

                                                                                    28

                                                                                          30

                                                                                               32

                                                                                                    34

                                                                                                          36

                                                                                                               38

                                                                                                                     40

                                                                                                                          42

                                                                                                                                44

                                                                                                                                     46

                                                                                                                                          48

                                                                                                                                                50
  0

            2

                4

                     6

                           8




                                                                    Annual Income ($000's)



                                                            Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                      60 Year Old Couples $50,000-$500,000/yr

100%




80%




60%




40%




20%




 0%




-20%
       50       75   100       125      150     175     200   225     250     275   300      325    350    375      400   425    450      475   500
                                                                    Annual Income ($000's)




                                                                            51
                                                                      PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                    60 Year Old Couples

                                 500

                                                                                    Loss of
                                 450
                                                                                   Medicaid
                                                                                 Benefits in old
                                 400                                              age (65yrs+)
 .




                                 350                                                        Loss of Medicaid
 PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                                                                           Benefits (60-65yrs)
                                 300


                                 250


                                 200


                                 150


                                 100
                                                                                                                      PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                  50                                                                                  No Tax


                                   0
                                                           10

                                                                 12

                                                                       14

                                                                            16

                                                                                  18

                                                                                        20

                                                                                              22

                                                                                                   24

                                                                                                         26

                                                                                                                 28

                                                                                                                       30

                                                                                                                               32

                                                                                                                                     34

                                                                                                                                          36

                                                                                                                                                38

                                                                                                                                                      40

                                                                                                                                                           42

                                                                                                                                                                 44

                                                                                                                                                                      46

                                                                                                                                                                            48

                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                  0

                                        2

                                            4

                                                 6

                                                      8




                                                                                           Annual Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                      PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                    60 Year Old Couples

                                 4500


                                 4000
                                                          PV Lifetime Spending with Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
                                                          PV Lifetime Spending No Tax & Transfers ($'000s)
.




                                 3500
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                 3000


                                 2500


                                 2000


                                 1500


                                 1000


                                  500


                                   0
                                        0   25   50   75        100   125   150     175    200     225   250     275      300       325   350   375    400      425   450   475    500
                                                                                           Annual Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                    52
SINGLES
                                                                         Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                       30 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$25,000/yr

                       35



                       30
                                                                                                                                        Loss of Medicaid
                                                                                                                                        results in infinite
                       25                                                                                                            effective marginal tax
 .




                                                           Loss of food                                                                      at $24k
                                                          stamps results          Loss of TAFDC
 Net Income ($'000s)




                                                             in infinite         results in infinite
                       20                                     effective              effective
                                                          marginal tax at         marginal tax at
                                                               $8.5K                  $10.5K
                       15



                       10                                                                                                        Net Income

                                                                                                                                 Net Income = Gross Income

                           5



                       -
                                0   1    2    3       4     5     6     7   8      9     10    11      12   13   14   15   16   17   18    19    20    21     22   23   24   25
                                                                                              Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                         Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                      30 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$250,000/yr

                       300




                       250

                                         Net Income
 .




                       200               Net Income = Gross Income
 Net Income ($'000s)




                       150




                       100




                           50




                       -
                                0   10   20   30   40       50   60    70   80    90    100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250
                                                                                              Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                    53
                                                               Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                        30 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$25,000/yr

120%

                                  Loss of food
                                 stamps results
100%                                in infinite
                                     effective
                                 marginal tax at
                                      $8.5K                                                                                    Loss of
80%
                                                                                                                                parent               Loss of
                                                                                                                               Medicaid               child
                  Start marginal                                                                                                                     Medicaid
60%                reduction in                                                         End reduction
                     TAFDC                                                             in TAFDC (lost
                                                                                         due to asset
                                                                                            test)
40%

                   Marginal
                 reduction in
20%             food stamps



 0%




-20%
       0    1        2     3     4   5     6        7      8     9   10     11     12     13     14     15   16     17   18    19   20    21     22      23     24   25
                                                                          Annual Income ($000's)



                                                              Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                        30 Year Old Singles $25,000-$250,000/yr

120%




100%



80%



                         Exit EITC
60%
                         clawback
                           range

40%




20%



 0%




-20%
       25       40          55       70        85          100       115         130       145        160         175    190        205        220       235         250
                                                                          Annual Income ($000's)




                                                                                  54
                                                                       PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                      30 Year Old Singles

                                400



                                350
.




                                300
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                250



                                200



                                150



                                100

                                                                                                                       PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                 50                                                                                    No Tax


                                 0
                                      0    1    2    3    4      5     6    7     8    9     10   11   12    13   14    15   16    17   18    19   20    21   22    23     24   25
                                                                                             Annual Gross Incom e ($'000s)




                                                                       PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                      30 Year Old Singles

                                3500



                                3000                          PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                              No Tax
.




                                2500
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                2000



                                1500



                                1000



                                 500



                                  0
                                       0   10   20   30   40      50   60    70   80    90   100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250
                                                                                             Annual Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                       55
                                 Marginal Lifetime Effective Tax Rate
                                  30 Year Old Singles $0-$25,000/yr

120%




100%
                                                                                              Loss of
                                                                                             Medicaid
                                                                                             results in
80%                                                                                      infinite effective
                                                                                           marginal tax


60%



40%




20%



 0%




-20%
       0    2.5   5        7.5           10            12.5            15         17.5             20         22.5   25
                                              Annual Income ($000's)



                              Marginal Lifetime Effective Tax Rate
                            30 Year Old Singles $25,000-$250,000/yr

120%




100%



80%




60%



40%




20%



 0%




-20%
       25    50       75         100            125           150           175               200             225    250
                                              Annual Income ($000's)




                                                      56
                                                                                         Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                                       45 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$25,000/yr

                      40

                                                            Net Income
                      35                                    Net Income = Gross Income


                      30                                            Loss of TAFDC
.




                                                                     due to Asset                                                                                                                     Loss of
                                                                         Test                                                                                                                          Parent
                      25                                                                                                                                                                              Medicaid
Net Income ($'000s)




                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                     Loss of
                                          Loss of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Child
                                           Food
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Medicaid
                                          Stamps
                      15


                      10



                          5


                      -
                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                         12.8
                                                                                                                                                13.5
                                                                                                                                                       14.3
                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                    15.8
                                                                                                                                                                           16.5
                                                                                                                                                                                  17.3
                                                                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                                                                               18.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      19.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                             20.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          21.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        23.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24.8
                                                                                     6.75


                                                                                                  8.25
                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                              9.75
                                                                                                                     10.5
                                                                                                                            11.3
                                                                   4.5
                                                                         5.25
                                                                                6


                                                                                            7.5
                               0
                                   0.75
                                          1.5
                                                2.25
                                                       3
                                                            3.75




                                                                                                                      Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                         Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                                      45 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$250,000/yr

                      300




                      250

                                                                   Net Income
.




                                                                   Net Income = Gross Income
                      200
Net Income ($'000s)




                      150




                      100




                          50




                      -
                               0
                                   7.5
                                          15
                                                22.5
                                                       30
                                                            37.5
                                                                   45
                                                                         52.5
                                                                                60
                                                                                     67.5
                                                                                            75
                                                                                                  82.5
                                                                                                         90
                                                                                                              97.5
                                                                                                                     105
                                                                                                                            113
                                                                                                                                   120
                                                                                                                                         128
                                                                                                                                                135
                                                                                                                                                       143
                                                                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                    158
                                                                                                                                                                           165
                                                                                                                                                                                  173
                                                                                                                                                                                         180
                                                                                                                                                                                               188
                                                                                                                                                                                                      195
                                                                                                                                                                                                             203
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          218
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 225
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        233
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               240
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     248




                                                                                                                      Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                                               57
                                                             Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                      45 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$25,000/yr



140%



120%
                                                                                                                    Loss of
                                                                                                                     Parent
100%                                                                                                                Medicaid



80%
                                                                                                                                                 Loss of
                                                                                                                                                 Children
                                                                                                                                                 Medicaid
60%
                                       Loss of
                                                                   Enter EITC
                                     TAFDC due
                                                                    clawback
                                      to asset
40%                                                                   range
                                        test


20%               Begin
                marginal
                 loss of
                TAFDC
 0%



-20%
       0    1        2   3      4   5    6        7      8     9    10     11     12   13    14   15    16     17   18    19   20    21     22    23     24   25
                                                                         Annual Income ($000's)



                                                            Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                      45 Year Old Singles $25,000-$250,000/yr



140%



120%



100%



80%



60%



40%



20%



 0%



-20%
       25       40         55       70       85          100        115         130    145        160        175    190        205        220      235        250
                                                                         Annual Income ($000's)




                                                                                 58
                                                                                            PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                                           45 Year Old Singles

                                 350


                                                                                                                                                                                Loss of
                                 300                                                                                                                                             Child
                                                                                                                                                                                Medicaid
 .




                                 250                                                                                                       Loss of
 PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                                                                                                                            Parent
                                                                                                                                           Medicaid
                                 200



                                 150



                                 100



                                  50                                                                                                                                     PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                                                                                                         No Tax

                                   0
                                       0
                                            0.75
                                                   1.5
                                                         2.25
                                                                 3
                                                                      3.75
                                                                              4.5
                                                                                    5.25
                                                                                            6
                                                                                                 6.75
                                                                                                         7.5
                                                                                                               8.25
                                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                                            9.75
                                                                                                                                    10.5
                                                                                                                                            11.3
                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                          12.8
                                                                                                                                                                 13.5
                                                                                                                                                                        14.3
                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                     15.8
                                                                                                                                                                                            16.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   17.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                18.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           21.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         23.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      24.8
                                                                                                                               Annual Gross Incom e ($'000s)




                                                                                            PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                                           45 Year Old Singles

                                 3500



                                 3000
                                                                             PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
.




                                                                             No Tax
                                 2500
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                 2000



                                 1500



                                 1000



                                  500



                                   0
                                        0
                                             7.5
                                                    15
                                                          22.5
                                                                 30
                                                                       37.5
                                                                               45
                                                                                     52.5
                                                                                            60
                                                                                                  67.5
                                                                                                          75
                                                                                                                82.5
                                                                                                                       90
                                                                                                                             97.5
                                                                                                                                     105
                                                                                                                                             113
                                                                                                                                                    120
                                                                                                                                                           128
                                                                                                                                                                  135
                                                                                                                                                                         143
                                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                                                                                      158
                                                                                                                                                                                             165
                                                                                                                                                                                                    173
                                                                                                                                                                                                          180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 188
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        195
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               203
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            218
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   225
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          233
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                240
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       248




                                                                                                                              Annual Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                                                                   59
                                                                                     Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                                   60 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$50,000/yr


                      30




                      25


                                                       Net Income                                                                                    Loss of
.




                                                                                                                                                     Medicaid
                      20                               Net Income = Gross Income                                                                     Benefits
Net Income ($'000s)




                      15



                      10




                          5




                      -                                                                                                 12 2




                                                                                                                           15




                                                                                                                        18 8




                                                                                                                           21




                                                                                                                        24 4
                             0
                            75


                                     25

                                                   3
                                                  75


                                                            25

                                                                           6
                                                                          75


                                                                                    25

                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                    75

                                                                                                 11 5




                                                                                                                            .5




                                                                                                                            .5




                                                                                                                        20 5




                                                                                                                            .5
                                      5




                                                             5




                                                                                     5




                                                                                                      5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5


                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                           1




                                                                                                                           2
                                    1.




                                                           4.




                                                                                   7.




                                                                                                     .




                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                   .2


                                                                                                                          .7


                                                                                                                          .2


                                                                                                                          .7


                                                                                                                          .2


                                                                                                                          .7


                                                                                                                          .2


                                                                                                                          .7


                                                                                                                          .2


                                                                                                                          .7
                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                         13




                                                                                                                         16




                                                                                                                         19




                                                                                                                         22
                          0.


                                   2.


                                                3.


                                                          5.


                                                                        6.


                                                                                  8.


                                                                                                  9.




                                                                                                                        14


                                                                                                                        15


                                                                                                                        17




                                                                                                                        21


                                                                                                                        23
                                                                                                                  Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                     Gross Income vs. Net Income (1 year)
                                                                                   60 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$50,000/yr

                      300




                      250

                                                     Net Income
.




                      200                            Net Income = Gross Income
Net Income ($'000s)




                      150




                      100




                          50




                      -
                               0
                                   7.5
                                         15
                                              22.5
                                                     30
                                                          37.5
                                                                 45
                                                                      52.5
                                                                             60
                                                                                  67.5
                                                                                         75
                                                                                              82.5
                                                                                                     90
                                                                                                          97.5
                                                                                                                 105
                                                                                                                       113
                                                                                                                             120
                                                                                                                                   128
                                                                                                                                         135
                                                                                                                                               143
                                                                                                                                                      150
                                                                                                                                                            158
                                                                                                                                                                  165
                                                                                                                                                                        173
                                                                                                                                                                              180
                                                                                                                                                                                    188
                                                                                                                                                                                          195
                                                                                                                                                                                                203
                                                                                                                                                                                                      210
                                                                                                                                                                                                            218
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  225
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        233
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              240
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    248




                                                                                                                 Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                                         60
                                                                Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                         60 Year Old Singles Earning $0-$25,000/yr

100%


90%


80%

                                                                                                    Loss of
70%                                                                                                 Medicaid
                                                                                                    Benefits

60%


50%


40%


30%
                          Fail asset test
20%                          for Food
                         Stamps (only at
                           this income)
10%


 0%
       0    1        2   3     4     5      6        7      8     9   10     11     12   13    14   15    16     17   18    19   20    21     22   23    24   25
                                                                           Annual Income ($000's)



                                                               Marginal Effective Tax Rate
                                                         60 Year Old Singles $50,000-$500,000/yr

100%


90%


80%


70%


60%


50%


40%


30%


20%


10%


 0%
       25       40        55        70          85          100       115         130    145        160        175    190        205        220    235        250
                                                                           Annual Income ($000's)




                                                                                   61
                                                                                            PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                                           60 Year Old Singles

                                 300




                                 250                                                                                                                                           Loss of
 .




                                                                                                                                                                               Medicaid
                                                                                                                                                                               Benefits
 PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                 200




                                 150
                                                                 PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                 No Tax
                                 100




                                  50




                                   0
                                       0
                                            0.75
                                                   1.5
                                                         2.25
                                                                 3
                                                                      3.75
                                                                              4.5
                                                                                    5.25
                                                                                            6
                                                                                                 6.75
                                                                                                         7.5
                                                                                                               8.25
                                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                                            9.75
                                                                                                                                    10.5
                                                                                                                                           11.3
                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                         12.8
                                                                                                                                                                13.5
                                                                                                                                                                       14.3
                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                    15.8
                                                                                                                                                                                           16.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  17.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                                                                                                                               18.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          21.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        23.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24.8
                                                                                                                               Annual Gross Incom e ($'000s)




                                                                                            PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                                                                                           60 Year Old Singles

                                 2500




                                                                              PV Lifetime Spending Including Transfers ($'000s)
                                 2000
.




                                                                              No Tax
PV Lifetime Spending ($'000s)




                                 1500




                                 1000




                                  500




                                   0
                                        0
                                             7.5
                                                    15
                                                          22.5
                                                                 30
                                                                       37.5
                                                                               45
                                                                                     52.5
                                                                                            60
                                                                                                  67.5
                                                                                                          75
                                                                                                                82.5
                                                                                                                       90
                                                                                                                             97.5
                                                                                                                                     105
                                                                                                                                            113
                                                                                                                                                   120
                                                                                                                                                          128
                                                                                                                                                                 135
                                                                                                                                                                        143
                                                                                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                                     158
                                                                                                                                                                                            165
                                                                                                                                                                                                   173
                                                                                                                                                                                                         180
                                                                                                                                                                                                                188
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       195
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              203
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    210
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           218
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  225
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         233
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               240
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      248




                                                                                                                              Annual Gross Income ($'000s)




                                                                                                                                                  62
                                         Appendix

                                Our Transfer Calculator

        The following is a list of the non-Social Security transfer benefit calculated by our
transfer calculator.

-   Transitional Assistance to Families with Dependent Children (TAFDC)
-   Food Stamps (FS)
-   Medicaid
-   Medicare
-   Supplementary Security Income (SSI)
-   Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
-   Special Supplemental Nutrition Program For Women, Infants And Children (WIC)

The annual levels of each transfer benefit are determined taking into account all
eligibility criteria, which often include demographics (e.g., number and ages of children),
as well as applicable income and asset tests. Each program has, however, eligibility rules
and benefit formulae that deal with special cases. For this study, we consider the rules
and benefit formulae that apply to the standard cases.


Modeling Specific Benefit Programs

Transitional Aid to Families with Dependent Children -- TAFDC
Transitional Aid to Families with Dependent Children (TAFDC) is a cash assistance
program designed to assist needy families with dependent child or pregnant women.
TAFDC is the formal name in Massachusetts of the program formerly known as AFDC
(Aid to Families with Dependent Children). Most states have adopted the name
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF). The terms “transitional” and
“temporary” reflect the new objective of the programs, namely to provide short-term
assistance to needy families and to encourage such families to return to the labor force.
Under the current rules of the TAFDC, eligible household may generally receive
assistance for no more than 24 months within any 5-year period.

There are several steps in defining eligibility for benefits. The calculations needed to
determine eligibility, both non-financial and financial, and benefit levels can be
complicated even for the standard cases we consider.

Non-Financial Eligibility requires that the child must be deprived of the care or support
of at least one parent. Deprivation factors include: death, continued absence, physical or
mental incapacity, unemployment or underemployment of (a) parent(s). A dependent
child may be under age 19 or, if a fulltime school student, age 19. We assume that our
family units meet these program-specific requirements.

To meet requirements for           Household    Eligibility Standard (185%    Need Standard/
                                     Size         of the Need Standard)      Payment Standard
                                       2                     982                   531
                                       3                    1,171                  633
                                       4     63             1,352                  731
Financial Eligibility a household must pass two income tests. First, family unit gross
income cannot exceed 185 percent of the Need Standard that applies given family size.
Second, gross income minus certain applicable deductions cannot exceed the Need
Standard itself.

Standard monthly deductions include
- a $90 deduction for each employed family member.
- an extra $30 plus one-half of gross income above $120 deduction for the employed
   TAFDC benefit recipients or applicants who received benefits in the previous 4
   months.
- dependent-care deductions that range between $50 to $200 for a child under two and
   $44-$175 for a child 2 or over, depending on the hours worked by a recipient.

We applied the $90 deduction per working individual for all 12 months of each year of
eligibility and the maximum deduction levels for childcare for children between ages 1
and 5. However, we did not implement the extra deduction because of its complex
dynamic nature.

If the family unit passes both income tests it gets financial assistance defined as the
difference between the maximum payment standard and net income after deductions. In
accordance with standard program restrictions on the length of benefit receipt, we limited
the receipt of benefits to no more than 24 months within any five-year period. Hence, for
those of our stylized households who are eligible for assistance, benefits follow a cyclical
pattern: two years on followed by three years off, provided the asset test criterion is met.
TAFDC regulation in Massachusetts assumes that families receiving benefits may also
receive $40 of monthly housing allowance, which we add to the monthly TAFDC benefit.

Sources
1.   Mass Resources. Transitional Aid to Families with Dependent Children (TAFDC).
     http://www.massresources.org/pages.cfm?contentID=17&pageID=4&Subpages=yes


Food Stamps
The purpose of the Food Stamp Program is to improve the diet of low-income families by
increasing their food purchasing power. Households must satisfy both state and federal
requirements to qualify for food stamps. There are several steps in determining program
eligibility and calculating the value of the stamp benefits.

First, gross monthly (earned and unearned) income cannot exceed the limits specified in
the table below for households of different sizes. Unearned income includes Social
Security and private pension benefits, SSI benefits, unemployment insurance benefits,
and TAFDC payments. In our study we include SSI and TAFDC payments as part of the
income used to calculate the value of food stamps.

The following monthly deductions apply:




                                                64
-   $134 per household.
-   20 percent of gross income.
-   Dependent day care: under 2 years of age, up to $200 per month; over 2 years of age,
    up to $175 per month. We apply here the TAFDC program dependent care deduction
    for every child between the ages of 1 and 5.
-   Medical expenses of individuals over 60 years old are deductible beyond the first $35.
    These expenses are calculated as the sum of payments for prescription drugs,
    Medicare premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance payments.
-   Excess housing costs, which are defined as housing expenses in excess of half of the
    household' s income after other deductions. Prior to age 60 there is a maximum level
    of $388 for deductible excess housing costs.

Net monthly income (monthly income after deductions) cannot exceed the family-size
specific limits given in the table below. The value of the stamps is the maximum
monthly allotment less 30 percent of net income. The 30 percent figure reflects the
expectation that recipient households will spend about 30 percent of their resources on
food.
                Household       Gross Monthly   Net Monthly      Maximum Monthly
                  Size          Income Limit   Income Limit           Benefit
                            1            1,009           776                  149
Sources                     2             1354         1041                   274
                            3             1698         1306                   393
                            4             2043         1571                   499
    1.   Mass Resources. Food Stamps Program.
         http://www.massresources.org/pages.cfm?contentID=12&pageID=3&Subpages=yes



Medicare
Medicare is a federal health insurance program for the aged and disabled (we ignore
disability benefits and focus on the benefits for the aged only). It incorporates two parts:
Hospital Insurance (HI), also known as “Part A”, and Supplementary Medical insurance
(SMI), also known as “Part B”. Hospital Insurance is generally provided automatically to
individuals aged 65 and over who are entitled to Social Security benefits. Part A helps
pay for care in hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, hospice, and some home health care.
Enrolling in SMI is optional; part B helps pay for: doctors, outpatient hospital care,
clinical laboratory tests, durable medical equipment, most supplies, and some other
services not covered by Part A.

Medicare Part A is primarily financed through a mandatory 2.9 percent payroll tax. Part
B is financed in part by participant premium payments of $78.20 per month regardless of
benefits received. In addition, there are specific cost-sharing arrangements. In particular,
under Part A in each benefit period a recipient of benefits pays: $776 for a hospital stay
of 1-60 days; an additional $194 per day for days 61-90; an additional $338 per day for
days 91-150; and all costs for each day beyond 150 days.

We assume that at age 65 both husband and wife enroll in both Part A and Part B. It is


                                              65
typical for individual to enroll in both plans. We assumed that in each year an individual,
if s/he receives benefits, stays in the hospital less than 60 days and so pays the fixed fee
of $776. Under Part B, participants receiving benefits must first meet an annual $110
deductible and, in most cases, cover 20 percent of the approved amount after the
deductible.

In our calculations, we impute to each age-eligible spouse at a particular age their
expected net Medicare benefits at that age. Any actual out-of-pocket cost sharing and
premium payments were deducted from the gross income in calculations of the Food
Stamps benefits for eligible individuals.

Our data on Medicare benefits
for aged come from the Medicare Reimbursement per Eligible Enrollee (2005)
Dartmouth Atlas of Healthcare                          Part A              Part B
          21                             Age      Men       Women      Men      Women
Database.       This      database
provides     average     Medicare    65-69          2,987     2,504     2,104     2,218
benefits under Part A and under
                                                    3,923     3,368     2,731     2,640
Part B classified by age and sex 70-74
                                     75-79          5,005     4,376     3,249     2,912
in 2003. We found that, in the
                                     80-84          6,004     5,274     3,498     2,877
recent past, average benefits per 85+               7,072     6,400     3,413     2,581
person enrolled were 26 percent
and 5 percent greater, respectively, under Plan A and Plan B, in Massachusetts compared
to the national averages. We incorporated that adjustment for all age cohorts and both
sexes. We converted all 2003 amounts to 2005 dollars using CPI for medical
expenditures, provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Sources
  1. Dartmouth Atlas of Healthcare Database (September 2005).
  2. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Internet: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/


Medicaid
Medicaid is a joint federal-state program that provides medical care to the poor. In 2002
Medicaid recipients constituted 17 percent of the US population. Over 50 percent of all
Medicaid income-eligible infants, children, and adults had no access to any other form of
private or public health insurance. However, not all eligible individuals apply for
Medicaid. For purposes of this study we assume that our households, when eligible, do
apply and receive all Medicaid benefits to which they are entitled.

Medicaid covers most, but not all, medically necessary medical care and services
provided to eligible individuals. Each state establishes its eligibility standards and general
rules. The policies are complex and vary considerably from state to state. In
Massachusetts, Medicaid is officially known as MassHealth. In addition to serving the
poor in general, MassHealth incorporates special programs to assist poor pregnant
women and children, the disabled, and immigrants who are in need of emergency care.
21
     Access to these data was generously provided to us by Professor Jonathan Skinner of Dartmouth College.


                                                     66
MassHealth provides the following services:
- Inpatient hospital services
- Outpatient services: hospitals, clinics, doctors, dentists (limited dental coverage for
  adults), family planning, and home-health care
- Medical services: lab tests, X rays, therapies, pharmacy services, dental services,
  eyeglasses, hearing aids, medical equipment and supplies, adult day health, and adult
  foster care
- Mental health and substance abuse services: inpatient and outpatient
- Living in nursing homes
- Payment of the Medicare premium, coinsurance, and deductibles for certain groups of
  elderly

Like Medicare, Medicaid operates as a vendor payment program; recipients receive
benefits directly in the form of medical services provided by qualified vendors. Benefits
are provided as long as the individual meets general and financial eligibility criteria.
Financial eligibility criteria include income eligibility requirements, which may be
different for different family members, and assets eligibility requirements. MassHealth
Standard Program specifies that the family monthly income before taxes and deductions
cannot exceed:

-   200 percent of the FPL (Federal Poverty Level) for pregnant women and infants
-   150 percent of the FPL for children under age 19
-   133 percent of the FPL for parents with children under age 19

Under MassHealth the income limit for an eligible individual (couple) aged 65 and over
is 100 percent of the FPL. In addition, in Massachusetts if an individual is eligible for
SSI, s/he would also be eligible for Medicaid. The table below presents the respective
monthly income limits.


                                Federal poverty Lines (2005)
                Household
                  Size          100%         133%         150%      200%
                     1                798      1,061        1,196     1,595
                     2              1,069      1,422        1,604     2,138
                     3              1,341      1,783        2,011     2,682
                     4              1,613      2,145        2,419     3,225


Medicaid eligibility may be extended to individuals with incomes greater than the above
income limits if they are deemed “medically needy.” States provide residual financing of
such individuals’ medical treatment costs, provided they spend their excess resources
(income and assets) down to the eligibility limits. This is particularly the case for
individuals moving into nursing homes with insufficient resources to fully finance their
stays. For simplicity, we do not consider coverage of the medical needy in this analysis.

In each year we determine for each family member of a particular age and sex if s/he


                                            67
meets appropriate income standards of eligibility and then allocate to that individual the
Medicaid age- and sex-specific benefit projected to prevail in that year. Fortunately,
statistics on Medicaid eligibles, recipients, and total vendor payments are available by sex
and age. When the beneficiary in our stylized case is a child under 19, we ignore gender
difference in benefits.

If a person over age 65 is eligible for Medicaid, his/her Medicare cost-sharing will be
partially or fully financed by Medicaid. There are two broad groups of dual-eligibles:
those for whom Medicaid pays only Medicare part B premiums (so-called, SLMB
eligibles), and those who get extensive coverage from Medicaid (see the discussion on
Medicaid-Medicare interactions below). Our calculated average benefit values for aged
eligibles reflect Medicaid payments made for both these groups. However, we impute
full Medicaid benefits only to the elderly with incomes less than 100 percent of the
federal poverty line; and we treat SLMB eligibles separately. Specifically, for those over
65, who are eligible for the full coverage, we adjust the average Medicaid benefits by
excluding payments for SLMB eligibles, using data on the fraction (4.6 percent) of those
receiving benefits from both Medicare and Medicaid who are SLMB recipients, the size
of the SLMB Medicaid benefit (equal to the annual Part B premium), and the overall
average Medicaid benefit net of Nursing Home financing. Our final calculated adjusted
age- and sex-specific Medicaid benefits for 2005 are presented in the table below. We
used the BLS index of medical expenditure growth to measure 2002 benefit levels in
2005 dollars.

                           Estimated 2005 Medicaid Benefits in
                    Massachusetts, net of SLMB program financing
                                      Average Net Benefit per Eligible
                        Age             Female               Male
                      All Ages     $          6,145 $              5,711
                      Under 1      $          3,468 $              3,747
                         1-5       $          1,839 $              2,148
                        6-12       $          1,660 $              2,094
                       13-14       $          2,134 $              2,777
                       15-18       $          2,807 $              3,018
                       19-20       $          2,814 $              2,590
                       21-44       $          4,503 $              6,653
                       45-64       $         10,216 $             11,424
                       65-74       $          9,353 $             11,021
                       75-84       $         15,914 $             15,300
                   85 AND OVER $             26,960 $             23,243


In each year we determine for each family member of a particular age and sex if s/he
meets appropriate income standards for eligibility and then allocate to that individual the
Medicaid age- and sex-specific benefit projected to prevail in that year. When the
beneficiary in our stylized case is a child under 19, we ignore gender difference in
benefits.

Sources


                                            68
     1.   2005 Health and Human Services poverty guidelines. Internet:
          http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/05poverty.shtml
     2.   MassHealth. Internet: www.mass.gov
     3.   Medicaid. Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Internet:
           http://www.cms.hhs.gov



Supplementary Security Income (SSI)

Supplementary Security Income is a federal program that makes monthly payments to
people who have limited income and resources if they are 65 or older or are disabled. In
                          our study we ignore payments to the disabled. If individuals
 Household     Income
                          meet the program'    s income limits, after deductions, they
    Size        Limit
                          receive monthly benefits. Payments up to the Federal income
      1          708
      2         1,071
                          limits are paid by the federal government, while states provide
                          supplements that are calculated as the difference between state
and federal income limits. Standard deductions are $20 per month plus the sum of a) an
additional $65 per month if labor income exceeds $65 per month and b) one-half of
wages over $65. In Massachusetts, an SSI-eligible person is automatically enrolled in
Medicaid.

For every year we first determine age eligibility for each spouse, and then income
eligibility for the household. When both spouses are eligible, their combined benefit
equals the difference between the income limit for a two-person household and the
spouses’ combined income after deductions. When only one spouse is age eligible, the
eligible spouse’s benefit is calculated according to the regulations using either an
individual- or couple-income limit depending on the level of the income of the ineligible
spouse.

Sources
1.   Mass Resources. Supplemental Security Income (SSI).
     http://www.massresources.org/pages.cfm?contentID=18&pageID=4%20&Subpages=yes



Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
LIHEAP is a block-grant program of the Federal Government that allocates funds
between states to operate various home energy assistance programs for needy households.
The funds may be used for the purposes of home heating and cooling assistance, energy-
crisis intervention, and low-cost weatherization or other energy-related home repairs.

LIHEAP assists eligible low-income households in meeting the heating or cooling
portion of their residential energy needs. Low-income households are defined as
households with incomes that cannot exceed the greater of 150 percent of the poverty
level or 60 percent of state median income ($31,952, $39,469, and $46,987 for 2-, 3-, and
4- person families respectively in Massachusetts in 2005). The states have flexibility in
setting their income eligibility at or below this maximum standard. LIHEAP payments
can be made to households where one or more persons are receiving Supplemental
Security Income (SSI), Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC/TANF), or food


                                                    69
stamps. Priority may be granted to those households with the greatest energy cost in
relation to income, taking into consideration the presence of children and elderly.

In Massachusetts in 2004, 134 thousand households received LIHEAP benefits.
However, this represents only 15.5% of LIHEAP-eligible households. As such, while the
average benefit per recipient is $480, the amount received per eligible household is only a
fraction thereof. In our calculations, we assume that each eligible household received
15.5% of the maximum possible LIHEAP benefit according to their income test relative
to the poverty line.

Sources
    1.   Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development.            Internet:
         http://www.mass.gov/dhcd/components/cs/1PrgApps/LIHEAP/chart.pdf
    2.   Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development.            Internet:
         http://www.mass.gov/dhcd/components/cs/Fuel/default.htm#income%20chart
    3.   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Internet:
         http://www.liheap.ncat.org/tables/FY2004/heatbenefit04.htm



Special Supplemental Nutrition Program For Women, Infants And Children (WIC)
WIC is a program designed to improve the health of pregnant women, new mothers, and
their infants. WIC targets population groups that have low income and are at risk
nutritionally, specifically:

-   pregnant women through pregnancy and up to 6 weeks after birth or after pregnancy
    ends
-   breastfeeding women through their infant'
                                            s first birthday;
-   infants through their first birthday.
-   children up to age 5.

WIC benefits include: supplemental nutrition, nutrition counseling, and screening
services. In most WIC State agencies, WIC participants receive either actual food items
or food vouchers to purchase specific foods to supplement their diets. Different food
packages are provided for different categories of participants.

Although federally funded, WIC is administrated by state agencies and managed by local
agencies. The WIC Program has certain eligibility requirements that are based on income
and nutritional risk. In order to qualify, WIC applicants must show medically verified
evidence of health or nutrition risk. In addition, their family income generally must be
below 185 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). Certain applicants can be judged
income-eligible for WIC based on their participation in Food Stamps, Medicaid, and
AFDC/TANF programs. WIC does not serve all eligible individuals - participation is
limited by the availability of Federal funding. Usually, program applicants are ranked by
need.

The estimated 2004 average monthly benefit for WIC recipients (be they women, infants,
or children) in Massachusetts is $33.80. For our calculations, we assume that all eligible



                                            70
households receive this average benefit times the probability of receipt, which was 81
percent in 2004. The average monthly benefit of the $33.80 multiplied by 0.81 is $27.38,
which implies probability-adjusted annual benefits of $328.52 to all of our eligible
households.

Sources
   1.   WIC Program. Food And Nutrition Service. Internet: http://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/   and
        http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/wisummary.htm
   2.   Massachusetts state government. Internet: http://www.mass.gov




                                             71
