                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MEDICAID CROWD-OUT OF PRIVATE LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE DEMAND:
          EVIDENCE FROM THE HEALTH AND RETIREMENT SURVEY

                                           Jeffrey R. Brown
                                            Norma B. Coe
                                           Amy Finkelstein

                                         Working Paper 12536
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12536


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2006




We are grateful to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the National Institute of Aging, and the Campus
Research Board at the University of Illinois at Urban-Champaign for financial support, and to Jim
Poterba for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Norma B. Coe, and Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medicaid Crowd-Out of Private Long-Term Care Insurance Demand: Evidence from the Health
and Retirement Survey
Jeffrey R. Brown, Norma B. Coe, and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 12536
September 2006
JEL No. G22,H51,H53,I18

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper provides empirical evidence of Medicaid crowd out of demand for private long-term care
insurance. Using data on the near- and young-elderly in the Health and Retirement Survey, our central
estimate suggests that a $10,000 decrease in the level of assets an individual can keep while qualifying
for Medicaid would increase private long-term care insurance coverage by 1.1 percentage points. These
estimates imply that if every state in the country moved from their current Medicaid asset eligibility
requirements to the most stringent Medicaid eligibility requirements allowed by federal law â a
change that would decrease average household assets protected by Medicaid by about $25,000 â
demand for private long-term care insurance would rise by 2.7 percentage points. While this represents
a 30 percent increase in insurance coverage relative to the baseline ownership rate of 9.1 percent, it
also indicates that the vast majority of households would still find it unattractive to purchase private
insurance. We discuss reasons why, even with extremely stringent eligibility requirements, Medicaid
may still exert a large crowd-out effect on demand for private insurance.

Jeffrey R. Brown                                   Amy Finkelstein
Department of Finance                              Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign         MIT E52 350
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706                           50 Memorial Drive
1206 South Sixth Street                            Cambridge MA 02142
Champaign, IL 61820-9080                           and NBER
and NBER                                           afink@mit.edu
brownjr@uiuc.edu

Norma B. Coe
Norma Coe
Tilburg University & Netspar
Warandelaan 2
5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands
N.Coe@uvt.nl
Introduction

    Expenditures on long-term care, such as home health care and nursing homes, accounted for 8.5

percent of all health care spending in the United States in 2004 (Congressional Budget Office, 2004).

These long-term care expenditures are projected to triple in real terms over the next few decades, in large

part due to the aging of the population (Congressional Budget Office, 1999). Because over one-third of

Medicaid expenditures are already devoted to long-term care (U.S. Congress, 2004), there is rising

concern among policy makers about the fiscal pressure that further growth in long-term care expenditures

will place on federal and state budgets in the years to come, and growing interest in stimulating the

market for private long-term care insurance. For example, in a much-publicized press release issued in

October 2004, the National Governors Association announced that states spent nearly as much money on

Medicaid in fiscal year 2003 as they did on K-12 education, and expressed concern that Medicaid is

putting a “squeeze” on state budgets going forward (National Governors Association, 2004).

    The market for private long-term care insurance is currently quite limited. Only about 10 percent of

the elderly have private long-term care insurance (Brown and Finkelstein, 2004a). Because these policies

tend to be quite limited in scope, only 4 percent of total long-term care expenditures are paid for by

private insurance (Congressional Budget Office, 2004). By contrast, in the health care sector as a whole,

35 percent of expenditures are covered by private insurance (National Center for Health Statistics, 2002).

    Medicaid provides public long-term care insurance in the form of a payer-of-last resort. It covers

long-term care expenditures only after the individual has met asset and income eligibility tests, and after

any private insurance policy held by the individual has paid any benefits it owes. In this paper we explore

how changes in Medicaid’s means-tested eligibility thresholds might affect demand for private long-term

care insurance.

    We use data from the 1996, 1998 and 2000 waves of the Health and Retirement Survey to study the

effect of Medicaid asset protection rules on private long-term care insurance coverage among individuals

aged 55 to 69. To investigate Medicaid’s impact, we draw on the substantial variation across individuals

in the amount of assets that can be protected from Medicaid based on their state of residence, marital


                                                                                                              1
status and asset holdings. Due to the potential endogeneity of asset holdings to these Medicaid rules, we

predict assets based on demographic characteristics of the individual.

    We find statistically significant evidence that more generous Medicaid asset protection is associated

with lower levels of private long-term care insurance coverage. Our central estimate is that a $10,000

increase in the amount of assets an individual can protect from Medicaid is associated with a decrease in

private long-term care insurance coverage of 1.1 percentage points. This implies, for example, that if all

states were to adopt the most stringent asset eligibility requirements allowed by federal law in 2000 –

$16,824 for a married couple and $2,000 for a single individual – and thereby decrease average protected

assets by about $25,000, overall demand for private long-term care insurance would rise by 2.7

percentage points. While such an increase is large relative to the existing ownership rate in our sample of

near-elderly and young elderly of 9.1 percent, it suggests that the vast majority of these individuals would

remain uninsured.

    Our empirical findings complement recent simulation-based estimates of the impact of Medicaid on

private long-term care insurance demand (Brown and Finkelstein, 2004b). Like our empirical estimates,

these simulation results also suggest that changes in Medicaid’s asset disregards are unlikely to have a

substantial effect on private long-term care insurance demand. At the same time, however, Brown and

Finkelstein (2004b) estimate that Medicaid may be able to explain the lack of private insurance purchases

for at least two-thirds of the wealth distribution, even if there were no other factors limiting the size of the

market. This is because Medicaid imposes a substantial implicit tax on private long-term care insurance;

for example, they estimate that about 60 to 75 percent of the expected present discounted value benefits

that a median wealth individual would receive from a typical private long-term care insurance policy are

redundant of benefits that Medicaid would have provided had the individual not purchased private

insurance. Changes in Medicaid’s asset disregards, however, do not have a large effect on this implicit

tax. Together, the empirical and simulation results underscore the importance of understanding the

mechanism behind the crowd out effect of a particular public program in considering the likely impact of

potential reforms to the public program on private demand.


                                                                                                               2
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section one provides background information on long-term

care expenditure risk and the nature of existing public and private insurance coverage for this risk. It also

briefly reviews the insights from simulation estimates of how Medicaid affects private long-term care

insurance demand. Section two presents the data and empirical framework. Section three presents our

crowd-out estimates. Section four uses these crowd-out estimates to simulate the likely effects of changes

in Medicaid means-testing thresholds. Section five concludes.

1. Background on long-term care insurance and Medicaid crowd out

    Long-term care represents a significant source of financial uncertainty for elderly households.

Although most 65 year olds will never enter a nursing home, of those who do enter a nursing home, 12

percent of men and 22 percent of women will spend more than 3 years there; one-in-eight women who

enter a nursing home will spend more than 5 years there (Brown and Finkelstein, 2004b). These stays are

costly. On average, a year in a nursing home costs $50,000 in 2002 for a semi-private room, and even

more for a private room (MetLife, 2002).

    Very little of this expenditure risk is covered by private insurance. According to the 2000 Health and

Retirement Survey, among those individuals aged 60 and over, only 10.5 percent own private long-term

care insurance. Moreover, Brown and Finkelstein (2004a) estimate that the typical purchased policy

covers only about one-third of EPDV long term care expenditures. As a result, only about 4 percent of

long-term care expenditures are paid for by private insurance, while about one-third are paid for out of

pocket (Congressional Budget Office, 2004); by contrast in the health sector as a whole, private insurance

pays for 35 percent of expenditures and only 17 percent are paid for out of pocket (National Center for

Health Statistics, 2002). Medicaid pays for about 35 percent of long-term care expenditures

(Congressional Budget Office, 2004).1



1
 This leaves a remaining one-quarter of expenses that are covered by Medicare. However, this apparently large
Medicare share is somewhat misleading. About half of Medicare long-term care spending consists of Medicare’s
home health care benefit, which is a genuine long-term care service. However, the other half comes from Medicare’s
coverage of short-term, skilled nursing home facilities following an acute hospital stay; this is not the custodial
nursing home care that accounts for the vast majority of nursing home days and is covered by private long-term care


                                                                                                                 3
    An extensive theoretical literature has proposed a host of potential explanations for the limited size of

the private long-term care insurance market. These explanations include both factors that constrain supply

and factors that limit demand. Norton (2000) provides a useful overview of the various potential

explanations.

    On the supply side, market function may be impaired by such problems as high transactions costs,

imperfect competition, asymmetric information, or dynamic problems with long-term contracting. There

is evidence consistent with the existence of many of these supply-side failures in the private long-term

care insurance market. Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) provide evidence of asymmetric information in

the market. There is also evidence of dynamic contracting problems arising both from the difficulty of

insuring the aggregate risk of rising medical costs (Cutler, 1996) and from dynamic adverse selection as

individuals who learn that they are better risks than expected drop out of the market (Finkelstein et al.,

2005). Brown and Finkelstein (2004a) present evidence that premiums are marked up about 18 cents per

dollar of premium above actuarially fair levels; this markup appears to reflect a combination of

transaction costs and imperfect competition.

    On the demand side, several different factors that may constrain the private insurance market have

been suggested. Limited consumer rationality – such as difficulty understanding low-probability high-loss

events (Kunreuther, 1978) or misconceptions about the extent of public health insurance coverage for

long-term care – may play a role. Demand may also be limited by the availability of imperfect but

cheaper substitutes, such as financial transfers from children, unpaid care provided directly by family

members in lieu of formal paid care, or the public insurance provided by the means-tested Medicaid

program (Pauly, 1990; Brown and Finkelstein, 2004b).

    There is evidence that these demand side factors are likely to be important in understanding the

limited size of the private market. Brown and Finkelstein (2004a) suggest that the loads on policies – and

whatever market failures produce them – are unlikely to be sufficient to explain the limited market size.


insurance and by Medicaid, and is somewhat misleadingly included in long term care spending estimates.
(Congressional Budget Office 2004, US Congress, 2000).


                                                                                                             4
They note that the average load on a typical private policy is about 50 cents on the dollar higher for men

than women, yet ownership patterns are extremely similar by gender, a fact that cannot be explained

solely by the within-household correlation in ownership patterns. This suggests an important role for

demand side factors such as Medicaid.

    Brown and Finkelstein (2004b) provide more direct evidence of a crowd out effect of Medicaid. They

develop and calibrate a utility-based model of an elderly, life cycle consumer’s demand for private long-

term care insurance and compare demand under various counterfactual assumptions regarding the nature

of private insurance and of the Medicaid program. Their simulations suggest that given the current

structure of Medicaid, even if actuarially fair, comprehensive private insurance policies were to be

available, at least two-thirds of the wealth distribution would still not purchase this insurance. They show

that the mechanism behind this large estimated Medicaid crowd out effect stems from the fact that a large

portion of private insurance benefits are redundant of benefits that Medicaid would have provided in the

absence of private insurance, a phenomenon that they label the Medicaid “implicit tax”. For a male

(female) at the median of the wealth distribution, they estimate that 60 percent (75 percent) of the benefits

from a private policy are redundant of benefits that Medicaid would otherwise have paid.

    The Medicaid implicit tax stems from two features of Medicaid’s design that results in private

insurance reducing expected Medicaid expenditures. First, by protecting assets against negative

expenditure shocks, private insurance reduces the likelihood that an individual will meet Medicaid’s

asset-eligibility requirement. Second, Medicaid is a secondary payer when the individual has private

insurance. This secondary payer status means that if an individual has private insurance, the private

policy pays first, even if the individual’s asset and income levels make him otherwise eligible for

Medicaid; Medicaid then covers any expenditures not reimbursed by the private policy.2



2
 Understanding Medicaid’s implicit tax also helps explain the ostensibly puzzling finding that men and women
purchase private insurance in very similar proportions, despite substantially higher loads on male policies. Since
women have much higher expected lifetime long-term care utilization, the expected proportion of long-term care
expenditures paid for by Medicaid is higher for women than men of the same asset levels, and thus the Medicaid
implicit tax on private insurance is higher for women than for men. Indeed, Brown and Finkelstein (2004b) show


                                                                                                                     5
    Brown and Finkelstein (2004b) estimate that changes in Medicaid’s asset disregards would not have a

substantial effect on the Medicaid implicit tax, and thus, would not make private long term care insurance

desirable for most of the wealth distribution. Specifically, they simulate the likely effect of a policy that

has been adopted in several states which makes the Medicaid asset disregards less stringent if the

individual purchases private insurance. They estimate that such a policy would not however, have much

effect on the implicit tax or on private insurance demand because, even in the absence of any asset

eligibility requirements – i.e. complete asset protection for individuals – Medicaid still imposes a

substantial implicit tax on private insurance through its status as a secondary payer.

    This paper extends the simulation analysis in Brown and Finkelstein (2004b) to examine empirically

how the amount of assets that Medicaid allows an individual to keep while receiving Medicaid coverage

for long term care expenses affects demand for private long-term care insurance. Our empirical estimates

of the crowd-out effect of Medicaid on private long-term care insurance demand are also related to a

sizeable empirical literature that has investigated the extent of Medicaid’s crowd out of acute private

health insurance among working families. The estimates from this literature range in magnitude, but at the

upper end suggest that up to half of the increase in public insurance coverage from increased Medicaid

eligibility is offset by reductions in private insurance coverage (see Gruber, 2003 for a review of this

literature).

    To our knowledge, only two other empirical papers have examined the impact of Medicaid on private

long term care insurance demand. Sloan and Norton (1997) compare private long-term care insurance

holdings in the 1992 and 1994 HRS and the 1993 AHEAD across individuals in states with different

Medicaid income eligibility limits. They find evidence that higher Medicaid income eligibility limits are

associated with lower probability of owning long-term care insurance in the AHEAD data (ages 70+) but

not in the HRS data (ages 51 – 64); they do not examine the effect of asset limits. Kang et al (2004) use

the 1992 through 1998 waves of the HRS to examine the effect of Medicaid asset and income tests on


that the net loads on polices – i.e. the load on the net benefits from the private policy, which omits any benefits paid
by the private policy that Medicaid would otherwise have paid – are quite similar for men and women.


                                                                                                                       6
private insurance coverage, using variation in individual financial resources and state Medicaid eligibility

limits. They find evidence consistent with a crowd out effect of less stringent Medicaid asset eligibility

limits, but not evidence of an effect of Medicaid income limits on long-term care insurance coverage.

    Our paper builds on this earlier work in two important dimensions. First, we limit our attention to

data from 1996 and later waves of the HRS since prior survey waves utilized a confusing question to

ascertain long-term care insurance coverage, resulting in substantial under-reporting (coverage rates are

about one-fifth of what other surveys from that time suggest) and, more generally, extremely poor data

quality; see Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) (Appendix A) for more details on these data issues. Second,

both papers utilize differences in state Medicaid rules to identify the impact of Medicaid on long-term

care insurance demand; however, there are other potentially important determinants of the demand for

long-term care insurance that vary by state, such as the price and quality of nursing homes. Our empirical

approach allows us to surmount this concern, as we discuss in more detail below.

2. Data and Empirical Approach

2.1 Data and Summary Statistics on Long-Term Care Insurance Coverage

    We use data from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), a nationally representative sample of the

elderly and near-elderly. We use a restricted access version of the HRS that allows us to identify the

individual’s state of residence. Our analysis uses data from the 1996, 1998 and 2000 waves of the HRS.

The 1996 wave consists exclusively of individuals from the original HRS cohort (individuals born 1931

to 1941). The 1998 and 2000 waves also include individuals from the adjacent, younger cohort (born

1942 to 1947), and the adjacent older cohort (born 1924 – 1930); these are known respectively as the

“War Baby” cohort and the “Children of the Depression” (CODA) cohort. We limit the analysis to

individuals aged 55 to 69 in each wave. As discussed, we do not use data from waves prior to 1995 due to

data issues with the measurement of long-term care insurance coverage; we exclude the 1995 AHEAD

wave because individuals in this wave are outside our age range.

    We limit our analysis to individuals aged 55 to 69 to focus on the decisions of individuals who are in

the prime buying ages for long-term care insurance (HIAA, 2000). Once purchased, the policy is


                                                                                                             7
intended to be a “lifetime” policy; indeed, subsequent annual premiums are constant in nominal terms, so

that policy payments are quite front-loaded. As a result, it is important to examine the effect of Medicaid

rules that were in effect when an individual might be considering the purchase of private long-term care

insurance. For this reason, we particularly wish to exclude individuals aged 70 and over from the analysis.

Such individuals may well have been making their purchase decisions in the mid to late 1980s, during

which Medicaid eligibility rules were substantially different than they are today. Crucially for our

empirical strategy, which relies on the differential treatment of married and single individuals within

different states, these rules would not have varied within state by marital status prior to 1989.3 The current

structure of Medicaid eligibility rules was adopted with the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988,

which was implemented in 1989 (Stone, 2002).

    Because of the panel nature of the data, we observe many individuals multiple times over the waves.

Our full sample consists of 28,100 observations on 12,402 unique individuals. We account for the

multiple observations of the same individuals in the error structure in our regression analysis. We do not,

however, directly exploit the panel nature of the data and the changes in Medicaid eligibility rules for

specific individuals over time due to changes in martial status or – more commonly – changes in state

rules. We believe the use of such changes provide a questionable form of identification since it is unclear

under which set of rules the individual made the (lifetime) purchase of long-term care insurance. Indeed,

as we discuss in more detail below, our preferred specification limits the analysis to the sub-sample of

individuals who did not change marital status between 1996 and 2000 and who live in one of the 30 states

which have not had any real changes to their Medicaid asset allowances between 1991 and 2000 (see

Appendix A for details). We refer to this sub-sample as the “Constant Medicaid rules sub-sample”

because the individuals faced constant Medicaid rules over our time period. They represent an arguably

cleaner sample on which to analyze the crowd-out effects of Medicaid as there is considerably less

3
  Consistent with this, using our empirical strategy we find statistically insignificant effects of current (1996 – 2000)
Medicaid rules on long-term care insurance coverage for individuals who are 70 and older (mean age of 79) and who
therefore may have been at the prime buying age under a very different set of rules (results not reported). We also
show in the sensitivity analysis below that the crowd-out effects we estimate in our 55-69 year old sample are
stronger at younger ages within this range.


                                                                                                                       8
uncertainty about what rules were in effect when the individuals bought (or considered buying) long-term

care insurance.

    Table 1 presents some summary statistics for both the full sample (column 1) and the constant

Medicaid rules sub-sample (column 2). All statistics are based on using household weights. We focus on

the summary statistics for the sub-sample in column 2, although the results are generally similar. The

long-term care insurance coverage rate is 9.1 percent. This is comparable to the rates found in other

surveys for similar age ranges (see e.g. HIAA, 2000). Just over 70 percent of the sample is married, just

under half is male, and about two-fifths are retired.

    The average long-term care insurance coverage rate masks important variation across sub-groups in

their long-term care insurance holdings. Table 2 therefore presents summary statistics on long-term care

ownership rates separately by various covariates. Once again, column 1 presents the results for the full

sample, and column 2 presents results for the constant Medicaid rules sub-sample. Coverage rates are

similar by gender, and higher for married individuals than single individuals (10.0 percent vs. 7.1

percent). Coverage rates are higher among 62 to 69 year olds (10.4 percent) than among 55 to 61 year

olds (8.1 percent). Coverage rates also vary across states; the inter-quartile range in long-term care

insurance coverage rates across states ranges from 0.06 to 0.12 (not shown).

    The pattern of coverage by net worth is most dramatic. Less than 4 percent of the sample in the

bottom quartile owns long-term care insurance, compared to 15 percent in the highest quartile of net

worth. In fact, long-term care insurance coverage rates increase monotonically by wealth decile, from

0.03 percent in the bottom decile to 0.17 percent in the top. The wealth profile likely reflects the fact that

the means-tested eligibility requirements of Medicaid make it a better substitute for private insurance for

lower wealth individuals.

2.2 Overview of Medicaid rules and our empirical approach

    We focus our analysis on the impact on private long-term care insurance demand of the amount of

protected financial assets that an individual can keep while still receiving Medicaid reimbursement for

long-term care utilization. Below, we show that other Medicaid rules such as the minimum allowable


                                                                                                              9
income retention for the community spouse or the treatment of the community house’s spouse upon its

sale or her death do not appear to affect insurance coverage, and do not affect our estimate of the effect of

the asset rules on insurance coverage.

    Medicaid financial asset disregards exhibit substantial variation across individuals based on an

individual’s marital status, state of residence, and asset holdings. Our empirical strategy, broadly

speaking, is to control for any direct effects of marital status, state, and assets holdings on long-term care

insurance demand, and then to identify the impact of Medicaid on long-term care insurance demand using

the variation in Medicaid generosity that exists across higher interactions of these three variables (i.e.

assets by marital status, state by marital status, and assets by state, as well as assets by state by marital

status). Thus for example, we use both differences across states in the amount of assets protected for

married individuals relative to single individuals, and differences across states in the amount of assets

protected for individuals of different asset levels to identify the impact of Medicaid’s asset protection

rules on demand for private long-term care insurance. Throughout the analysis, we use predicted assets to

deal with the potential endogeneity of assets to Medicaid spend down rules (Coe, 2005).

    Medicaid asset rules for single individuals are relatively simple and uniform across states and

particularly within states: they do not vary with the assets of the individual (as long as the individual has

assets of more than the protected amount). The modal state rule (used by nearly 70 percent of states)

allowed single individuals receiving Medicaid coverage for nursing home care to retain no more than

$2,000 in financial wealth. The remaining states had asset limits ranging from $1,500 to $6,500.

    In contrast, the amount of assets a community spouse is allowed to keep when her spouse goes into a

nursing home exhibits substantial variation across states at a given household asset level, from a

minimum of $16,824 to a maximum of $84,120 in 2000. Moreover, the amount of assets a community

spouse can keep varies with household assets, and this difference across states is highly non-monotonic in

the level of household assets.

    For married households with assets below the minimum amount that federal law requires be kept

when one spouse is in a nursing home ($16,824 in 2000), there is no difference across states in Medicaid


                                                                                                                10
asset disregards. For most states, there is also no difference in the amount of assets the married couple can

keep if their assets are more than double the maximum amount that federal law allows to be kept when

one spouse is in a nursing home (which puts the asset amount at $168,240 in 2000). However, for

married households within this range – which corresponds to roughly the 20th to 60th percentile of the

asset distribution for married households in the relevant age range in the 2000 HRS– there are substantial

differences across states in the amount of assets that a married household can keep under Medicaid.

    By way of illustration, Figure 1graphs the difference in the amount of assets a community spouse can

keep as a function of total household financial assets in the two most common sets of state rules. Under

the most common set of rules – which is used in 26 states – the community spouse is allowed to keep all

of their assets up to the federally allowed maximum protected assets ($84,120 in 2000) after which they

face a 100% marginal tax rate on all further assets. In the second most common set of rules – which is

used in another 15 states – the community spouse is allowed to keep all of her assets up to the federally

allowed minimum protected assets ($16,824 in 2000), faces a 100 percent marginal tax rates on all assets

between this federal minimum and two times the minimum, faces a 50 percent marginal tax rate on all

assets between twice the federal minimum and twice the federal maximum, and a 100 percent marginal

tax rate on all assets above twice the federal maximum.

    As seen in Figure 1, the difference in amount of protected assets that a community spouse with a

given amount of assets faces varies non-monotonically with assets. Using the asset distribution for

married households in our age range in the 2000 HRS, we estimate that moving from the most common

set of state rules to the next most common would on average allow a married household to keep $21,715

more in assets when one spouse entered a nursing home, which represents 29 percent of average financial

assets in this range. The maximum difference in the amount of assets that a household would be able to

keep is $42,060 and occurs for household with assets of $84,120. The minimum difference in protected

assets is 0, and occurs for household with assets of less than $16,824 or more than $168,240. If we were

instead compared these most common state rules (which are also the most generous in terms of the

amount of protected assets allowed for married couples) to the least generous state rules (used by 3 states)


                                                                                                            11
the maximum difference in the amount of assets the household would be able to keep would rise to

$67,296 (which would occur in households with $84,120 or more in assets).

    To sum up, we exploit several key sources of variation in the amount of protected assets to identify

the impact of Medicaid asset protection on demand for private long term care insurance. These include:

differences across states in the average asset disregards for married and single individuals, differences

across married individuals of different asset levels in different states, and differences across married and

single individuals of different asset amounts, as well as higher order interactions between state of

residence, marital status, and assets. In all cases, we control for any direct effects of asset levels, marital

status, or state of residence on the probability an individual has private long term care insurance. For

interested readers, Appendix A provides considerably more detailed information on how the Medicaid

eligibility rules vary across states by marital status and asset level.

2.3 Econometric Framework

    Temporarily ignoring several econometric concerns (that we will address below), a natural starting

point would be to estimate the following equation:

    LTCI ist = β 1 Protected ist + β 2 Married ist + α s + X ist
                                                             ′ η + ε ist                           (1)

In this estimating equation, the dependent variable LTCI ist is a binary indicator for whether individual i

in state s and year t owns long-term care insurance, Marriedist is an indicator variable for whether the

individual is married and α s represents a full set of state fixed effects.4 The vector of covariates (X)

consist of indicator variables for education categorized by highest degree achieved (less than high school,

high school, some college, college degree or more), gender, occupation, industry, number of children up

to 5, Hispanic heritage, race, retired, age, wave, and cohort; in addition; in addition, (X) includes

interactions of each of the education categories with all of the other control variables.

4
  We specify equation (1) as a linear probability model because it allows us to handle instrumental variables most
flexibly; as we discuss in more detail below, we are concerned about endogeneity of the right hand side variable
Protected and therefore estimate equation (1) by instrumental variables. We have confirmed, however, that the
marginal effects from Probit specifications evaluated at the mean yield nearly identical results to the linear
probability model specified in equation (1).


                                                                                                                     12
    The main covariate of interest is Protected, which we measure in units of $10,000. Protected

measures the amount of financial assets that a particular household is allowed to keep and still qualify for

Medicaid reimbursement. A higher level of Protected corresponds to a more generous (less means tested)

Medicaid program. The mean (median) amount of Protected assets in our sample is $36,345 ($18,152)

with a standard deviation of $36,135.

    Protected varies across households depending on state of residence (s), marital status (m), and

household assets according to the following formula:

                ⎧                Assets ims                   if          Assets ims ≤ Minimum ms
                ⎪
Protected ims = ⎨Minimum ms + .5 * (Assets ims − Minimum ms ) if   Minimum ms < Assets ims < Maximum ms (2)
                ⎪                                                       Assets ims ≥ Maximum ms
                ⎩              Maximum ms                     if

The state sets the level for the minimum and maximum amount of assets protected by the Medicaid

program, within the constraints imposed by Federal law. We calculate Protectedims for each individual in

our sample, based on their assets, marital status, and the specific state Medicaid rules detailed in

Appendix A.

    By including a dummy for whether the individual is married and a full set of state fixed effects we

control, respectively, for any fixed differences across married and single individuals or across individuals

in different states in their demand for private long term care insurance. The covariates (X) are designed to

control for demographics that may directly affect insurance demand, perhaps through their effect on asset

levels or perhaps through other means. (We do not directly control for assets in equation (1) because of its

potential endogeneity, although we have verified that controlling flexibly for net worth decile does not in

fact affect the results). Protected is therefore identified off of two-way and three-way interactions

between state, marital status, and assets.

    We note that the state fixed effects allow us to control flexibly for a number of other potentially

important determinants of demand for private long-term care insurance. They condition out any

differences across states in the price and quality of nursing homes, which may affect demand for long-

term care insurance. They also condition out any differences across states in the Medicaid program that



                                                                                                              13
may influence insurance coverage but are the same for married and single individuals within a state or

individuals of different asset levels within a state. These include, for example, the Medicaid rules

regarding the nature and extent of coverage provided for home health care, and the Medicaid

reimbursement rates relative to private payer rates in the state. Our estimates therefore focus precisely on

the impact of Medicaid eligibility rules for nursing home coverage on long-term care insurance demand.

    A potential concern with estimating equation (1) is that – as equation (2) makes clear – Protected is a

function of assets, and therefore savings decisions, which may themselves be affected by Medicaid rules.

Thus assets may be endogenous to insurance purchase decisions. Indeed, there is empirical evidence that

the savings of the elderly appear to respond to the incentives embodied in Medicaid’s rules for eligibility

for coverage for long-term care expenditures (Coe, 2005). This is consistent, more generally, with the

evidence that savings decisions are affected by the incentives provided by means tested public insurance

programs (see e.g. Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes, 1995 and Gruber and Yelowitz, 1999).

    To address the potential endogeneity of assets to Medicaid rules, we calculate predicted assets for

each household based on a reduced form prediction model that uses only plausibly exogenous

demographic characteristics to predict asset accumulation. Specifically, we estimate:

                       ′ δ + υ ist
Log ( Assets ) ist = X ist                                                                             (3)

We estimate the asset equation in logs because the highly skewed nature of the asset distribution results in

a much better fit in predicting log assets than assets. We define assets to be Medicaid-taxable assets;

these are the same as net worth for single individuals, but exclude housing wealth from net worth for

married individuals, since housing wealth is not treated as a Medicaid-taxable asset for married

individuals. As covariates we include the same set of covariates used in X in equation (1) that we

described above. We also include a marital status dummy since savings behavior may well differ across

single and married individuals. Note that we do not use state dummies – or state Medicaid rules – in

predicting wealth. The goal of equation (3) is not to develop the best prediction model of assets but to

isolate the portion of assets that can be explained by plausibly exogenous demographic characteristics




                                                                                                             14
rather than asset accumulation decisions that are themselves endogenous to the state Medicaid rules. We

estimate equation (3) using the full data sample, and household weights. Estimation of the prediction

equation (3) yields an R-squared of 0.24.

    Using the results of equation (3), we generate predicted assets for each individual in the sample. We

then use predicted assets – instead of actual assets – as well as the individual’s state of resident and

marital status to calculate the amount of assets that would be protected by the Medicaid program. We

refer to these protected assets calculated using predicted rather than actual assets as Protected_Hat. Thus,

Protected_Hat represents the amount of assets the Medicaid program would disregard if the household’s

actual assets were as predicted by their characteristics. By contrast, Protected denotes the amount of

assets the Medicaid program would protect based on their actual (potentially endogenous) assets. Like

Protected, Protected_Hat is measured in units of $10,000. The mean (median) value of Protected_Hat in

our sample is $43,121 ($39,929), with a standard deviation of $34,348.

    In the results reported below, we estimate equation (1) by instrumental variables, instrumenting for

Protected with Protected_Hat. In all of our regression estimates we use the HRS household weights. We

adjust the standard errors to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix in the error term within

each state. To take account of the sampling variation in the predicted variable Protected_Hat (Murphy

and Topel, 1985) we also report standard errors from a non-parametric bootstrap. Specifically, we

bootstrap the prediction equation (equation 2) and for each iteration of the bootstrap, calculate predicted

assets, use these to calculate Protected_Hat, and then estimate equation (1) using Protected_Hat as an

instrument for Protected on the drawn sample; we run 200 iterations of the bootstrap. In practice, the

standard errors are not affected much by this procedure; we report both sets of standard errors in the

results below.

    Because we are using multiple waves of the HRS, we calculate Protected using the state rules and

individual demographics in effect in the year in which the interview takes place. As mentioned above, 21

states, affecting 32 percent of the sample, experience real changes in the community spouse asset

disregards between 1991 and 2000. In addition, about 5 percent of our sample changes marital status over


                                                                                                           15
the waves 1996 – 2000 In principle, these changes in state rules and marital status over time provide us

with a fourth source of variation in Medicaid asset protection rules faced by an individual. We do not,

however, believe that such changes in Medicaid asset protection are a particularly clean or useful source

of variation, as it is unclear for these individuals which Medicaid asset protection rules were in effect –

and thus the relevant rules – when the individual was considering whether to purchase long-term care

insurance. Although we report estimation results for the full sample, our preferred specification limits the

sample to the approximately three-fifths of the original sample (17,623 observations consisting of 7,923

unique individuals) who did not change martial status between 1996 and 2000 and are from states whose

Medicaid rules did not change in real terms since 1991. Our estimates of crowd-out become larger and

more precise in this sub-sample, which is consistent with greater measurement error in the full sample in

the relevant Medicaid rules in effect when an individual is making his long term care insurance coverage

decision.

    Finally, it is worth noting a potential limitation to our approach is that we are using current predicted

assets, while what matters for the Medicaid asset tax is the assets an individual has at the time of nursing

home entry. This will bias against finding an effect of Medicaid. In practice, however, the relatively low

rates at which the elderly appear to spend down their assets over their retirements suggest that this may

not be too great of a problem (see e.g. Hurd 1989, Hurd 2002, and Mitchell and Moore 1997). .

3. Crowd-out estimates

    Table 3 reports the main results from estimating equation (1) by instrumental variables, using

Protected_Hat to instrument for Protected. The first column shows the results for the whole sample. The

coefficient on Protected is -0.0056, and is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. The point

estimate suggests that a $10,000 increase in the amount of assets an individual can retain while qualifying

for Medicaid is associated with a 0.56 percentage point decline in long-term care insurance coverage.

    The remaining columns report analysis when the sample is limited to individuals who face constant

Medicaid rules. While we lose almost two-fifths of our observations due to these data cuts, we believe

this sub-sample will provide a cleaner estimate of the impact of Medicaid on long-term care insurance


                                                                                                              16
coverage. Consistent with this view, column 2 indicates that the estimated effect of Medicaid on long-

term care insurance demand is larger (and more statistically significant) in the constant Medicaid rules

sub-sample than in the full sample. The point estimate on Protected rises to -0.109, and is statistically

significant at the 5 percent level. This suggests that a $10,000 increase in the amount of assets a

household can hold and still be eligible for Medicaid is associated with a 1.1 percentage point decline in

the probability of holding long-term care insurance. The results in column 2 constitute our preferred

specification, and we use these results for our central estimate.

    The remaining columns of Table 3 explore the sensitivity of our central estimate to using different

sources of variation to identify the effect of Medicaid protected asset rules on long-term care insurance

demand. As discussed above, variation in Protected_hat comes from the two-way interaction of predicted

assets with state, the two-way interaction of predicted assets with marital status, the two-way interaction

of marital status with state, and the three way interaction of marital status, predicted assets, and state. To

investigate whether each of these sources of variation yields similar results, columns (3) through (6) show

the results in which we control one by one for various sources of variation, and therefore identify only off

of the others. Specifically, in column (3) we add a control for predicted assets interacted with marital

status, in column (4) we add controls for predicted assets interacted with state dummies, and in column

(5) in which a we add controls for marital status interacted with state dummies. Finally, in column (6) we

include controls for all two-way interactions (predicted assets by marital status, predicted assets by state,

and married by state) so that the only variation used to identify Protected_Hat is the three-way

interaction of state by marital status by predicted assets. Although the analysis often loses power when

various sources of identifying variation are eliminated, the results indicate that the coefficient on

Protected always remains negative and roughly of the same magnitude as the -0.011 in the baseline

specification; it various from -0.0093 to -0.017 depending on the specification. The fact that all the

sources of variation yield similar estimates increases our confidence in the empirical strategy and our

baseline estimates.




                                                                                                             17
    Table 4 reports results from a number of additional sensitivity analyses. Column 1 replicates the IV

estimates from our preferred specification (Table 3, column 2). One potential concern is that two other

aspects of Medicaid vary across state by marital status and may also affect insurance demand: the

treatment of income and estate recovery practices.5. Multi-collinearity in various Medicaid program rules’

generosity could produce a misleading estimate of the impact of Medicaid asset rules. Moreover, the

impact of these other features of Medicaid on long-term care insurance demand are of independent

interest. Column 2 therefore adds two variables to control for these two features. The variable “Income”

measures the amount of income (in units of $10,000) the household is allowed to keep and still qualify for

Medicaid; this varies across states and within state by marital status. “Liens” is an indicator variable for

whether a state will put a lien on a house when one spouse is in the nursing home in order to recoup

expenses upon the death of the community spouse. This practice means that the house is no longer a

bequeathable asset for married couples and the house is only a temporarily protected asset; there is no

change for single households since the house is not a protected asset for them in any state. Appendix A

describes the state income and housing (“liens”) rules in more detail. The results in column 2 of Table 5

show the expected positive coefficient on “Liens”, but the positive coefficient on “Income” is the opposite

of what was expected. Neither coefficient is statistically significant, and an F-test indicates that they are

not jointly significant (not shown). Perhaps most importantly, inclusion of these variables does little to

change the parameter of interest, the coefficient on Protected.

    As discussed previously, the variation in our variable of interest Protected occurs mostly in the range

of 20th to 60th percentile of the asset distribution of married individuals (see Figure 1). Therefore, column

3 shows the results limiting the sample to this (albeit endogenous) range; as expected, the point estimate

increases in absolute value. However, even with a doubling of the point estimate – to -0.0223 (standard

error = 0.0130), the results still imply that even if all of the states decreased the amount of protected


5
 Of course, many other aspects of Medicaid vary across state – such as reimbursement rates for nursing homes and
whether and how much coverage is provided for home care. An advantage of our strategy is that because we do not
use cross-state differences in Medicaid to identify its effects, we purge these differences and are able to focus on the
effect of one particular Medicaid parameter of interest.


                                                                                                                     18
assets to the minimum allowable under federal law in 2000, the vast majority of individuals in our sample

would remain without private insurance.

    Columns (4) and (5) reports the results from doing the analysis separately for younger ages (55-61)

and older ages (62-69), respectively. The sample specification suggests the effect is stronger on younger

ages – which may be because these individuals are more likely to be buying during the time of the

analysis and thus the state rules in effect at that time are more likely to be the relevant one. Columns (6)

and (7) reports results for, respectively, those with a high school education or less and those with some

college or more; the results are substantively and statistically indistinguishable.

    Finally, we have verified (in results not reported) that estimation of the reduced form OLS – in which

Protected is replaced by Protected_Hat on the right hand side of equation (1) – yields qualitatively

similar results to the instrumental variables estimation of equation (1), in which Protected is instrumented

for with Protected_Hat. The coefficients on this reduced form estimation tend to be somewhat smaller

(although still statistically significant) than the instrumental variables version; for example, a reduced

form estimation of our preferred specification (shown in Table 3, column 2) yields a coefficient on

Protected_Hat of -0.0052 (statistically significant at the 5 percent level) compared to the IV estimate of -

0.109. This is consistent with the introduction of measurement error in using Protected_Hat instead of

Protected to measure the Medicaid rules faced by a given household. By contrast, estimating equation (1)

with Protected rather than Protected_Hat on the right hand side results in a positive coefficient; this

suggests that the issue of the potential endogeneity of assets to the Medicaid rules is in fact quantitatively

important for our estimates.

4. Simulated effects of potential Medicaid reforms

    The preceding analysis suggests a statistically significant crowd-out effect of Medicaid on demand for

private long-term care insurance. Our central estimate suggests that a $10,000 increase in the amount of

assets a household can hold and still be eligible for Medicaid is associated with a 1.1 percentage point

decline in the probability of holding long-term care insurance. Relatedly, these findings suggest that

increasing the stringency of Medicaid’s means testing – i.e. decreasing the amount of protected assets –


                                                                                                             19
would induce greater demand for private insurance. In this section we provide a gauge of the magnitude

of these crowd-out estimates by exploring their implications for the effect of potential Medicaid reforms

in the size of the private long-term care insurance market.

    In particular, we consider what our estimates imply for how much long-term care insurance holdings

would increase if all of the states decreased the amount of protected assets to the minimum allowable

under federal law in 2000. These minimum federally allowable asset protection laws were $16,824 for a

married couple, and $2,000 for a single individual. Currently, only 3 states (Arkansas, DC and Oregon)

have rules this stringent, while 26 states have the most generous asset protection rules allowed by federal

law. Given current state rules and the distribution of assets in the data, we estimate that this change would

decrease the average protected assets for an individual in our sample by a little under $25,000. Our point

estimates in column 4 therefore imply that this decrease in asset protection would be associated with an

increase in private long term care insurance coverage by about 2.7 percentage points. This represents

about a 30 percent increase in coverage relative to the current coverage rate of 9.1 percent. However, it

suggests that the vast majority of the individuals in our sample would remain without private insurance.

    We also considered what our results imply for private long-term care insurance coverage if the

minimum federally allowed asset protect laws were reduced by half (to $8,421 for a married couple and

$1,000 for a single individual) and all states were to set their asset protection laws at their new minimum.

Given the current state rules and the distribution of assets in the data, we estimate that this (out-of-

sample) change would decrease the average protected assets for an individual in our sample by almost

$30,000, or by $5,000 more on average than the previous reform we considered. Our crowd-out estimates

imply that a $30,000 decline in the amount of protected assets would be associated with a 3.3 percentage

point increase in private long-term care insurance coverage rates. While this represents a more than one-

third increase over current insurance coverage rates, it would still leave over 85 percent of individuals in

the sample without private insurance.

    These empirical findings are broadly consistent with the simulation-based evidence in Brown and

Finkelstein (2004b). They find that recent policy reforms adopted in several states to allow individuals


                                                                                                            20
who purchase private insurance to qualify for Medicaid coverage while retaining substantially more assets

would have relatively little effect on the implicit tax that Medicaid imposes on private insurance, and

hence little effect on demand for private insurance. Importantly, however, Brown and Finkelstein (2004b)

estimate that Medicaid’s implicit tax has a large crowd-out effect on private insurance demand. Changes

in asset protection by themselves however do not affect this implicit tax much because as long as

Medicaid remains a secondary payer, even without any asset limits to Medicaid eligibility a large portion

of private insurance benefits are redundant of what Medicaid would otherwise have paid. (By the same

token, removing the secondary payer status without changing the Medicaid asset limits similarly leaves a

large Medicaid implicit tax). Our empirical findings, coupled with the simulation-based evidence in

Brown and Finkelstein (2004b) thus underscore the importance of understanding not just the size of the

crowd out effect, but also the mechanism behind it in considering the likely impact of potential reforms to

the public program on private demand.

5. Conclusion

    Long-term care is a large, and largely uninsured, potential expense facing the elderly. Medicaid

serves as the insurer of last resort. As the baby boomers age, long-term care expenditures are expected to

rise substantially, and with them Medicaid expenditures. This will put increasing pressure on state and

federal budgets. As a result, increasing attention is focused on how public policy can stimulate the private

long-term care insurance market.

    This paper looks empirically at the effects of the Medicaid program on private long-term care

insurance demand. We draw on the substantial variation in the level of assets that an individual can

protect from Medicaid based on an individual’s state of residence, marital status and asset holdings to

identify the impact of Medicaid on private long-term care insurance demand. Our estimates suggest that

more generous Medicaid asset protection is associated with less private long-term care insurance

coverage. Our central estimate implies that a $10,000 increase in the amount of assets a household can

retain while qualifying for Medicaid coverage of long-term care expenditures is associated with a 1.1

percentage point reduction in long-term care insurance coverage.


                                                                                                          21
    Although our findings point to a crowd-out effect of Medicaid asset protection on long-term care

insurance demand, they also suggest that even large scale reductions in Medicaid asset protection are

unlikely to stimulate private insurance coverage among most of the elderly population. We estimate that,

if all states were to adopt the most stringent asset eligibility requirements allowed by federal law in 2000

– $16,824 for a married couple and $2,000 for a single individual – and thereby decrease average

protected assets by about $25,000, overall demand for private long-term care insurance would rise by 2.7

percentage points, leaving almost 90 percent of the elderly still without private insurance.

    These empirical findings complement recent simulation research (Brown and Finkelstein, 2004b)

which also suggest that changes in Medicaid’s asset protection rules would do little to address the lack of

private long-term care insurance among most of the elderly. At the same time, Brown and Finkelstein

(2004b) find that Medicaid may have a substantial crowd-out effect on long-term care insurance demand

through the large implicit tax it places on the benefits from private long-term care insurance policies.

Changes in Medicaid asset rules appear to not have much affect on this implicit tax, which may explain

the simulation and empirical evidence that changes in Medicaid asset rules do not appear to have much

effect on demand for private insurance. Together, these findings raise the important question of whether it

is feasible to design Medicaid in a way that reduces the implicit tax it places on private insurance, and

thus the constraints it appears to place on private insurance demand.




                                                                                                            22
References

Brown, Jeffrey and Amy Finkelstein. 2004a. “Supply or Demand: Why is the Market for Long-Term
Care Insurance So Small?” NBER working paper w10782, September.

Brown, Jeffrey and Amy Finkelstein. 2004b. “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance: Medicaid
and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” NBER working paper w10989, December.

Bruen, Brian K., Joshua M. Wiener, Johnny Kim, and Ossai Miazad. 1999. “State Usage of Medicaid
Coverage Options for Aged, Blind, and Disabled People.” Urban Institute Press, August.

Cutler, David. 1996. “Why Markets Don’t Insure Long-Term Risk?” Unpublished mimeo.
http://econweb.fas.harvard.edu/faculty/dcutler/papers/ltc_rev.pdf

Coe, Norma B. 2005. “Financing Nursing Home Care: New Evidence on Spend-Down Behavior.” MIT
dissertation. September.

Congressional Budget Office. 2004. “Financing Long-Term Care for the Elderly.” April.

Congressional Budget Office. 1999. “Projections on expenditures for long-term care services for the
elderly.” March.

Congressional Research Service (1993). “Medicaid Source Book: Background Data and
Analysis.” (The Yellow Book).

Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry. 2006. “Private Information and its Effect on Market
Equilibrium: New Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance.” American Economic Review forthcoming.

Finkelstein, Amy, Kathleen McGarry and Amir Sufi. “Dynamic Inefficiencies in Insurance Markets:
Evidence from long-term care insurance.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. May
2005.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2003. “Medicaid” in Moffitt, Robert (ed.) Means Tested Transfer Programs in the
United States. University of Chicago Press: 15-77.

Gruber, Jonathan and Aaron Yelowitz. 1999. “Public Health Insurance and Private Savings.” The
Journal of Political Economy Vol 107, Issue 6, pp 1249-1274. December.

Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA). 2000. “Who buys LTC insurance in 2000?”

Hurd, Michael. 2002. “Are Bequests Accidental or Desired?” RAND Labor and Population Program
working paper series DRU-3010.

Hurd. Michael. 1989. “Mortality Risks and Bequests.” Econometrica 57(4), 779-813.

Horvath, Jane. 1997. “Medicaid Financial Eligibility for Aged, Blind and Disabled: Survey of State Use
of Selected Options.” National Academy for State Healthy Policy, Portland, ME. May.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, Stephen Zeldes. 1995. “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance.” The Journal of Political Economy Vol 103, Issue 2, pp 360-399. April.



                                                                                                      23
Kang, Hyojin, Alan Mathios and Sharon Tennyson. 2004. “Medicaid Crowd-Out of Private Insurance:
The case of long-term care.” Unpublished mimeo.

Kassner, Enid and Lee Shirley. 2000. “Medicaid Financial Eligibility for Older People: State Variations
in Access to Home and Community-Based Waiver and Nursing Home Services.” The Public Policy
Institute, AARP. April.

Kunreuther, Howard. 1978. Disaster Insurance Protection: Public Policy Lessons. New York: Wiley.

MetLife Mature Market Institute. 2002. “MetLife Market Survey of Nursing Home and Home Care
Costs 2002.”

Mitchell, Olivia and Moore. 1997. “Retirement Wealth Accumulation and Decumulation: New
Deveopments and Outstanding Opportunities” NBER working paper w6178, September..

Murphy, Kevin and Robert Topel. 1985. “Estimation and Inference in Two-Step Econometric Models.”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics (3):4 pp. 370-379.

National Association of State Medicaid Directors (NASMD). “Aged, Blind & Disabled State
Summaries.” http://www.nasmd.org/research/ABD/abd.htm

National Governors Association. 2004. “Medicaid Squeezes State Budgets” available at:
http://www.nga.org/portal/site/nga/menuitem.6c9a8a9ebc6ae07eee28aca9501010a0/?vgnextoid=04ee137
945da2010VgnVCM1000001a01010aRCRD&vgnextchannel=759b8f2005361010VgnVCM1000001a010
10aRCRD

National Center for Health Statistics, 2002. Health, United States, 2002 With Chartbook on Trends in the
Health of Americans. Hyattsville, Maryland: 2002.

Norton, Edward. 2000. “Long-term Care.” In AJ Culyer and JP Newhouse (eds) Handbook of Health
Economics, vol 1, ch 17. Elsevier Science.

Pauly, Mark. 1990. The Rational Nonpurchase of Long-Term-Care Insurance. Journal of Political
Economy 98(1): 153-168.

Price, Richard. (1996) “Medicaid: Spousal Impoverishment Protections.” CRS Report for Congress 95-
1053 EPW. March 4.

Sabatino, C.P. and Wood, E. (1996). Medicaid estate recovery: a survey of state programs and practices.
AARP Public Policy Institute, Washington. D.C.

Schwab, Carol A. (1998) “Medicaid Eligibility for Nursing Home Benefits: A Guide for North
Carolinians.” North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
North Carolina. June.

Sloan and Norton. 1997. “Adverse Selection, Bequests, Crowding Out, and Private Demand for
Insurance: Evidence from the Long-term Care Insurance Market.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty (15):
201-219.

Stone, Julie Lynn. 2002. “Medicaid: Eligibility for the Aged and Disabled.” CRS Report for Congress
RL31413. Penny Hill Press. . July 5.


                                                                                                      24
United States Congresss, Committee on Ways and Means. 2004. “2004 Green Book.” Washington DC:
GPO.

United States Congress, Committee on Ways and Means. 2000. Green Book 2000: Background Material
on Programs Under the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means, Washington DC: GPO.




                                                                                                25
            Figure 1:Difference in Protected Assets
                                          for Community Spouse
Diffe re nce                          (Most common state rules – second most commo n state rules)




$42,060




$16,824



                                                                                                                               House hold
                                                                                                                               Assets (A)
                     $16,824              $33,648                $84,120                                      $168,240
                     (20 th Ptile )                                                                           (60 th Ptile)
     Note: Most common state rules apply in 26 states, second most common in 15 states. Dollar amounts are based on rules in 2000. The
     rules (and affected states) are described in more detail in Appendix A (see “case 1A” and “case 2A” respectively). Percentiles denotes
     the percentile of the asset distribution for married households in the 2000 HRS.




                                                                                                                                              26
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                        (1)                                (2)
                                   Full Sample              Constant Medicaid rules sub-sample
Percent with LTC Insurance              9.6                                     9.1
Average Age                            61.5                                    61.6
Percent Married                        70.2                                    71.4
Percent Male                           48.1                                    48.1
Percent Retired                        40.2                                    39.8
Average number of children              3.3                                     3.3
Household Networth (in
Thousands)
       Mean                               385                                   367
       25th Percentile                     50                                    48
       Median                             157                                   153
       75th Percentile                    387                                   391
N                                       28,1000                               17,623
Note: “Full Sample” consists of individuals aged 55-69 in the 1996, 1998 or 2000 HRS who report their
marital status and long-term care insurance coverage. “Constant Medicaid Rules” sub-sample is restricted
to individuals who did not experience changes in marital status during our data (1996 – 2000) and who are
in one of the 30 states that did not have real Medicaid asset rule changes between 1991-2000. Net worth is
the HRS imputed value for net worth. It includes net financing worth, housing wealth, and defined
contribution pension values, but does not include DB pension or Social Security wealth. All statistics are
calculated using household weights.




                                                                                                        27
Table 2: Long-Term Care Insurance Ownership Rates
                                            (1)                              (2)
Sample                         Full Sample                    Constant Medicaid rules sub-sample
Entire Sample                             9.6                                9.1
Males                                     9.7                                9.0
Females                                   9.4                                9.3
Singles                                   7.8                                7.1
Marrieds                                 10.3                               10.0
                                                                             8.1
age 55-61                                   8.9
age 62-69                                  10.1                                 10.4
                                                                                 9.9
wave = 1996                                10.5
wave = 1998                                 9.3                                  9.0
wave = 2000                                 9.1                                  8.6
                                                                                 3.4
Net Worth, Bottom Quartile                     4.1
Net Worth, 2nd Quartile                        7.7                                 7.1
Net Worth, 3rd Quartile                       10.2                                10.0
Net Worth, Top Quartile                       15.1                                14.8
Note: Full Sample consists of individuals aged 55-69 in the 1996, 1998 or 2000 HRS who report their
marital status and long-term care insurance coverage. “Constant Medicaid Rules” sub-sample is restricted
to individuals who did not experience changes in marital status during our data (1996 – 2000) and who are
in one of the 30 states that did not have real Medicaid asset rule changes between 1991-2000. Net worth is
the HRS imputed value for net worth. It includes net financing worth, housing wealth, and defined
contribution pension values, but does not include DB pension or Social Security wealth. All statistics are
calculated using household weights.




                                                                                                        28
Table 3: Main crowd out estimates
                           Full Sample                                                            Constant Medicaid Rules Sub-Sample
                           (1)                        (2)                        (3)                     (4)                   (5)                                (6)
Protected                  -0.0056*                   -0.0109**                  -0.0093                 -0.0103*              -0.0172**                          -0.0153
                           (0.0031)                   (0.0048)                   (0.0060)                (0.0050)              (0.0064)                           (0.0112)
                           [0.0045]                   [0.0048]                   [0.0052]                [0.0055]              [0.0053]                           [0.0079]

Additional Controls                                                              Asset HAT *                Asset HAT * state          Married * State            All two-way
                                                                                 married                                                                          interactions
Observations               24,841                     15,576                     15576                      15576                      15576                      15576
Notes: Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) by instrumental variables (IV); Protected_Hat is used as an instrument for Protected. All regressions use household
weights. Protected and Protected_Hat are measured in units of $10,000. “Constant Medicaid rules sub-sample” restricts the sample to individuals whose marital status did not
change between 1996 and 2000 and who are in states whose real Medicaid asset disregards did not change between 1991 and 2000. Columns (3) through (6) add additional
controls to the specification in column (2), as indicated in the row labeled “additional controls”. Specifically, column 3 adds an interaction between predicted assets and marital
status, Column 4 adds interactions between predicted assets and state dummies, Column 5 adds interactions between marital status and state dummies, and column 6 adds all three
of these sets of two-way interactions in the previous three columns. Standard errors allowing for an arbitrary variance covariance matrix within each state are (in parentheses);
standard errors calculated using a non-parametric bootstrap are [in square brackets] (see text for more details). ***, **, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent
and 10 percent level respectively, based on the standard errors (in parentheses). All regressions include indicator variables for marital status, state fixed effects, education
categorical dummies, gender, occupation, industry, number of children up to five, age, retired, HRS cohort, race, Hispanic, and HRS wave, as well as education categorical
dummies interacted with the indicators for marital status, gender, occupation, industry, number of children up to five, age, retired, HRS cohort, race, Hispanic and HRS wave.




                                                                                                                                                                                       29
Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis: Alternative specifications and sub-samples
                      Baseline          Other Medicaid Parameters       20th to 60th pctile of   age 55-61        age 62-69       High School              Some College or
                                                                        Asset distribution                                        Education or Less        More
                         (1)               (2)                            (3)                      (4)              (5)             (6)                      (7)
PROTECTED                -0.0109**         -0.0114**                      -0.0223*                 -0.0136**        -0.0043         -0.011**                 -0.012*
                         (0.0048)          (0.0055)                       (0.0130)                 (0.0053)         (0.0085)        (0.0052)                 (0.006)
                         [0.0048]          [0.0049]                       [0.0127]                 [0.0067]         [0.0068]        [0.0059]                 [0.010]

INCOME                                      0.0363
                                           (0.4285)

LIENS                                        0.0087
                                            (0.0175)
Observations            15576             15576                           6029                   8552              7024              9,452                     6,124
Note: Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) by instrumental variables (IV) on the constant Medicaid rules sub-sample; Protected_Hat is used as an instrument for
Protected. All regressions use household weights. Protected and Protected_Hat are measured in units of $10,000. Column 1 replicates the baseline results (from Table 3, column
2). Column 2 adds controls for other Medicaid rules, specifically the amount of income (in units of $10,000) that a household can keep and still qualify for Medicaid (“Income”),
and an indicator variable for whether a state will put a lien on a house when one spouse is in a nursing home in order to recoup expenses upon the death of the community spouse
(“Liens”). Column 3 limits the sample to individuals in the 20th to 60th percentile of the asset distribution of married individuals (which is the range in which the variation in
Protected is largest). Columns 4 and 5 look separately at individuals aged 55-61 and 62-69. Columns 6 and 7 look separately at individuals with a high school education or less and
individuals with some college education or more. Standard errors allowing for an arbitrary variance covariance matrix within each state are (in parentheses); standard errors
calculated using a non-parametric bootstrap are [in square brackets] (see text for more details). ***, **, * denotes statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent
level respectively, based on the standard errors (in parentheses). All regressions include indicator variables for marital status, state fixed effects, education categorical dummies,
gender, occupation, industry, number of children up to five, age, retired, HRS cohort, race, Hispanic, and HRS wave, as well as education categorical dummies interacted with the
indicators for marital status, gender, occupation, industry, number of children up to five, age, retired, HRS cohort, race, Hispanic and HRS wave.




                                                                                                                                                                                     30
Appendix A: Overview of Medicaid Rules
     This appendix discusses in some detail the rules that govern financial eligibility for Medicaid.
We focus primarily on the rules regarding the amount of financial assets that an individual or
couple is permitted to keep and still receive Medicaid reimbursement for nursing homes. We
label this value Protected in our empirical work in the main body of the paper; it is our key
variable of interest. We also briefly discuss the rules regarding Medicaid income disregards and
Medicaid treatment of housing wealth; we briefly explore the impact of these variables in the
sensitivity analysis presented in Table 5.
     Medicaid rules vary considerably across states. Within each state, the rules pertaining to a
single individual who goes into a nursing home differ from those pertaining to married
individuals who go into a nursing home whose spouse remains in the community. Since the
differential rules within state by marital status form the main source of our empirical
identification strategy, we discuss these differences in some detail.
     Appendix Table A1 provides a summary of the various Medicaid rules for nursing home
expenses for single and for married people in each state as of 2000. We now discuss each briefly
in turn. At the end of this section, we turn to a discussion of state rule changes over the 1991 to
2000 period.

Rules for single individuals in 2000
Medicaid rules for single individuals are relatively simple and uniform across states.

Maximum amount of retainable assets: They can keep no more financial wealth than the
Medicaid-specified asset limit. Anything above these must go toward paying for the care. In
2000, the modal asset limit was $2,000 (which nearly 70 percent of states used). The remaining
states have an asset limit that ranges from $1,500 to $6,500.

Maximum amount of retainable monthly income: They can keep no more monthly income than
the Personal Needs Allowance (PNA). In 2000, these ranged from $30 to $77 per month.
Rules regarding housing wealth: They must sell their house (and use the proceeds to pay for that
care), unless there is a chance of recovery or a dependent child living in the house.

Rules for married individuals (one spouse in NH, one in community)6
Treatment of financial assets:
     When one spouse enters a nursing home, total household financial (non-housing) assets (A)
are attributed evenly between the two spouses. From this even attribution, the spouse that goes
into a nursing home is allowed to keep only the Medicaid-specified income and asset limits for
single individuals (i.e. $30-$77 a month of income and approximately $2,000 of assets).
     The main source of variation used in our empirical work is the amount of assets that the
community spouse is allowed to keep. This amount depends on the total amount of household
financial assets (A) and the state rules regarding the minimum and maximum assets that the
community spouse is allowed to keep (STATEMIN and STATEMAX respectively). A
community spouse whose share of the assets is below the state minimum allowable (STATEMIN)
is allowed to take assets from the nursing home spouse to top-up their asset level up to
STATEMIN.
     In setting the minimum and maximum amount of assets the community spouse can retain, the
states are constrained to set a minimum (STATEMIN) that is at least as high as the federal

6
  For the less common case when both spouses need nursing home care, they are essentially treated as two
single individuals in terms of the treatment of assets, income and housing. The one exception is that some
states set a lower threshold for the amount of assets the couple can keep ($3,000 combined instead of
$2,000 each).


                                                                                                        31
minimum (FEDMIN) and to set the maximum (STATEMAX) no higher than the Federal
maximum (FEDMAX).7
     In all states therefore, married couples with combined assets of less than the Federal
Minimum ($16,824 in 2000) face the same treatment of their assets (they are allowed to keep all
of them). Furthermore, in all but 5 states, married couples with combined assets of more than
twice the Federal maximum (i.e. $168,240 in 2000) are allowed to keep the same amount
($84,120).8 The differential treatment across states of married couples’ assets therefore occurs
mainly for couples with assets between the Federal Minimum and twice the Federal Maximum. In
2000, these limits were $16,824 and $168,240 respectively, and correspond to the 20th and 58th
percentile of financial assets for married households in the 2000 HRS. Married households in this
“affected range” have average assets of $74,266.9
     For married couples with assets between the Federal Minimum and twice the Federal
Maximum, there is substantial variation across states in the amount of assets they are allowed to
retain. This variation arises from where states choose to set their State Minimum and State
Maximum allowable retainable assets.
     Figure A1 compares the amount of assets that the community spouse can keep under the two
most common state rules. In the first, which is used in 26 states, the state sets both the minimum
and maximum allowable assets (STATEMIN and STATEMAX) to the Federal Maximum. Under
these rules, the household faces a 0 percent marginal tax rate on its assets until it reaches the state
minimum amount of allowed retainable assets, at which point it faces a 100 percent marginal tax
rate on all further assets. We refer to this as “Case 1A” and illustrate it with the dark line in
Figure A1.10
     The second most common set of state rules (which apply in 15 states), set the state minimum
equal to the federal minimum allowable retainable assets, and the state maximum equal to the
federal maximum allowable retainable assets. This is shown by the dashed line in Figure A1. In
this case, the marginal tax rate faced on assets goes from 0%, to 100%, to 50% and then back to
100%, as shown in the figure.11
     Figure 1 graphs the difference in the amount of assets a community spouse can keep (as a
function of total household financial assets) if they are in a Case 1A state relative to a Case 2A
As is readily apparent, this difference is non-monotonic in the couples’ assets.
     The difference in the amount of allowable retained assets is quite substantial. For example, if
all married couples were to move from Case 1A states to Case 2A states, the average difference in
the amount a household is allowed to keep would be $8,277 in the whole sample, which is
approximately 2 percent of average assets. For those in the “affected range” (20th to 58th
percentile of assets i.e. between $16,824 and $168,240), this move would on average allow them
to keep $21,715 more in assets, which represents 29 percent of average financial assets in this
range. The maximum change in the amount of assets that the household would be able to keep is
$67,296 and occurs for households with assets of $84,120.
     Finally, we note that while we have focused on the two major types of state rules, there are 10
other states whose rules differ from those in Cases 1A and 2A. For the sake of brevity we do not
discuss these rules in detail; they are summarized in Table A1. Like the two more common cases


7
  In 2000, the FEDMIN and FEDMAX were, respectively, $16,824 and $84,120 (Stone 2002). They are
indexed to the CPI but have otherwise remained unchanged between the 1991 and 2000 period.
8
  The five state exceptions are AR, DC, NY, OR, and SC.
9
  These are summary stats on the 2000 HRS, using financial assets. The sample is limited to married
households aged 60-70. The cut points in the distribution are identical for the age 75+ sample (20th-58th
percentile).
10
   The 26 states in this category are: AK, AZ, CA, CO, FL, GA, HI, IL, KY, LA, MA, MD, ME, MI, MS,
MO, ND, NE, NV, OK, SD, VT, WA, WI, WV, and WY.
11
   The 15 states in this category are: CT, ID, IN, KS, MT, NC, NH, NJ, OH, PA, RI, TN, TX, UT, and VA.


                                                                                                      32
discussed above, the difference across states in the treatment of assets is non-monotonic in the
couples’ assets across these other cases as well (relative to each other or the two more common
cases). It is also non-trivial in magnitude.

Treatment of Income: Income is split based on the “name on the check” rule, rather than evenly
between the two spouses as is the case for assets, in all but 2 states. The institutionalized
individual is allowed to keep the same amount of income as a single household (defined above as
the PNA). The community spouse is allowed to keep an unlimited amount of income if it is in
her name. If the community spouse’s income is below a minimum amount known as the
community spouse income limit (CSIL), then she is eligible to keep enough of her
institutionalized spouse’s income to bring her total income up to that limit. This minimum income
amount varies across states from approximately $1,407 to $2,133 per month as shown in Table
A1.

Treatment of Housing: The house of a community spouse is left out of the calculation of assets or
income and it is completely protected for the community spouse during her lifetime. It may be of
unlimited value. However, about one-quarter of states will put a lien on this house, which allows
the state to collect money from the sale of the house to reimburse them for their Medicaid outlays
upon the sale of the house or the death of the community spouse. We refer to such states as LIEN
states. Enforcement of estate recovery practices varies across states (Sabatino and Wood, 1996).

Changes in Rules.
All of the preceding discussion applies to the state rules in 2000. For purposes of the empirical
work, it is important to know whether states changed their rules at some point, as individuals
might have purchased or considered purchasing long-term care insurance under a different set of
rules. As discussed in the text, there was a major change in rules in 1988 (effective in 1989),
which motivated our focus on an age group who was likely to be of buying age after 1988. We
also tracked down information on rule changes between 1991 and 2000. There is no central
database for state-specific Medicaid eligibility rules. We compiled a timeline for these state-
specific rule changes by collecting a variety of different sources that covered the different years;
where sources disagreed, we telephoned the relevant agency in the state to ascertain the correct
information. We were unable to obtain state-specific information between 1989 and 1991.12
    There were no major changes in the Medicaid rules for single individuals during this time
period. However, for married individuals, 21 states changed their assets protection rules for the
community spouse between 1991 and 2000 (see Appendix Table A1). In addition, 27 states
changed the allowable income limit for institutionalized individuals (PNA). Finally, over our
period 13 states introduced estate recovery plans (LIENS).




12
  Our specific sources for state Medicaid rules from 1991- 2000 are: Bruen et al (1998); Congressional
Research Service (1993); Horvath (1997); Kassner and Shirley (1998); the National Association of
Medicaid Directors; Price (1996); Sabatino and Wood (1996); Schwab (1998); Stone (2002), and telephone
calls to particular states.


                                                                                                   33
  Table A1: Medicaid Eligibility Parameters by State, 2000
State    Rules for single individuals           Rules for married individuals with community spouse
         Max          Max amount        Min amount of       “Min” amount of       Is lien put   No change
         amount       of                retainable assets   retainable            on            asset rules
         of           retainable        for community       monthly income        community for married
         retainable monthly             spouse              for community         spouse’s      individuals
         assets       income            (STATEMIN)          spouse (CSIL)         house?        (1991-
                      (PNA)                                                                     2000)
AK       2,000        75                           84,120                 2,103               0             1
AL       2,000        30                           25,000                 1,407               1             0
AR*      2,000        40                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
AZ       2,000        76.80                        84,120                 2,103               0             1
CA       2,000        35                           84,120                 2,103               1             1
CO       2,000        50                           84,120                 1,407               1             0
CT       1,600        52                           16,824                 1,407               1             1
DC*      2,600        42                           16,824                 2,103               0             1
DE       2,000        70                           25,000                 1,407               1             0
FL       2,000        35                           84,120                 2,103               0             1
GA       3,000        30                           84,120                 2,103               0             1
HI       2,000        30                           84,120                 2,103               1             1
IA       2,000        30                           24,000                 2,103               0             0
ID       2,000        30                           16,824                 1,407               1             1
IL       2,000        30                           84,120                 2,103               1             1
IN       1,500        50                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
KS       2,000        30                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
KY       2,000        40                           84,120                 2,103               0             1
LA       2,000        38                           84,120                 2,103               0             1
MA       6,500        60                           84,120                 1,407               1             0
MD       2,500        40                           84,120                 2,049               1             0
ME       3,000        40                           84,120                 2,103               0             0
MI       2,000        60                           84,120                 2,103               0             0
MN       3,000        67                           23,774                 1,407               1             1
MO       2,000        30                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
MS       2,000        44                           84,120                 2,103               0             1
MT       2,000        40                           16,824                 2,103               1             1
NC       2,000        30                           16,824                 2,103               0             1
ND       3,000        40                           84,120                 2,103               0             1
NE       4,000        50                           84,120                 1,407               0             0
NH       2,500        50                           16,824                 2,103               0             1
NJ       4,000        35                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
NM       2,000        45                           31,290                 1,407               0             1
NV       2,000        35                           84,120                 2,103               0             0
NY*      3,600        50                          74,820*                 2,103               1             0
OH       1,500        40                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
OK       2,000        50                           84,120                 2,103               0             0
OR*      2,000        30                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
PA       2,400        30                           16,824                 1,407               0             1
RI       4,000        50                           16,824                 1,407                             1



                                                                                                 34
 SC*         2,000         30                             66,480                    1,662                0         0
 SD          2,000         30                             84,120                    1,407                0         0
 TN          2,000         30                             16,824                    1,407                0         1
 TX          2,000         45                             16,824                    2,103                0         1
 UT          2,000         45                             16,824                    1,407                0         1
 VA          2,000         30                             16,824                    1,407                0         1
 VT          2,000         47.66                          84,120                    1,407                0         1
 WA          2,000         41.62                          84,120                    1,407                0         1
 WI          2,000         45                             84,120                    1,875                1         1
 WV          2,000         50                             84,120                    1,407                0         0
 WY          2,000         30                             84,120                    2,103                0         1
Source: Stone 2002, Sabatino and Wood 1996, and authors’ corrections based on telephone conversations with
particular states where other sources disagreed with those listed here.
Notes:
         • For all states, the maximum amount of assets the community spouse is allowed to keep
               (STATEMAX) is the same (and equal to FEDMAX) unless the state is denoted with a * in which
               case STATEMAX=STATEMIN.
         • Treatment of housing for single individuals is not described in the table since it is the same in all
               states (see text).
         • PNA stands for Personal Needs Allowance
         • CSIL stands for Community Spouse Income Limit.
         • In 2000, FEDMIN and FEDMAX were $16,824 and $84,120, respectively.




                                                                                                              35
         Figure A1:Medicaid Marginal Tax
                          Married Households
                                STATEMAX=FEDMAX
Assets Kept for
Community Spouse
                                        Case 1A: STATEMIN=FEDMAX
FED
MAX
                                              100%

                      0%
                                        50%
                                                  Case 2A:
                                                  STATEMIN=FEDMIN


FED
MIN      45°       100%                                             Household
                                                                    Assets (A)

            FEDMIN   2*FEDMIN        FEDMAX                2*FEDMAX
                                                                       36
