NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH, REFORM INDICATORS AND POLICY COMPLEMENTARIES
Jorge Braga de Macedo
Joaquim Oliveira Martins
Working Paper 12544
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12544

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2006

We thank Francesca Pissarides for allowing us to access the EBRD database and Silas Xu for helpful
research assistance. We also thank participants in the Fall 2004 seminar on International Development
at Sciences Po, Paris, where the empirical work was first presented in February 2005; participants
at the seminar in Universidade Nova de Lisboa, September 2005, in particular Luis Campos e Cunha,
Luis Catela; participants at the invited session on Policy Complementarities sponsored by Banco de
Portugal at LACEA Annual Conference, October 2005, Paris, in particular Ricardo Hausman. The
views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the OECD or its Memeber countires.
© 2006 by Jorge Braga de Macedo and Joaquim Oliveira Martins. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth, Reform Indicators and Policy Complementaries
Jorge Braga de Macedo and Joaquim Oliveira Martins
NBER Working Paper No. 12544
September 2006
JEL No. P2,O40,C33
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses the design of structural policies by relating second-best results and the complementarity
of reforms. It computes a complementarity index based on structural reform indicators compiled by
the EBRD for transition countries, assuming that the run-up to EU integration corresponds to a nearly
complete policy cycle. Using econometric panel estimates, the level of reforms and changes in their
complementarity are found to be positively related to output growth, corrected for endogeneity, and
given initial conditions and the extent of macroeconomic stabilisation.
Jorge Braga de Macedo
Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Faculty of Economics
Campus Campolide
1099-032 Lisbon
Portugal
jorge_macedo@nber.org
Joaquim Oliveira Martins
2 Rue Andre Pascal
75775 Paris Cedex 16
FRANCE
joaquim.oliveira@oecd.org

Index
1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 3
2. Second-best and reform strategy ....................................................................................................... 4
3. From second-best to Supermodularity and policy complementarity........................................... 5
4. Empirical application: the transition process in Central and Eastern Europe ............................ 7
4.1. The EBRD Transition indicators ................................................................................................. 8
5. Composite Reform Indicators and Complementarity .................................................................... 9
6. Reform level, complementarity and growth: an empirical test................................................... 11
7. Conclusions and further research.................................................................................................... 13
Appendix: Complementarity, Supermodularity and Optimisation ............................................... 14
Data Annex: Country list and groupings ........................................................................................... 16

2

1. Introduction
As economic reforms are mutually interdependent, a liberal policy package needs internal
coherence. How can a coherent reform strategy be achieved for a well-balanced and functional
economic system? The theory of second-best originated in Lipsey and Lancaster (1956) suggests
that in the presence of a large number of distortions, a piecemeal reform approach is unlikely to
produce a good strategy and actually may reduce welfare. Yet, a radial reform strategy achieving
proportional reductions in all distortions at the same time can be shown to be unambiguously
welfare improving. This result is due to Foster and Sonnenschein (1970) and was generalised by
Rader (1976) and Bergstrom (1996).
The difficulty and time needed to build institutions often leads to adopt a compromise: some
short-term deadweight losses are accepted to reap the long-term benefits of reforms. A piecemeal
approach to reform has been also justified on the grounds of political constraints as political
cycles are often too short to engage several reform fronts at the same time.
The idea of engaging several reforms in parallel may also reflect policy complementarities. This
goes back to Edgeworth (“doing more in one thing increases the returns to doing more of
another”) but it has been generalised in such a way that it does not require any particular
differentiability or convexity assumptions (Topkis, 1998). This framework has been applied
notably to industrial organisation and institutional analysis (e.g. Milgrom and Roberts, 1995;
Amable, 2003). Rather than focusing on the constraint of removing all distortions at the same
time or in equal proportions, the existence of complementarity signals a benefit instead, i.e. the
return of doing one reform is enhanced when other reforms are in place.
Nevertheless, relatively little attention has been paid to complementarity in the vast literature
relating the design and the scope of reforms to overall economic performance. To be sure, crosssection or panel regressions of composite reform indicators on growth have provided mixed or
inconclusive evidence. The link between liberal reforms and growth was been questioned by
Rodrik (2003), who points out that there is not a unique mapping from institutional function to
form and therefore that liberal economic reforms are not the only path to achieving the goal of
creating a full-fledged market economy capable of sustaining growth. Such reforms are more
likely to fall prey to the second-best argument when there is a tendency for ready-made policy
packages (e.g. Washington-consensus type) and much less is known about local conditions.
Independently of whether results are favourable to the presumption that reforms improve
economy’s prospects, Rodrik (2005) criticises regressions of composite reform indicators on the
rate of GDP growth. He stresses that we know much more about sustaining growth in highincome countries, but much less about igniting growth in poor countries. For the latter, nonorthodox policies could be appropriate to trigger a growth process. Growth, in turn, would help
sustaining reform.
This has two important consequences. First, Rodrik’s analysis suggests that rather than a broadbased reform, the lesson is to concentrate on the key barrier(s) to growth, rather than trying to
3

undertake all reforms (or removing all distortions) at once. Second, policies are typically
endogenous to the growth process. In many countries, the sequence was rather first high growth,
then better institutions rather than the reverse. In this context, usual regressions of economic
growth on policies may not give many insights on how economic development unfolds (Rodrik,
2005).
Against this background, this paper proposes a framework aiming at somewhat reconciling the
core result of second-best theory, according to which a liberal reform package has to be
comprehensive by nature, with the fact that igniting a reform process may require focusing on
the main distortions blocking the take-off of the economy. To this aim, we define a
complementarity index across structural reforms and investigate its impact on economic growth.
We used a set of structural reform indicators compiled by the EBRD for Central and Eastern
European countries in transition. While broadly qualitative, these indicators provide a
sufficiently comprehensive and consistent evaluation by the EBRD experts of the structural
transformation transition process. Taking the transition process as a policy experiment is
particularly attractive. Allowing for different initial conditions, at the outset, all transition
countries were offered roughly the same liberal policy package designed to make use of market
mechanisms to obtain the best possible allocation of resources. Countries have implemented this
package in different ways and extent leading to a wide and rich variation of outcomes. Starting
in the early 1990s up to the integration of in the EU of new Member countries, this period also
corresponds to a nearly complete policy cycle.
The structure of the paper is as follows. The next two sections briefly discuss the basis for the
second-best result and the mathematics of complementarity. This is followed by a discussion on
main reform areas and their interdependence in the context of emerging markets and transition
countries, using information collected in OECD country surveys. Section 4 also describes the
content and some features of the EBRD reform indicators. Section 5 considers composite reform
indicators, focusing on reform level and complementarity. Using these indicators, we then test
the impact of the level and changes of reform indicators on output growth by means of an
econometric panel estimate. The paper ends with a summary and thoughts for further research
in the context of the EU reform strategy.

2. Second-best and reform strategy
The seminal paper by Lipsey and Lancaster (1956) showed that starting from a second-best
situation, the only way to ensure a non-ambiguous increase in welfare is to remove all the
distortions simultaneously. From this rather pessimistic view on the way to conduct economic
reforms and their impact on economic reform on welfare, Foster and Sonnenschein (1970) proved
that, under some conditions, the following result holds in single-equilibrium theory:
Theorem (Foster and Sonneschein, 1970): With a flat production function and if no
commodity is inferior in the production function, then a radial increase in distortion is
associated with a reduction in utility.

4

A radial increase in distortion derives from the comparison between two d-equilibria, each
characterised by a level of distortions, D1 and D2, where D2=k.D1 and k>1. The index k can be
seen as a proportional shift in all distortions simultaneously compared with the first-best
situation. This isomorphic shift is required in order to ensure that the mapping between dequilibria and distortion is unique.
The correspondence between a proportional reduction in distortions and tax reforms is relatively
easy to understand. In more general cases, it may be quite difficult to define a set of meaningful
indicators, having the same dimensionality and range of variation. Nevertheless, the
development of institutional and reform indicators in recent years has made significant progress
in this direction.1
Let us assume that N reform areas have been identified and a set of indicators (R1, R2,…., RN)
defined in such a way that when considering a proportional move in all reform areas:

∆Ri
= k > 0 , ∀i
Ri

(1)

this is equivalent to a radial removal of distortions. Under appropriate conditions, each value of
the parameter k would then define a single d-equilibrium. In principle, it could be possible to
construct a composite indicator measuring how far a given reform package is far from a radial
move. For example, one minus the variance of the different ki would provide an appropriate
Euclidean metric:

RR = 1 −

1
N

∑ (k
i

i

− kˆ

)

2

(2)

where k̂ is the average of the ki. RR=1 would imply a radial shift in the distortions.

3. From second-best to Supermodularity and policy complementarity
Accordingly, a reform strategy reducing distortions progressively in a radial manner would
ensure a non-ambiguous increase in welfare. The problem is that such a reform package would
lead to an overly ambitious policy agenda. It is difficult to imagine that a government, especially
in less developed countries, has the information set and the institutional capacity to implement
such a broad strategy. Rodrik(2006) put forward a similar argument by pointing out that a policy
advice based on broad-based reform is somewhat unfalsifiable in terms of its impacts on
economic performance (e.g. GDP growth). When the impact of reforms does not materialise as
expected, it can always be argued that some policy areas were left out and hindered the overall
return of reform package “In the end, it is always the advisee who falls short, and never the
advisor who is proved wrong”.

1

For a discussion on composite indicators and their construction methods, see Nardo et al. (2005).

5

Moreover, the conditions to apply the Foster and Sonnenschein’s result are rather restrictive. A
flat production rules out any peculiarities in the indifference curves. Together with the
isomorphic distortion these conditions avoid multiple equilibria. While the intuition for a ‘radial’
reform strategy is strong, in the sense that there is no welfare gains from piecemeal reforms, the
conditions appear very demanding even in a static framework.
In view of the empirical application we are seeking, the modern concept of complementarity
(Topkis, 1987, 1998) provides an alternative and more flexible framework in which to address
reform interdependence. It does not require any particular differentiability or convexity
assumptions, and for example it can be applied to discrete or qualitative policy indicators. The
framework applies to the case where different reforms (or removal of distortions) are pair-wise
complementary. As argued below, this seems a relatively general property. It is more often the
case that policies are related to each other in a complementarity way rather than being
substitutes.
The basic idea is as follows. Assume a given objective function F(.) depending from two policy
instruments (x, y). A given policy can have two states either reform (x) or no-reform ( x ). In this
context, the two policies are said to be complementarity if:

F ( x, y ) − F ( x , y ) ≤ F ( x , y ) − F ( x , y )

(3)

This means that return of moving from minimum ( x , y ) to ( x, y ) (or to ( x , y )) is less than the
move from ( x, y ) (or from ( x , y )) to the maximum ( x, y ). Put differently, even tough F(.) always
increases, the return from doing reform x (or y) is greater when reform y (or x) is already in place.
This formalises the fact that having done one reform maximises the return of doing another
reform. Note that Edgeworth complementarity is a special case where the complementarity can
be defined in a differential way: ∂ 2 F ( x, y ) ∂x∂y ≥ 0 .
This can be generalised to a case of N reforms. If the complementarity relations (3) hold for every
pair of reforms, F(.) is said to be supermodular. Optimising in such a system can be achieved by
increasing all reforms in parallel (but not necessarily in the same proportion as in radial
reductions in distortions). As shown by Milgrom and Roberts (1995) this achieves at least half of
the potential gains of an unrestricted optimisation (see Annex).
This powerful result only applies in comparative statics, so the issues of temporal consistency,
reputation, etc. cannot be addressed in the framework as it stands. However, we can define a
time interval suitable for a given reform package and define pair-wise complementarities that
will achieve the predicted increase in welfare. This can be done for various stages in the process
of economic growth without the recursive link among stages of reform, which has been found by
the sequencing literature. Under these conditions, a joint implementation of complementary
reforms would then unambiguously improve welfare, just like a radial reduction in distortions.
This optimisation framework has been applied by Milgrom and Roberts (1995); Amable (2003)
and Amir (2003), while Acemoglu(2005) presents monotone comparative static results on
equilibrium technology bias.

6

What reforms might be included in a reform package depends on the complementarity relations
existing for a specific country and a given point in time. For example, as it will be discussed
below, a price liberalisation policy is complementarity with macroeconomic stabilisation and
vice-versa. There may also be gains in jointly implementing labour and product market reforms
even though the greater rigidity of the former has led some authors (Blanchard and Giavazzi,
2002) to suggest that the link may be recursive rather than supermodular. The policy implication
is that complementarity is an empirical issue, but there is more room for reform packages
embodying complementarity relations than has generally been thought. Effective reform
packages do pertain to a particular stage in the growth process. As growth moves from the neoclassical to Neo-Schumpeterian regimes of Aghion and Howitt (2005), the complementarity
across policies can be broadened to maintain effectiveness. Below we focus on the transition
process.

4. Empirical application: the transition process in Central and Eastern Europe
A decade of transition provides a particular insightful case to explore the linkages across
different economic reforms. At the outset, all transition countries started from a highly distorted
system and were offered roughly the same liberal policy package designed to make use of
market mechanisms to obtain the best possible allocation of resources, which in turn creates the
conditions for sustainable growth and an improvement of living standards. Of course initial
conditions differed greatly and this was pointed out at the time. In retrospect, what was perhaps
overlooked was that such a package would need to be implemented in an internally coherent
way.
Indeed, when policies are mutually interdependent, in order to reap the full benefits from
reform, different policies must, as far as possible, be implemented in parallel. Also because
reforms are interdependent, a direction of causality is not easy to disentangle. Actually, in first
place, most transition countries liberalised trade and a large basket of prices, typically excluding
prices of energy, housing and transport. As a result, the true pattern of demand is revealed as
relative prices adjust. This was followed by stabilisation, but if the right macroeconomic policy
mix is not in place, notably when a budget deficit is financed through monetary creation, price
liberalisation is quickly followed by high and accelerating inflation. In turn, macroeconomic
stabilisation can only be sustained and lead to economic recovery if significant and steady
progress is achieved in the area of structural reform. For example, efforts to achieve and maintain
budget discipline were undermined where enterprises faced weak budget constraints and drew
resources from the public sector (OECD, 1998, 2002). The channel for this was often not direct
subsidy from the budget, but instead over-easy access to credit from the banking system, often
itself in full or partial state ownership. Another example of indirect support is where the state
maintained an artificially overvalued exchange rate in order to facilitate imports of raw materials
or energy to un-restructured heavy industries. This situation persists until firms that fail to add
value are forced out of the market. During transition, privatisation and restructuring were all
used to encourage this outcome. But often this process was held back by insufficient use of
liquidation, the result of ineffective bankruptcy procedures and weak creditor rights.
7

Lack of progress in one area affects other structural reforms. For example, large enterprise
restructuring is undermined in the absence of financial discipline, typically imposed by the
banking sector. Either banks do not lend, regardless of companies’ creditworthiness, to prevent a
new accumulation of bad debts, thus reinforcing existing credit constraints. Or else, under
pressure to resume the flow of lending to un-restructured enterprises, financial problems in the
banking sector re-emerge. Likewise, if bankruptcy proceedings are not effective, banks cannot
both provide credits and impose financial discipline. For example, cases of rapid banking sector
liberalisation without these microeconomic conditions in place were often followed by severe
systemic crisis (OECD, 2000).
More generally, positive structural interactions do not necessarily follow policy implementation.
The problem is not only to solve the question of stocks, such as bad debts, but also to ensure that
the flows, namely exit and entry of firms, new financing and investment, are adequately
balanced. When the flow problems have not been solved, the stock problems tend to re-emerge,
with the risk that their resolution becomes even more costly. Where exit mechanisms are
enforced and induce enterprise liquidations but where the conditions for entry of new
enterprises are not in place, the pace of restructuring may become politically unsustainable as
unemployment rises and the economy fail to recover rapidly.
Another example of the macro-structural complementarity is when an exchange rate anchors
designed to trigger a disinflation process induce a massive increase in the relative prices of the
non-tradable sector. When appropriate competition or regulatory policies are not implemented,
this shock in relative prices together with low price elasticity generates large rents and
constitutes a drag on the potential growth in the economy. This effect can be exacerbated when
policies or incentives towards human capital investment do not exist because the traditional
tradable sector also tends to loose international price competitiveness.
Along these lines, Table 1 summarises the main policy interdependences just discussed and
provides examples of the policy feedbacks by main policy blocks, in the sense that implementing
a reform block increases the return of implementing another one. This provides a first snapshot
of the potential complementarities existing across reforms. These linkages are at the centre of the
transition process. Several OECD studies in this area concluded that it was more important to
ensure that these links operated adequately rather than pushing reform in any single area,
including institutional development (OECD, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2002). One important implication
of what amounts to an implicit preference for “radial” strategies or, in a looser way, to the
existence of policy complementarities is that reform reversals can magnify the costs of transition
(reduce the benefits of reform) perhaps threatening progress in the most advanced policy areas.
[Table 1. Matrix of positive linkages during transition]
4.1. The EBRD Transition indicators
The empirical basis for the observation of the reform process in transition countries was taken
from the EBRD Transition Report, which provides indicators available for 27 transition countries
since 1989. The countries are listed in Annex 1, together with the coverage of the three groupings
8

considered, reflecting initial conditions but also expected terminal conditions in what pertains to
EU membership, where European countries are distinguished from the New Independent States
(NIS) of the former Soviet Union.
The indicators cover eight main structural reform areas listed in Table 2, plus an indicator of
physical infrastructure development which proxies the attractiveness of the economy to domestic
and foreign investors. The EBRD indicators are ranked from 1 (no-reform) to 4+ (full reform). For
completeness, macroeconomic stabilisation is proxied by one additional indicator, the rate of
consumer price inflation (labelled CPI).2
[Table 2. EBRD Reform Indicators]

5. Composite Reform Indicators and Complementarity
Having a set of reform indicators, the question is whether reform momentum is concentrated in
some reform areas or more evenly distributed.3 A transition process that would aim at
minimising the welfare losses associated with a piecemeal reform in a second-best context would
tend to minimise the gap between the different reform areas, while increasing the average level
of reforms. To evaluate it we need to measure policy complementarity. The basic idea is that one
needs to find a metric that verifies the property of complementarity. For example, let us assume
three reform areas valued in the range [1, 4] as the EBRD indicators. Then, a move from (1,1,1) to
(2,2,2) is better than a move to (4,1,1), although in terms of the average reform level there is no
difference.
A reform strategy exploiting policy synergies is then reflected into an even distribution of
individual reform indicators. A simple way to capture this is to measure the concentration of
reforms by means of the usual Hirschmann-Herfindhal indicator and take the reciprocal of it, as
an index of reform complementarity (RC):

RC =

1
 R 
∑i  RL ⋅i N 

(4)

2

where RL is the simple average4 year by year of the nine sectoral indicators and N for the
number of reform areas. There is an interesting relationship between the level and the
2

Other proxies were considered (e.g. budget deficits, current account balances, etc.), but the CPI turned
out to perform rather well in the econometric tests.

3

In a previous version of this paper, there is a more detailed description of the transition process and
composite reform indicators. This version can be downloaded from the LACEA Annual
Conference 2005 website at lacea.org.

4

Depending on some form of evaluation of the relative importance of policy areas, this indicator could be
computed using a particular weighting scheme. Of course, this would not change the main
thrust of the results.

9

complementarity of reforms. In order to draw this relation, it can be shown that the range of
variation for the two indicators is as follows:

RL ∈ [Rmin , Rmax ]
 (R + ( N − 1) Rmin )2

RC ∈  max
, N
2
2
 Rmax + ( N − 1) ⋅ Rmin


(5)

where Rmin and Rmax stand for, respectively, the minimum and the maximum reform score (in this
case 1 and 4+).
To illustrate the links between these two indicators we can construct a hypothetical case where
the reform process starts only in one or two reform areas and then, progressively, is extended to
all reform areas up to the point where all reform indicators reach the maximum reform score.
This point can be viewed as the end of a policy cycle. This produces a U-shaped relationship
between RL and RC, the average level of reforms and the complementarity index, as illustrated in
Figure 1.
[Figure 1. Reform Levels and Complementarity: a hypothetical case]
It is interesting to note that the d-equilibria, discussed in section 2, are all iso-complementarity loci
with the RC indicator at its maximum. In some sense, a radial reform strategy could be described
in terms of the complementarity indicator by a process removing distortions in such a way that
RC never decreases throughout the transition process.
Turning now to our actual sample, Figures 2a-c show that the reform process was indeed
characterised by a significant decrease of complementarity at the beginning of transition. This
can be interpreted as follows. Transition is about shifting from a socialist system that had a high
complementarity, but was totally rigid and distorted, towards a flexible market system that also
displays a high complementarity. To make this structural change not all distortions could be
removed at the same time so complementarity decreased.
[Figure 2a. Reform complementarity (RC), New EU Members]
[Figure 2b. Reform complementarity (RC), European non-EU Members]
[Figure 2c. Reform complementarity (RC), NIS]
Interestingly, the most successful transition countries were able to resume the complementarity
of reforms during the transition process, whereas the lagging or slow-reformers were not able to
implement the reform process in the same way. Therefore, as it could be expected, reform
complementarity has increased in the more advanced transition countries that integrated
recently the EU.
As an aside, there are some insights to be drawn in terms of the comparison between the reform
process in China and in the former Central and Eastern European countries. The fact that the
Chinese transition has avoided the large output loss observed in latter group of countries could
10

be related to the fact its reform process approach was able to decrease market distortions without
overly decreasing the overall complementarity of the economic cum institutional system, but this
testing hypothesis is left for future research.

6. Reform level, complementarity and growth: an empirical test
The indicators presented in the previous section, RL and RC, are now related to the growth rate
of real output. The fact that the ignition of reforms is reflected in a decrease of complementarity
is equivalent to say that not all distortions could be removed at the same time. As discussed in
the introduction, this is typically a second-best situation, which can entail a loss of welfare (or
output, as a proxy). This transitional cost could be reflected in income losses at the beginning of
the transition. This theoretical intuition is verified in our sample for the New EU Members, as the
relationship between the average level of reforms and GDP growth shows an initial decline
followed by an increase until the end of the policy cycle. No such a pattern appears for the NonEU group where growth displays a much more erratic relation with the level of reforms.
Our empirical test takes as a starting point the Falcetti et al. (2002, 2005)’s investigation on the
relative importance of three sets of factors – initial conditions, macroeconomic stabilisation and
structural reforms – as determinants of growth in transition economies. They argued that the
usual debate on the role of initial conditions is much driven by the way the econometric test is
conducted. A simple cross-section analysis tends to give a much greater weight to initial
conditions. This is due to the fact that commitment to reform accelerates convergence. This effect
can be better captured by a panel regression, where the role of reforms emerges strongly. Their
main result is that “…countries that ‘defied the odds’ by reforming more rapidly and extensively
than predicted by a simple non-linear time trend, have reaped substantial growth dividends and
this time the effect is highly significant.”
In their final remarks, they also point out that the literature on reforms and performance has so
far largely failed to address the question of “the complementarities between further liberalization
and privatisation and deeper institutional reform, which have recently received so much
emphasis in the policy debate… Responding effectively to the challenges of the next decade will
require more than the recipes of the past.” By integrating both level and complementarity of
reforms, this paper aims at closing this gap. Indeed, if transition countries –mainly those
integrating the EU– were able to trigger a reform process and overcome the costs of the initial
economic recession, our theoretical analysis (section 2) suggests that sustaining growth requires a
broader reform strategy.
We first followed the specification of Falcetti et al. (2002), i.e. the growth rate of GDP is related to
the level of the reform indicators.5,6 While this specification is followed in many growth
5

Some outlier points were removed from the sample because one either the growth rates of GDP or the
CPI displayed extremely high values, which could create an artificial leverage point in the
regression. These include the years 1992 and 1993 for the FR Yugoslavia, 1992 and 1996 for
Bosnia, 1994 for Georgia and 1993 for Turkmenistan.

11

regression studies, our framework suggests rather relating the variation of distortions (or the
reform indicators) to variations in output.
Accordingly, we tested a specification where both the levels and variations of the reform
indicators are included among the regressors (Table 3). The unbalanced panel data covers 27
countries x 16 years (1989-2004). In order to test for the robustness of the results the estimates
were carried out through different estimators: first using the usual fixed-effect estimator, not
allowing incorporating the time invariant variable related to the initial conditions. Then the
initial conditions were added in the context of a GLS random-effects model. Finally, a dynamic
GMM model (cf. Arellano and Bover, 1998)7 was estimated in order to correct for possible
endogeneity bias between growth, inflation and the level of reforms. This addresses
Rodrik (2005)’s critique of the endogeneity of policy indicators in growth regressions.
[Table 3. Growth, Reform level and Complementarity: an econometric test]
The results confirm that the countries having a higher reform level (RL) tend to have higher GDP
growth, but the variation of RL displays a negative sign. Thus, an increment of reforms usually
induces a negative impact on growth, which is typically the second-best result. Over the longrun, when reform becomes more broad-based higher levels of reforms are related to higher
growth rates. The complementarity indicator displays a symmetric pattern, as its level displays a
negative sign while its variation has the expected positive sign. Indeed, a high complementarity
by itself does not necessarily lead to higher output growth, because in our sample, unreformed
countries may have had for some period higher complementarity than reforming ones. To sumup, only the level of reforms and the changes in their complementary have a positive impact on
growth. The former effect provides a long-run target for reforms, while the latter provides
guidance on the conduct of the transition process.

6

7

This test was carried out through a panel regression (27 countries by 16 years) including initial
conditions, a measure of stabilisation and the level of reforms, but with different proxies for the
initial conditions and macroeconomic stabilisation. In addition, we included the
complementarity index defined above. For the New European members, the results provide
relatively robust evidence that the reform indicators play a more important role than the initial
conditions. This could be expected, as the catch-up process in this group lessens the role of the
starting conditions. In this sub-sample, both the level and the complementarity of reforms
display positive and significant coefficients. In the European non-EU members, the impact of
pre-transition GDP level is negative, no doubt a consequence of the conflict in the Balkans and
the effect of complementarity does not appear significant. The same applies for the NIS group.
This is not surprising, as the growth performance in the latter groups is more noisy and volatile
and there were a number of policy reversals. An additional regression where the time sample
was restricted to the initial stages of transition (say, from 1989 to 1995) for all countries would
show that the reform indicator appears not significant, while the complementary index appears
positive and significant. The results are available in the paper quoted in footnote 3.
For this we used the xtabond2 command of STATA developed by Roodman (2005).

12

7. Conclusions and further research
Liberal economic reforms are seen as reducing distortions, thereby raising profitability in the
more productive sectors of the national economy. If there are many such distortions, then
eliminating only few of them may be perverse for national welfare, threatening the sustainability
of the reform process. The complexity of the relationship between reforms and growth is thus
one reason why it has been so difficult to capture it empirically. Here, we introduce the concept
of reform complementarity, in addition to the level of reforms, and use them to explain the
relationship between reforms and growth in transition countries.
The paper attempted to reconcile the usual presumption that a liberal reform package has to be
comprehensive by nature with the fact that igniting growth may sometimes require focusing on
the main distortions blocking the take-off of the economy (see Hausman, Rodrik and Velasco,
2005). Relating the level with the complementarity of reforms provided a basis for regressing
them on output growth. A set of structural reform indicators compiled by the EBRD for Central
and Eastern European countries in transition was used, assuming that the run-up to EU
integration corresponds to a nearly complete policy cycle. We found the reform level and the
change in reform complementarity to be positively related to output growth, given initial
conditions and the extent of macroeconomic stabilization as proxied by the rate of inflation,
correcting for possible endogeneity bias between these variables.
The insights gained from this study of the management of the transition process could be applied
into the broader context of the EU integration process and reform. The EU countries are facing
the challenge of globalisation. This shock is putting pressure for reform on what could have been
viewed as the relatively coherent system, combining rigid labour markets, highly regulated
product markets, together with some degree of financial centralization (Amable, 2003).
Currently, the EU economy is diverging from the more dynamic economic areas, in particular the
US and Asia. Resuming this gap seems to require a degree of flexibility higher than the one
currently embodied in the so-called ‘European model’, but the question is how to conduct such a
reform process in such a way that maximises output gains (or minimises possible output losses).
In this paper we have argued that using policy complementarities could be part of the answer.
The complementarity index presented here could be refined to take into account more complex
outcomes than the annual rate of growth, on the hand, and several levels of decision making on
the other. In effect, complementarity at the national level will certainly not suffice when it comes
to common policies. Even in what pertains to national policies, the interaction between levels of
government must be taken into account. We believe though that complementarity will remain a
useful concept in understand economic growth and development.

13

Appendix: Complementarity, Supermodularity and Optimisation
Edgeworth was the first propose the idea of complementarity. Factors are Edgeworth
complements if having more of one factor increases the return on the other factor. Assuming
mixed partial derivatives of the objective function exist, the sign of the mixed partial derivative
would be positive. However, in most economic applications smooth mixed partials are restrictive
-hence the interest in developing a system where this is unnecessary. Lattice theory is a branch of
mathematics that provides a formal foundation for complementarity and supermodularity.
A lattice ( X ; ≥ ) is a set X with the property that for any x and y in X, there exist an element in X
larger than or equal to x and y, and there exist an element smaller than or equal to x and y.

x ∨ y denotes the smallest element larger than or equal to x and y (join operation)
x∧ y

denotes the largest element smaller than or equal to x and y (meet operation)

A sublattice is a subset of a lattice that is closed under the operations of meet and join. For
example, the real numbers is a lattice and any subset of the real numbers is also a lattice. A
sublattice mathematically expresses a kind of technical complementarity. If a solution x is chosen
from a sublattice of ℜ n (representing n inputs for example), then it means that increasing the
value of some variable never prevents increasing the others as well. Thus complementarity is
only really relevant if the space we are considering is a lattice.
In this context, supermodularity can be defined as: given an objective function f on a lattice X, f is
supermodular and its arguments are complements if and only if for any x and y in X:

f ( x) − f ( x ∧ y ) ≤ f ( x ∨ y ) − f ( y )

(A1)

In two dimensions we can replace the meet and join operators by explicitly writing out each
coordinate, as given in the section 3 in the text.
Supermodularity and optimization
Supermodularity also has interesting applications for optimizing an objective function. If x and y
maximize a supermodular f on a sublattice S, then x ∨ y and x ∧ y also maximize f.
Quick proof: Since f(x) = f(y), then from supermodularity: 2 ⋅ f ( x) ≤ f ( x ∨ y ) + f ( x ∧ y ) . But since
x maximizes f: f ( x) ≥ f ( x ∨ y ) and f ( x) ≥ f ( x ∧ y ) . Thus, f ( x) = f ( x ∨ y ) = f ( x ∧ y ) . This
means that the maximizers of f have an interesting pattern:
1) Either they are strictly ordered (component by component)
2) For any unordered pair of maximizers, there must be maximizers strictly greater or less than
either of these two maximizers.
14

Supermodularity also enables the decision maker to more easily check if x maximizes an
objective function f, because one can restrict the search only to those points greater or less than x.
This reduces the search space dramatically from 2 n orthants to just 2. If this restricted search
space does not contain a point x’ such that f ( x′) ≥ f ( x) , then there are no points in the entire
lattice S that gives a higher payoff.
It is interesting to also note that simply optimizing over this restricted domain will give at least
50% of the potential gains in an unrestricted optimization. The proof is relatively simple:
Since Equation A1 is true for all x and y. The following is also true:

f ( y ) − f ( x ∧ y ) ≤ f ( x ∨ y ) − f ( x)

(A2)

We can change the sign of Equation A2:

f ( y ) − f ( x ∨ y ) ≤ f ( x ∧ y ) − f ( x)

(A3)

Combining the previous two equations, and simplifying we get:

[ f ( x ∧ y ) − f ( x ) ] + [ f ( x ∨ y ) − f ( x )] ≥

f ( y ) − f ( x)

(A4)

Assume that y is the global optimum of f. Let x’ be the maximum of f subject to x ′ ≤ x or x ′ ≥ x .
Since ( x ∧ y ) ≤ x and ( x ∨ y ) ≤ x , it follows that:

2 ⋅ [ f ( x′) − f ( x)] ≥ [ f ( x ∧ y ) − f ( x)] + [ f ( x ∨ y ) − f ( x)] ≥ f ( y ) − f ( x)

(A5)

This implies that:

f ( x′) − f ( x) ≥ [ f ( y ) − f ( x)]/ 2

(A6)

15

Data Annex: Country list and groupings
The list of the countries covered in the EBRD database and the regional groupings used in the
text are as follows:
Country code/name

Regional Grouping

1 Albania
2 Armenia
3 Azerbaijan
4 Belarus
5 Bosnia
6 Bulgaria
7 Croatia
8 Czech Republic
9 Estonia
10 Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
11 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
12 Georgia
13 Hungary
14 Kazakhstan
15 Kyrgyzstan
16 Latvia
17 Lithuania
18 Moldova
19 Poland
20 Romania
21 Russia
22 Slovak Republic
23 Slovenia
24 Tajikistan
25 Turkmenistan
26 Ukraine
27 Uzbekistan

16

NEU
NIS
NIS
NIS
NEU
NEU
NEU
NWEU
NWEU
NEU
NEU
NIS
NWEU
NIS
NIS
NWEU
NWEU
NIS
NWEU
NEU
NIS
NWEU
NWEU
NIS
NIS
NIS
NIS

REFERENCES

Acemoglu, D. (2005), “Equilibrium Bias of Techonology”, MIT Economics Department Working
Paper no. 05-30.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (2005), "Appropriate Growth Policy: A Unifying Framework", Paper
presented at the OECD Conference on Global convergence scenarios: structural and policy
issues, Paris, January 2006.
Amable, B. (2003), The Diversity of Modern Capitalism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Amir, R. (2003), “Supermodularity and Complementarity in Economics: an Elementary Survey”,
CORE.
Arellano, M. and O. Bover (1998), “Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of errorcomponents models”, Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 68, pp. 29-52.
Bergstrom, T. (1996), “Comment on The Welfare Loss of Price Distortion”, mimeo, Department of
Economics UCSB.
Blanchard, O. and F. Giavazzi (2002), "Macroeconomic Effects of Regulation and Deregulation in
Goods and Labor Markets“, MIT Dept. of Economics Working Paper No. 01-02.
EBRD, Transition Report (several issues).
Falcetti E., M. Raiser and P. Sanfey (2002), "Defying the odds: initial conditions, reforms and
growth in the first decade of transition", EBRD Working paper no. 55
Falcetti E., M. Raiser and P. Sanfey (2005), " Reforms and growth in transition: re-examining the
evidence", EBRD Working paper no. 90
Foster, E. and H. Sonnenschein (1970), “Price Distortion and Economic Welfare”, Econometrica,
38, 281-297.
Hausmann, R., D. Rodrik and A. Velasco (2005), “Growth Diagnostics”, mimeo, Harvard
University.
Kawamata, K. (1974), “Price Distortion and Potential Welfare”, Econometrica, 42, 435-460.

17

Lipsey, R.G. and K. Lancaster (1956), “The General Theory of Second Best”, The Review of
Economic Studies, 24, 11-32.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1990), “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology,
Strategy, and Organisation”, The American Economic Review, 80, 511-528.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1995), “Complementarities and Fit Strategy, Structure, and
Organisation Change in Manufacturing”, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19, 179-208.
Nardo, M., M. Saisana, A. Saltelli, S. Tarentola, A. Hoffman and E. Giovaninni (2005), Handbook
on Constructing Composite Indicators: Methodology and User Guide, OECD Statistics Working
Paper 2005(3).
OECD (1998), Economic Survey of Romania, Paris.
OECD (1999), Economic Survey of Slovak Republic, Paris.
OECD (2000), Regional Economic Survey of the Baltic countries, Paris.
OECD (2002), Economic Survey of Romania, Paris.
Rader, T. (1976), “The Welfare Losses of Price Distortion”, Econometrica, vol. 44, no. 6, 1253-1257.
Roodman, D (2005), "xtabond2: Stata module to extend xtabond dynamic panel data estimator",
Center for Global Development, Washington,
downloadable at: http://econpapers.repec.org/software/bocbocode/s435901.htm
Rodrik, D. (2003), “Growth Strategies”, forthcoming in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook
of Economic Growth, North-Holland.
Rodrik, D. (2005), “Why We Learn Nothing from Regressing Economic Growth on Policies”,
mimeo, Harvard University.
Rodrik, D. (2006), “Goodbye Washington Consensus, Hello Washington Confusion?”, mimeo,
Harvard University.
Topkis, D.M. (1987), "Minimising a Submodular Function on a Lattice", Operations Research, 26(2),
pp. 305-321.
Topkis, D.M. (1998), Supermodularity and Complementarity, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

18

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

PL

TFES

SMNB

BR&IRL

LSP

SSP

G&ER

CP

INFRAST

Pre-reform

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

4.0

Igniting
Reform

1.0

1.0

1.0

4.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

4.0

2.0

1.0

2.0

4.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

19

3.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

4.0

4.0

Transition Transition Transition
1
2
3

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

End
Reform

5.00
1.00

5.50

6.00

6.50

7.00

7.50

8.00

8.50

1.50

Pre-reform
9.00

9.50

RC

2.00

Figure 1. Reform levels and Complementarity: a hypothetical case

2.50

3.00

3.50

4.00
RL

End Reform

7

7.5

hhi1
8

8.5

9

Figure 2a. Reform Complementarity (RC), New EU Members

1990

1995

Year

CzechRepublic
Hungary
Lithuania
SlovakRepublic

2000

2005

Estonia
Latvia
Poland
Slovenia

6.5

7

7.5

hhi1

8

8.5

9

Figure 2b. Reform Complementarity (RC), European non-EU Members

1990

1995

Year

Bosnia
Croatia
FYRMacedonia

20

2000
Bulgaria
FRYugoslavia
Romania

2005

6.5

7

hhi1
7.5 8

8.5

9

Figure 2c. Reform Complementarity (RC), NIS

1990

1995

Year

Albania
Azerbaijan
Georgia
Kyrgyzstan
Russia
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan

21

2000
Armenia
Belarus
Kazakhstan
Moldova
Tajikistan
Ukraine

2005

Support of
liberalisation
measures (e.g. public
utilities)

Import competition
& export promotion

MECHANISMS OF EXIT &
REGULATION
(Enterprise privatisation, liquidation
and restructuring)

MECHANISMS OF ENTRY

Sustains tax base &
eases demand
pressure

Prevents pressure
for liquidity
injection for
troubled banks
Prevents
accumulation of
arrears & public
contingent liabilities

--

Better assessment
of credit worthiness

Demand pressure
becomes
measurable

22

Creates viable
credit opportunities
for banks

Reduces financial
indiscipline & bad
debts

--

End of inflationary
revenues &
crowding-out of
state financing

FINANCIAL
REFORM

STABILISATION

NB: Positive linkage from block A (in line) to block B (in column).

Support of foreign
trade liberalisation

Prevents
Hyperinflation

--

FINANCIAL REFORM

STABILISATION

LIBERALISATION
(Prices & Tariffs)

LIBERALISATION

Table 1. Matrix of positive linkages during transition

Easing of resource
re-allocation;
prevents stagnation
& unemployment

--

Positive real interest
rates, reduction of
distortionary
subsidies
Support of hardbudget constraints

Competitive
pressures (e.g.
import discipline)

MECHANISMS
OF EXIT

--

Improved credit
conditions and
other financing
sources
Release of
resources; reduction
of entry barriers

Stable environment
for investment;
level playing field

Lower entry
barriers

MECHANISMS
OF ENTRY

(9) INFRAST: Infrastructure

23

(8) SM&NB: Securities Markets & Non-Bank financial institutions

(7) BR&IRL: Banking Reform & Interest Rate Liberalisation

(6) CP: Competition Policy

(5) T&FES: Trade and Foreign Exchange System

(4) PL: Price Liberalisation

(3) G&ER: Governance & Enterprise Restructuring

(2) SSP: Small-Scale Privatisation

(1) LSP: Large-Scale Privatisation

Table 2. EBRD Transition indicators

-0.005***
(0.0006)
6.455***
(0.568)
-3.897***
(0.881)
-12.645***
(1.995)
6.094***
(1.065)
391
0.57
(within)
95.14

--

Fixed-effects

RandomEffects
-0.0004*
(0.0001)
-0.004***
(0.0006)
5.389***
(0.523)
-3.458***
(0.769)
-14.118***
(1.944)
6.446***
(1.062)
391
0.57

0.006
0.239

-0.008***
(0.0016)
5.908***
(1.048)
-6.833**
(2.591)
-17.898*
(5.912)
5.415**
(2.430)
362

--

GMM

24

NB: Country fixed-effects are not reported. Standard errors are in parenthesis. GMM indicates the Arellano-Bover dynamic
panel-data estimation, which implies estimating a system of equations in first differences and levels, using the
complementarity indicator and its first difference as the exogenous instruments; m1 and m2 are tests for first-order and
second-order serial correlation.

F-test
m1
m2

Nb. Observations
R2

Change of reform complementarity (ΔRC)

Change of reform level (ΔRL)

Reform complementarity (RC)

Reform level (RL)

CPI growth

Initial conditions

Dependent variable:
Growth rate of real GDP

Table 3. Growth, Reform level and Complementarity: an econometric test

