                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     COLONIALISM AND MODERN INCOME – ISLANDS
                             AS NATURAL EXPERIMENTS

                                              James Feyrer
                                             Bruce Sacerdote

                                          Working Paper 12546
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12546


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2006




We thank Lauren Burrows, Katie Jaxheimer, and Celia Carmen for superb research assistance and the
National Science Foundation for generous support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by James Feyrer and Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Colonialism and Modern Income – Islands as Natural Experiments
James Feyrer and Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 12546
September 2006
JEL No. E21, O11, O4, O40

                                              ABSTRACT


Using a new database of islands throughout the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans we examine
whether colonial origins affect modern economic outcomes. We argue that the nature of discovery
and colonization of islands provides random variation in the length and type of colonial experience.
We instrument for length of colonization using wind direction and wind speed. Wind patterns which
mattered a great deal during the age of sail do not have a direct effect on GDP today, but do affect
GDP via their historical impact on colonization. The number of years spent as a European colony
is strongly positively related to the island’s GDP per capita and negatively related to infant mortality.
This basic relationship is also found to hold for a standard dataset of developing countries. We test
whether this link is directly related to democratic institutions, trade, and the identity of the colonizing
nation. While there is substantial variation in the history of democratic institutions across the
islands, such variation does not predict income. Islands with significant export products during the
colonial period are wealthier today, but this does not diminish the importance of colonial tenure.
The timing of the colonial experience seems to matter. Time spent as a colony after 1700 is more
beneficial to modern income than years before 1700, consistent with a change in the nature of
colonial relationships over time.

James Feyrer
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Center
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
james.feyrer@dartmouth.edu

Bruce Sacerdote
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu
I.   Introduction

Understanding the variation in income across countries remains one of economics' most
important research questions. Many authors have explored the links between colonialism
and modern day outcomes, though little consensus exists.         Historians and political
scientists have emphasized the long term negative consequences of colonial rule
including the possible inability of former colonies to transition to a stable form of self
government or the possible negative effects of resource extraction (see for example
Rodney [1974]). In this paper we show that time spent as a colony is strongly positively
correlated with modern economic outcomes across islands.


Recent economic work on the importance of institutions has shifted the focus of
empirical growth toward colonialism. La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny
[1997, 1998] show that former colonies of English common law countries have more
developed capital markets than former colonies with French civil law. Banerjee and Iyer
[2005] look at the effect of differences in colonial property rights institutions in India.
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson [2001, 2002] show that the form of colonization
(extractive versus heavy settlement by Europeans) tended to determine the type of
institutions created in the country and therefore strongly affected modern outcomes.


Obviously causality is problematic in considering the effect of institutions on growth.
Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny [2004] argue that human capital
causes growth and rich countries then adopt good institutions.         The literature has
attempted to deal with this through the use of instrumental variables, but finding
appropriate instruments is difficult. Mauro [1995] uses ethnolinguistic fractionalization
to instrument for corruption. Hall and Jones [1999] use the distance from the equator as
an instrument, arguing that this determines the degree of European influence. In neither
case is it clear that the instrument does not have a direct effect on output. In a paper
focusing on Indian states, Iyer [2005] uses the deaths of rulers lacking male heirs as an
instrument for the degree of British colonial control. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
[2001, 2002] argue that the death rates of settlers provide a useful instrument for modern



                                                                                         2
institutions. This approach has not been without critics. McArthur and Sachs [2000]
argue that settler mortality is related to the overall disease environment and has a direct
effect on output.


We bring two innovations to this debate. First, we have created a new database of 80
islands which contains a large number of additional data points beyond the usual cross
section of countries used by growth economists. Of the 136 countries in the Penn World
Tables with GDP data for 1989 only 13 are in our database. 2                      Islands provide an
interesting experiment in that our sample has more homogenous initial conditions than
the Penn World Tables group.              We will also argue that variation in the colonial
experience of islands was relatively random and therefore constitutes a natural
experiment.


In order to check this conjecture, we propose and implement a new source of exogenous
variation in colonial history – wind patterns. Wind speed and direction were crucial
during the age of sail, and have useful variation within each ocean and within a given
latitude. Islands located near routes in the prevailing winds made useful stopovers and
were more easily revisited and colonized. However, since the beginning of the age of
steam began over 100 years ago, the importance of wind patterns has disappeared. We
argue that any effect of wind speed on current GDP works only through wind's effect on
European settlement.


We show that the length of colonial period is strongly positively related to modern
outcomes. In order to asses the randomness of the colonial experience (colonizers may
settle the best places first and give them up last), we instrument for the year of European
discovery and subsequent length of colonial period using data on wind patterns. The IV
results are nearly identical to the OLS results, which is consistent with our conjecture that
much of the variation in the colonization of islands is random.



2
 Barbados, Comoros, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, Mauritius, Philippines,
Seychelles, Trinidad and Tobago, Puerto Rico, Vanuatu


                                                                                                        3
Like Acemoglu et al, our work suggests that differences in European settlement play an
important role in determining modern output. However, our initial results differ in that
the length of time, not the type of settlement is what matters. It may be that these effects
are related, so we attempt to distinguish between them by examining some of the colonial
era institutional features of the islands.      First, we examine the hypothesis that
colonization raised income via the introduction of trade. Islands whose primary colonial
exports involved intensive agriculture or complex extraction fare somewhat better in
modern times than islands whose main exports were dried coconut or fish. The trade
results, however, do not significantly diminish the impact of the length of colonization.


Another institutional feature that is often suggested is democracy. We look at the first
date that each island has an elected legislature (including colonial legislatures). By this
measure, there is substantial variation in when the various islands obtained democratic
institutions. Former Spanish colonies were the slowest to have a democratically elected
legislature and former British island colonies were the fastest. However, this measure of
democratic institutions is not a significant predictor of modern output in our sample.


Next, we use colonial dependence on slave labor and the modern ethnic composition of
the population as a measure of the type of colonial regime. Acemoglu et al. find that the
difference between settlement and extractive colonial regimes is important for explaining
modern outcomes. We find no significant difference between colonies with imported
slaves and those without and we find no relationship between modern ethnic composition
and output.


We also examine more basic facts about the colonial experience. La Porta, Lopez de
Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny [1997, 1998] show that legal origin of the colonizers is
related to capital market size, with former colonies of English common law countries
having more developed capital markets than those with French civil law. We do not find
a significant difference between colonizers using the two different legal systems.




                                                                                            4
We do, however, find significant differences between colonizers. An additional year as a
colony of the US is associated with a significantly larger increase in GDP than any other
country. The Dutch, British, and French are next best and there are no significant
differences between them. Years as a Spanish colony are still positively associated with
income, but somewhat less so than the previous group. Unique among the European
colonizers, years spent as a Portuguese colony are negatively associated with modern
GDP. However, there are only two Portuguese colonies in our dataset and they were all
very early colonies.


The final difference that we consider is the timing of the colonial period. The historical
record suggests that pre-Enlightenment colonialism had a much different attitude toward
natives than post-Enlightenment colonialism. The records of the voyage of Magellan in
the 16th century versus those of James Cook in the 19th suggest that the Europeans took
on a much more benevolent attitude toward native peoples during the latter period.
Indeed we find that years spent as a colony after 1700 are driving our results. These
latter years are significantly associated with modern income while pre 1700 years of
colonialism have no effect.


The fact that events centuries past exert a modern influence suggests the importance of
institutions. Viewed in this way, our results may be most related to Hall and Jones
[1999], who use geographical instruments to suggest that “social infrastructure,” or
broadly construed institutions, explain much of modern outcomes. They find that the
quality of institutions is a result of European influence. We advance on their findings in
several important ways. First, we can much more cleanly identify the effect of European
influence through the use of wind as an instrument. The IV results suggest that the
colonial experiences of our island sample constitute something of a natural experiment.


Simple institutional features such as trade, democracy, and slavery do not seem to be
driving our results. However, differences associated with the identity and timing of the
colonizers do suggest that there is heterogeneity in the colonial legacy. Acemoglu et al
suggest that modern institutional quality is a direct function of the quality of colonial



                                                                                          5
institutions. Our results can certainly be viewed through this lens. Readers of the
historical record will be unsurprised that we find the US and Dutch to be more beneficial
colonizers than the Spanish and Portuguese or that 18th century colonialism is different
from 16th century colonialism. However, this heterogeneity does not diminish the central
result that a longer experience with Europeans is associated with higher income. 3


II. Islands as Natural Experiments and the Importance of Wind

II.A. The Random Component of Island Settlement
The exploration and settlement of islands in the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans
entails hundreds of fascinating stories and historical accidents. At the broadest level, the
pattern of island discovery by Europeans makes a great deal of economic sense. Most of
the Caribbean islands were known to Europeans prior to most of the Pacific Islands. This
was a matter of distance from Europe and the incredible vastness of the Pacific. For
example, Columbus sighted the British Virgin Islands in 1493 and he had already sighted
portions of the Bahamas, Hispaniola and Cuba a year before that. Of the 39 Atlantic
islands in our database, 24 were first sighted by Columbus during one of his three
voyages. By 1685 the Dutch were using St. Thomas (Virgin Islands) as a slave trading
post and the island contained large sugar plantations by the mid 1700s.


Meanwhile, certain islands in the Pacific (in French Polynesia and the Cook Islands in
particular) were not sighted by Europeans until the late 1700s. Patterns of settlement
were determined in part by obvious economic factors like distance to the mainland.
However, a fair amount of colonization was due to unique historical accidents and due to
historical trade routes and wind patterns.


The Mutiny on the Bounty itself led to the discovery of several islands and the
colonization of at least two. While fleeing Tahiti, the mutineers discovered Rarotonga in
the Cook Islands.         Captain Bligh discovered Kadavu in Fiji as he sailed his open boat
3,600 miles from the Friendly Islands to Java (without losing a single one of his 18
crewmembers). The mutineers settled on Pitcairn (with their Tahitian wives) precisely
3
    Indeed in probably makes the finding more plausible.


                                                                                          6
because no one lived there and it was not near any land mass of note. The mutineers'
descendants became so numerous that the British government then moved some of them
to Norfolk Island thereby creating a second new colony.


One island in our data set, Penrhyn in the Cook Islands was accidentally colonized in
1788 when Captain Sever smashed his ship (the Penryhn) into the shoreline on his way to
deliver convicts to Botany Bay. Vanuatu acquired a small settlement in 1825 when one
sailor discovered that it contained sandalwood, which was at that time very valuable.
Palmerston was colonized by the British mostly because it was empty when Captain
Cook discovered it. The first group of settlers took to murdering each other. However
the second settlement was more successful; William Marsters moved there in 1862 with
his three Polynesian wives and his descendants are still there.



II.B. The Importance of Wind
Though random accident played a large role, we will also argue that wind speed and
direction were important factors in the pattern of island colonization. Unlike powered
boats, sailboats require steady wind to make headway. Islands located in areas where the
wind is weak were less likely to be discovered, revisited, and colonized by Europeans.
Wind direction is also important. The technology available at the time of the voyage of
Columbus only allowed ships to sail about twenty degrees into the wind.                                This
technology improved slowly over time, but sailing into the wind remained difficult until
steamships became the norm in the twentieth century. 4


Consistent downwind routes between useful destinations were therefore well traveled
while much of the globe went virtually untouched. Much of the east to west traffic across
the Pacific after Magellan’s 1521 crossing closely followed his pioneering voyage
because his path was the logical and efficient way to cross. Crossing in the opposite
direction turned out to be much more difficult due to prevailing wind patterns. At least

4
  Sailing ships were common for transoceanic voyages long after the introduction of steam powered ships
because it was difficult for early steamships to carry enough fuel for long voyages. This was particularly
true in the Pacific.


                                                                                                             7
four Spanish expeditions attempted and failed to establish a west to east route across the
Pacific in the wake of Magellan’s voyage. It was not until 1565 that a west to east path
was found across the Pacific and this required sailing much farther north.


The net result of this history is that the pattern of colonization is related to the speed and
direction of the prevailing winds. Islands like Fefan and Pohnpei in the Federated States
of Micronesia have calm winds, were not located near the Spanish trade route and were
basically left alone, even after their discovery in the 1680s. At the other extreme, despite
also being quite isolated, Guam was directly on the Spaniard's Manila Galleon route due
to a favorable combination of wind and currents. Magellan found Guam in 1521 and by
the end of the century it was settled as a watering hole for Spanish ships on the Mexico-
Philippines route.


Once an island was discovered, the path to European settlement was made more difficult
by the crude state of mapping technology.         Before the mid eighteenth century the
measurement of longitude at sea was extremely imprecise. There are many cases of
islands appearing multiple times on early maps because longitude was estimated
differently by separate voyages. Revisiting an island charted by a previous voyage was
problematic. The known map of the world at the dawn of the eighteenth century was
therefore incomplete and inaccurate. Such was the state of ignorance that many still held
out hope of a large undiscovered land mass in the Pacific. This changed during the latter
half of the eighteenth century with the solution of the longitude problem by Harrison.
James Cook and others made voyages which filled in the remaining map of the Pacific.


Latitude sailing was the most common form of navigation before the solution to the
latitude problem. Suppose you were trying to sail from Europe to a particular island in
the Pacific without an accurate measure of latitude. You would head north after rounding
Cape Horn until the vessel was at the same latitude as the destination. This was easy and
effective because the ship’s latitude could be easily and accurately determined by
measuring the height of the sun off the horizon at noon. Similarly, the latitude of your
destination on charts was well measured even if the longitude was not. Once at the



                                                                                            8
proper latitude, all that was needed to get to the destination was to sail due west until you
arrived. In order for this strategy to work, it was important that you arrived at the target
latitude to the east of your destination, forcing ships to sail north more rapidly than would
be sensible on a direct route. With this style of navigation, east-west corridors with
steady winds become more frequently traveled.


We propose wind speed and direction as ideal instruments for colonization and
settlement. Wind was incredibly important during the age of sail, but its importance
came to an abrupt halt early in the twentieth century. Thus within our sample wind
direction and speed should not have a direct effect on an island's current level of GDP,
but could have an important effect via the island's history of colonization. In a first stage
regression, wind speed and variability are important determinants of the number of years
of colonization.


III. The Nature of Island Colonization

In the Atlantic islands, colonization generally consisted of several hundred or a few
thousand Europeans arriving and in some cases being granted large parcels of land for
farming. Early Spanish colonialism was governed by the encomienda system which
essentially introduced feudal institutions to the colonies. The conquistadors were given
trusteeship over the native peoples. In practice, natives (mostly Arawaks or Caribs) were
often enslaved to work on these plantations.


Initially the Spanish focused on extracting gold from rivers and showed reckless
disregard for the natives enslaved to do the work. At its peak in 1510, Puerto Rico
produced 100,000 pesos of gold, but gold production gave out completely by 1540
(Carrión [1973]). Sugar cane was introduced and soon became a chief export crop in the
Caribbean islands. As early as 1550, Puerto Rico had 10 sugar mills producing 500,000
pounds of sugar a year. Coffee was introduced in Puerto Rico in 1736 and ginger and
tobacco were also important crops (Carrión [1973]).




                                                                                           9
The English and French were more enterprising than the Spaniards in setting up the
sugar-slave economy and by 1673 there were 57 plantations in English controlled
Barbados. Jamaica was at one point in the 17th century (after the British captured it from
the Spaniards) the world's largest producer of sugar (Black [1881]). By 1700, the French
had established many sugar plantations on virtually all of their islands, including
Martinique, Guadeloupe, Grenada, St. Croix, and Saint-Domingue (present day Haiti).


In the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries the island-colonies in the Caribbean
tended to have several hundred Europeans and, following the introduction of sugar were
often outnumbered by African slaves by a factor of 10 to 1. In 1530 Puerto Rico had
about 400 Spaniards and 2200 African slaves (Wagenheim [1973]). By 1789 Saint-
Domingue was home to 40,000 whites and 455,000 black slaves.


Colonies in the Pacific Islands tended to involve fewer numbers of Europeans and far less
reliance on imported slaves. Missionaries were often the first colonial residents. For
example, Guam was first sighted by Magellan in 1521. In 1668 the Spanish installed a
group of Jesuit missionaries, a single garrison of soldiers and a colonial governor. The
Spanish mission totaled 50 people relative to the 12,000 Chamorros on Guam. (Douglas
[1994], Rogers [1995]).


European contact with and colonization of Tahiti was relatively late in coming. Wallis
landed there and traded with the natives in 1767. Cook did the same two years later and
then Bligh visited several times and stayed for several months. British missionaries
eventually showed up around 1797. The mission consisted initially of 18 men and 5
women and these Europeans settled on the Matavai Bay peninsula.             British ships
continued to stop in Tahiti with increasing frequency to take on water and food. By the
census in 1848 there were about 500 white people in Tahiti (Newbury [1980]).


French missionaries arrived in New Caledonia in 1843.         By 1878, the French had
established a penal colony there with 6,000 white prisoners and several hundred free
whites including soldiers (Lyons [1986]).     Spain's colonization of the Caroline and



                                                                                       10
Marshall Islands was extremely sparse. In 1710 two Jesuit missionaries were landed at
Palau but were never seen or heard from again. The Spanish placed a handful of
Capuchin monks on Yap who opened a school and managed to convert a large number of
natives.


In the late nineteenth century entrepreneurial traders and employees of trading companies
were also responsible for a modest presence of Europeans and Americans on some
Pacific Islands. O'Keefe was an Irish-American from Georgia who ran a series of trading
outposts and stores on Yap and Palau (Hezel [1995]). James Paddon, a sandalwood
merchant, was one of the first white settlers in New Caledonia. In 1851, he moved his
trading and shipping business to the area that became the town of Noumea.


IV. The Impact of Colonization

IV.A. Loss of Native Peoples to Disease and Slavery


One of the most striking and terrible facts about colonization by Europeans is the degree
to which native populations on some islands were decimated either by brutal enslavement
or by diseases carried by Europeans and their animals (See Diamond [1997]). This is
most true in the Atlantic where certain islands lost their entire native population in a short
amount of time. For example, the Spaniards began to colonize Puerto Rico in 1505 under
the leadership of Ponce de Leon. The native Tainos were essentially enslaved as part of
the encomienda system in which land grants to Spaniards included the right to extract
tribute or labor from the natives assigned to that land. The original population of Tainos
was estimated to have been 60,000. By 1515 this had fallen to 14,400 and by 1530 to
1,500 (Wagenheim [1998]).                Prior to the arrival of Europeans, Jamaica was heavily
settled and was home to tens of thousands of Arawaks. Not a single one of the natives
were alive by the time the British took over from the Spanish in 1655 (Black [1881]).


The Pacific islanders also faced shocking mortality due to smallpox and other diseases
brought by the Europeans. 5 However, only a few of the islands saw a complete wiping

5
    Venereal disease brought by the Spaniards often lead to sterilization.


                                                                                            11
out of the original inhabitants and several islands fared reasonably well. Perhaps the
worst depopulation occurred in Guam and the Marianas. The number of pure blooded
Chamorros on Guam fell from 12,000 in 1668 to 1,576 in 1742 6 . By this point the
Chamorros were well intermarried with Filipino and Spanish immigrant families.


The Tahitians saw a drop in their population as a result of the introduction of European
disease, but this was followed by a partial recovery.           One estimate puts the population of
Tahiti at 24,000 around the time of Cook's visit but only 9,000-10,000 by 1800. The
native population stabilized and remained around 9,500 at the time of the 1848 census.
There was a discrete drop in the 1850s (an epidemic?) but population not only recovered
to the 1848 level but grew modestly for the next 60 years (Newbury [1980]).


Any discussion of the effects of colonialism on economic output has to acknowledge the
devastation of native populations and cultures. Our results show that islands with a
longer colonial history (and more settlement by Europeans) have higher income per
capita and lower infant mortality than other similar islands. Is it sensible to measure the
positive effects on growth from European contact if in fact the original inhabitants are
partially or entirely wiped out because of that contact? Is the possibility of no European
contact a realistic counterfactual? Even without colonialism proper, any contact still may
have wiped out entire populations.


We do not intend to address these questions in this paper. Our results are simply an
examination of the standard of living of people currently alive on these islands relative to
the colonial experience. We do, however, recognize that there are other measures of the
outcomes from colonialism that may generate different conclusions.                       It is certainly
plausible to argue that the accumulated utility of Pacific Islanders since first encountering
Europeans is lower than in the counterfactual even if the current standard of living on
these islands is significantly higher because of that contact.



6
 Douglas [1995] notes that the population decline probably started much earlier, i.e. in 1564 when
Legazpi's expedition visited the Marianas and likely introduced European diseases.


                                                                                                     12
IV.B. Promotion of Trade and Exports


If colonial tenure is related to modern economic outcomes, the obvious question is why?
Our results and our reading of the historical record suggest a very sensible yet under-
discussed explanation: the promotion of trade. For many of the islands the very notion of
households generating a surplus and exporting this surplus in exchange for money and
goods arrived with the colonizers. The historical record makes it clear that colonial
governments were obsessed with introducing and expanding the production of export
commodities like sugar, coffee, tobacco, and even coconuts. Colonial island regimes
were obsessed with "making the colony profitable" or at least self sustaining. Home
governments wanted to collect more tax revenue than they were pouring into the island as
subsidies. Colonial governors wanted to generate lots of cash flow from exports so that
they could direct some of this cash into their pockets.


By 1510, Spain was closely monitoring production in Puerto Rico and the Crown
appointed an accountant, a commissioner and a treasurer to measure production and
exports and collect the appropriate duties on the King's behalf. When opportunities for
extracting gold and salt ran out in 1530, Puerto Rico's Governor, Franciso Manuel de
Lando seized on the idea of growing sugar for export. He convinced the Crown to
provide loans to build sugar mills and to finance the voyage of families from Spain and
refugees from Brazil to provide labor. Prospective plantation owners were lured from
Spain with the promise of the indefinite use of large (several hundred acre) tracts of land
for growing sugar (Wagenheim, p 56-57).


The Spanish colonists in Jamaica experimented with a wide variety of export crops
including tobacco, indigo, and cocoa before they hit upon sugar as the real cash crop.
Once the British seized Jamaica, Governor Sir Thomas Modyford (1664) immediately set
about both increasing the amount of land under sugar cultivation and encouraging large
scale plantation agriculture (Black [1881], pp. 89-90).




                                                                                        13
European colonists in the Pacific Islands also focused on trade and exports.            New
Caledonia settlers in the 1860s initially tried growing coffee, sugar, tobacco and rice. But
cattle proved the ideal product and there were more than 100,000 cattle there by 1890!
However, the real export legacy of colonists in New Caledonia came in 1864 when
Garnier discovered nickel (Lyons [1986], p. 49). New Caledonia is currently the world's
fourth largest nickel producer and has about 25 percent of proven reserves. 7 Even very
lightly settled islands of the Pacific were affected by international trade introduced by the
Europeans. Copra (dried coconut) became a chief export of Yap by the 1880s and natives
would haul baskets of coconuts to local trading stations. (Hezel [1995], p 19.).



IV.C. Building of Schools, Roads and Public Health Infrastructure by Colonizers


Besides the promotion of trade, colonizers also had a large hand in building schools,
roads and infrastructure for drinking water. In the early colonial period, island schools
were introduced and run by missionaries and were neither comprehensive (generally
being grammar schools only) nor universal. San Juan, Puerto Rico had one school built
by the Franciscans in 1640 and a second shortly thereafter by the local Bishop.
(Wagenheim [1998], p. 74). San Juan's first high school was established in 1832 by a
group of clergymen.           By 1897 Puerto Rico had 551 schools and 28,000 pupils.
(Wagenheim, p. 234-235.)             Many early public schools in Jamaica were set up by
bequests from plantation owners who wanted to benefit the island residents. The first
such school opened in 1694 using a bequest from Raines Waite (Black [1881], p. 187).
The first school on Guam was opened in 1873 by the missionary Father San Vitores
(Rogers [1995], p. 50).         Several schools on Tahiti were opened by missionaries in the
late 1800s and the colonial government opened a school for teachers in 1901 (Newbury
[1980], p. 150).


Universal education did not arrive in any of the island colonies until the twentieth
century, but in many cases colonizers had a hand in setting up universal educational
systems. After Puerto Rico became a US commonwealth, the American administration
7
    CIA World Factbook, minerals.usgs.gov


                                                                                          14
rapidly expanded the number of rural schools. By 1920 there were 11 high schools and
the University of Puerto Rico had been founded (Carrión [1983], p. 174).



IV.D. Does the Enlightenment Matter? -- Magellan versus Cook


The previous sections suggest several concrete institutional differences that may be
associated with the colonial legacy. In this section we would like to suggest a more basic
difference in the nature of colonial regimes -- timing. There was a distinct change in the
attitude of the explorers toward the world between the beginning of the period of
exploration and the final filling in of the maps of the world. To illustrate this, one need
only look at the differences in motivation between Ferdinand Magellan and James Cook.


When Magellan set sail on his famous circumnavigation in 1519 his goal was to find a
Spanish route to the Spice Islands. The Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494 split the world
between Spain and Portugal at 46°W longitude. It was also agreed that this line extended
completely around the globe.      However, due to the inability to measure longitude
accurately, the exact location of this antemeridian was uncertain. The Spanish felt that a
westward route would allow them to lay claims on the Spice Islands. The agreement
between Spain and Portugal had the blessing of the Pope and along with their rights to
these unfound lands came a responsibility to spread Christianity. Magellan’s voyage was
therefore explicitly commercial with religious overtones.


This stands in stark contrast to the voyages of James Cook between 1768 and 1779.
Cook’s missions had explicit scientific aims. The first voyage was commissioned by the
Royal Society to observe the transit of Venus across the sun from Tahiti. The second
voyage’s goal was to find the Terra Australis, the mythical southern continent. The third
voyage was in search of the Northwest Passage. On all three voyages, Cook brought
artists and scientists to record and study all that he found. Since the longitude problem
had been solved, Cook was able to accurately fill in the map of the Pacific.           His
“discoveries” point out how weak European knowledge of the Pacific was at this late
date. Many islands were first charted by Cook and his ships made the first European


                                                                                        15
circumnavigation of New Zealand. He also claimed the east coast of Australia for
Britain.


Unlike Magellan, who was driven to bring Christianity to the natives, Cook had a much
more romantic view of the Pacific islanders.
           “We debauch their morals already too prone to vice and we introduce
           among them wants and perhaps diseases which they never before knew
           and which serves only to disturb that happy tranquility they and their
           forefathers have enjoyed … If anyone denies the truth of this assertion let
           him tell me what the natives of the whole extent of America have gained
           by the commerce they have had with Europeans.” 8

Clearly this suggests that islands found and colonized later had a much different
experience than those found during the initial period.


V. Data Description

The data on island colonization, GDP, and infant mortality are assembled from a large
number of sources. Our starting point was a database of islands maintained by the UN. 9
This dataset provided us with a comprehensive list of individual islands along with
nation, population and area. We sorted the islands by population and investigated islands
that satisfied two criteria. First, we only included islands that require open ocean sailing
to reach them from Europe.           Second, we limited the sample to relatively small
landmasses, specifically those less than 150,000 square kilometers. These selection
criteria are intended to generate a sample of islands that fit our story of random variation
in colonial experience. We are particularly interested in the randomness associated with
the age of exploration. Islands that were unavoidably found as Europeans made their
way down the coast of Africa clearly have a less random history than the islands of the
Pacific. The size criterion is intended to make the sample as homogeneous as possible.
Large landmasses like Australia are fundamentally different than the islands in our
sample. Within the group of islands fitting these criteria we researched islands in order
of population using any islands for which data were available.

8
    Hough [1994].
9
    http://islands.unep.ch/


                                                                                         16
Islands that are part of a group are only included as independent data points if there is
some independent information for the individual island. For example, the majority of the
islands in the Maldives have an identical colonial history and we only have one GDP data
point for the entire group. In this case, there is only one island in the Maldives included
in our dataset.       On the other hand, the islands of the Netherlands Antilles have
heterogeneity of both colonial history and GDP, so the individual islands in the group are
included separately.        We do, however, recognize that these may not be completely
independent data points so all the econometric analysis is clustered at the islands group
level.


Where available, we obtained GDP per capita for the year 2000 from the United Nations.
Per capita GDP figures were available for 39 island nations covering 61 of the islands in
our dataset. Roughly 19 islands are possessions of other countries, for example Guam is
a US possession. In those cases we obtained island level income per capita and infant
mortality numbers for the island from the statistical agency of the relevant country. 10 In
the case of islands that are currently part of an island group (such as the Cook Islands),
we disaggregated country level data into the component islands where possible.                           For
example Yap and Pohnpei are both states in the Federated States of Micronesia, but the
two islands have different histories, wind patterns, and economic output and are located
more than 1,000 miles apart. In some of these cases we were able to obtain separate GDP
breakdowns from a series of reports on Pacific island groups produced by the Asian
Development Bank. 11


The colonial and settlement histories for each island come from a myriad of sources. For
the Pacific islands we relied heavily in the Pacific Island Yearbook. For Atlantic and
Indian Ocean islands, we used Encyclopedia Britannica and supplemented this source
10
   In these cases we will be using income per capita as a proxy for GDP per capita. We recognize that this
is an imperfect measure. We report robustness checks where we limit ourselves to the GDP data.
11
   We used the breakdowns by island in the following way. The island group level data was used to
establish relative income levels. For example, the disaggregated data tells us that Yap in the FSM has
twice the per capita income of Moen in the same group. Using the relative income and population data we
calculated the per capita income for each island so that the relative income levels were correct and that the
population weighted group average was equal to the GDP per capita figure for the group from the UN.


                                                                                                          17
with information from official websites maintained by the governments of each island.
We collected the entire history of each island, including the first European sightings, the
first settlements, the extent of such settlements, and the political history of the island's
colonization if any.


Wind speeds are from satellite data taken from CERSTAT. 12 The satellites measure
wind speeds over water for the entire globe, reported on a one degree longitude latitude
grid. The data we utilize are reported monthly and consist of the average wind vector in
the north-south direction and the average wind vector in the east-west direction. For our
instruments, we use the average and standard deviation of these data points over the year.


Table I contains summary statistics for the data. Thirty nine of the eighty islands are
located in the Pacific, thirty five are in the Atlantic and the remainder are in the Indian
Ocean. The median population on our islands is about 14,000 people. This ranges from
as few as 102 people on Palmerston Island (in the Cook Islands) to more than 11 million
people in Cuba. Our results are robust to dropping islands with fewer than 10,000
people. The median land area for the islands is 130 square kilometers. The mean 2000
GDP per capita on the islands in the sample is $7,953 with a high of $53,735 for
Bermuda.


All but one of the islands, Tonga, was a European colony at some point in their history
with an average number of years as a colony of over 218 years. However there is a larger
group that had relatively limited colonial experience. Twenty four countries in the
sample were a colony for one hundred years or less and fourteen for less than fifteen
years. In general the Atlantic islands were the first to be colonized by Europeans and
some islands including Bonaire, Curacao, and Barbados have 400 years of colonial
history.



12
  The CERSAT (Centre ERS d'Archivage et de Traitement - French ERS Processing and Archiving
Facility) is part of IFREMER (French Research Institute for Exploitation of the Sea. It was created in 1991
as a node of the ESA (European Space Agency) ground segment for the ERS-1 and ERS-2 Earth
observation satellites. http://www.ifremer.fr/cersat/


                                                                                                         18
One possible criticism of our approach is that islands tend to be small and have different
natural resources than continental nations and are therefore not "real countries" of interest
to macroeconomists. Since many successful islands focus on tourism, one could also
make the case that this also makes them different from "real" countries. We have several
responses to this. First, the islands in the sample have rich variation in their latitudes and
levels and types of natural resources. Appendix Table IV shows that agriculture is a large
fraction of the economy for islands like Dominica and some of the Federated States of
Micronesia like Pohnpei.         Bermuda and the Virgin Islands tend to focus on services,
though this can mean banking and insurance in addition to tourism. More importantly,
even if all the islands in the South Pacific or the Atlantic had beautiful beaches, we still
would need to ask why certain islands have a subsistence level of income while others
have a standard of living that rivals Sweden and the US. Grand Cayman is a tourist
paradise while Hispaniola (Haiti plus the Dominican Republic) is not, despite the fact that
both islands have tropical breezes and the beauty of the Caribbean Sea. 13


VI. Empirical Results

Figure 1 shows a scatter plot of log GDP per capita versus number of centuries as a
colony. The circles are for islands in the Atlantic. The triangles are for islands in the
Pacific and the squares are for islands in the Indian Ocean. The regression line shows a
clear positive relationship between length of colonial period and modern GDP. While
there is a large amount of variation around the regression line (we certainly don't think
colonial history explains everything), the t-statistic for the slope is 6.1. The coefficient is
0.41 meaning that every additional 100 years of colonial history is associated with a 41
percent increase in GDP. Remarkably the upward slope holds within each of the oceans.
The relationship is not driven simply by the fact that Atlantic islands were discovered by
Europeans earliest and are the richest.




13
 We are not claiming that the length of the colonial period explains the Grand Cayman Hispaniola income
gap but rather that even within Caribbean islands, there is massive and interesting variation in economic
performance.


                                                                                                      19
Table II shows five different cross sectional regressions with our basic result. For
columns (1) through (5) log GDP per capita is the dependent variable. Column (1) shows
the basic correlation illustrated in Figure (1). Higher per capita GDP is associated with a
longer period under colonial rule. Each additional hundred years is associated with GDP
per capita that is 41 percent higher.


Column (2) adds geographic controls. We include dummies for each ocean and we
control for island land area and absolute value of latitude (distance from the Equator). As
in Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger [1999] and Sachs [2003], the absolute value of latitude is
strongly related to current levels of income. Every 10 degree increase in latitude (i.e.
moving roughly 700 miles away from the equator) is associated with a 48 percent
increase in GDP.     Those authors find that latitude works through the efficiency of
agriculture and disease prevalence.       Acemoglu et al [2001] provide evidence that
latitude's effects work through variation in the nature of European settlements and
institutions that were established. Island area is also significant with larger islands doing
more poorly than smaller islands. Interestingly, the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean dummies
are not significantly different from each other, though the Pacific coefficient is
significantly different from the Indian Ocean (the excluded category). Including the
geographic controls does not substantially alter the results for colonial tenure.


One important possibility is that Europeans simply chose to settle the best islands first
and hence the more successful islands have a longer colonial history. For example, being
near a continent could be correlated both with heavy settlement and with current GDP.
We are able to reject this explanation for our results by using wind direction and speed as
instruments for settlement or length of colonial period. As discussed in a previous
section, wind patterns make an appealing instrument because they were incredibly
important during 1500-1890 (and determined discovery and settlement), but may have
little direct effect on GDP today.


In column (3) we instrument for the number of years as a colony using data on wind
speed. Given the direction of travel from Europe, the east-west component of the wind is



                                                                                          20
particularly important for sailing voyages. We use the average value for the east-west
component of the wind and the monthly standard deviation as instruments. 14 Column (1)
in Appendix I shows the first stage. The instruments are significant predictors of the
length of colonial history with a first stage F statistic of 6.0. Each individual instrument
is significant. Column (3) of Table I shows the second stage of the two stage least
squares regression. The results are statistically indistinguishable from the OLS results
and the coefficient on years of colonization remains very significantly away from zero
with a t-statistic of 2.8. Each additional hundred years of colonization is associated with
44 percent larger GDP per capita.


One objection to our IV strategy is that the instrument is well suited to describing the
beginning of colonial rule, but is not a good instrument for the end of colonial rule.
Given that the years of colonial rule is determined by both the beginning and end dates of
the colonial period, it seems sensible to examine these separately.                 A final concern about
late colonialism is that our data includes countries which currently have a colonial
relationship with a developed country such as Puerto Rico, Guam, or the Netherlands
Antilles. It is possible that current transfers from the colonizing country to these islands
are important. 15


Columns (4) and (5) present regressions which use the first and last year of colonialism
instead of the total number of years of colonialism. 16 These regressions also include a
dummy to indicate if the country was a colony after 2000. The results indicate that it is
the start date of colonialism that is driving our results, not the end date. The coefficient
on the beginning year of colonialism is identical in magnitude (but opposite in sign) to
the coefficient on the number of years of colonialism in the previous regressions. Being
colonized one hundred years later is associated with a 40% increase in income. The
coefficient on the last year of colonialism is well estimated to be near zero. Whether the

14
   Appendix II explores the use of other variations on wind speed and direction as instruments. The results
are quite similar.
15
   It is not clear that we should be excluding late transfers as part of the colonial legacy. If one aspect of
having been a colony in 1800 is that you increase the probability of being a colony in 2000 this should be
included as part of the effect of colonialism.
16
    These data are divided by 100 in order to have the coefficients consistent with centuries as a colony.


                                                                                                            21
island was still a colony in 2000, however, is significant and positive. Being a colony in
2000 is associated with 40% higher income. The inclusion of this dummy has no
significant impact on the coefficient on the first or last year of colonialism, suggesting
that our base result is not being driven by current transfers. In Column (5) the first year
of colonialism is instrumented with wind. The results are statistically identical to the
OLS results.


As an additional outcome measure we replace GDP per capital with infant mortality in
Columns (6) – (8). These results mirror the results for GDP per capita. The number of
centuries that an island was a colony is a negative and significant predictor of infant
mortality in all the specifications. One notable difference compared to the GDP columns
is the importance of the ocean dummies. The Indian Ocean has significantly higher
infant mortality than the Pacific. This result is also robust to our IV strategy.


The regressions in Table III examine whether our results are being driven by sample and
data selection. Column (1) repeats our base result. Column (2) excludes islands for
which there is no direct GDP data available from the UN. These excluded islands are
generally territories of developed countries such Guam and the British Virgin Islands.
This column does allow for adjustments to GDP within island groups as described in the
data section. Column (3) does not include these adjustments. The results for these three
columns are identical, suggesting that our data collection is not driving the results.


Columns (4) through (7) show the results of running our base regression on sub samples
of islands limited to the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Columns (4) and (5) are estimated
with OLS. Columns (6) and (7) instrument the number of centuries of colonialism with
wind data as described above. Remarkably, the results are the same for each ocean as
they are for the entire sample and in all cases the coefficient on the number of years of
colonialism is statistically significant.




                                                                                         22
VI.A. Mechanisms


The island data show a robust relationship between the length of colonization and modern
day income. The next question is of course, why should past colonialism in these islands
be good for income levels? 17 Any explanation must allow for events happening centuries
ago to matter today. This fact alone points to the importance of institutions, given their
longevity.     For example the establishment of property rights, courts and a stable
government are all likely to be helpful for long run economic performance. Another
related possibility is that the Europeans (particularly the missionaries who established
many of the earliest settlements) established schools which raised human capital. The
colonized islands may have been more able to trade with other islands and other countries
following colonization.


This line of thought is hardly new. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson argue that certain
forms of European settlement set up stable, pro-growth institutions. In particular, they
distinguish between the types of colony, with settlement colonies producing positive
modern outcomes and extractive colonies producing negative ones. La Porta, Lopez de
Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny [1997, 1998] also emphasize an aspect of the quality of
colonization, finding that the identity of the colonizer matters through differences in the
legal systems. Our initial results emphasize the importance of the quantity of European
influence, without reference to the specifics of the colonial regime. This section will ask
whether controlling for mechanisms through which colonization may matter diminishes
the importance of the length of the colonial experience.


Table IV examines whether any measures of the quality of the colonial experience can
diminish the importance of the length of colonial experience. Columns (1) and (2) look
at the impact of trade, slavery and democracy. We include in our basic regression a
dummy for whether the island engaged in trade in complex products during the colonial
period.    The dummy variable is positive for islands which only traded in gathered
products such as fish or dried coconut during the colonial period. Islands trading in
17
  We can't come close to answering this question, but we mention here some of the most plausible reasons
discussed in the literature.


                                                                                                      23
organized agriculture (such as sugar), mining, or livestock are coded with a zero. We
include a dummy for whether agriculture used imported slaves. We also check the
possibility that the length of colonization is associated with greater democratization. We
test this by including the year of the first elected legislature as a regressor. Column (3)
uses dummies for 19th and 18th century legislatures to check for nonlinearity in this effect.


The point estimates suggest that islands with major trade goods in colonial times have
higher modern output by 40-50%. This result is generally statistically insignificant. The
inclusion of trade does not diminish the importance of the length of colonization,
suggesting that something other than the trade channel is at work. The use of imported
slaves is not significantly correlated with income and the point estimate is quite close to
zero. Similarly, an early legislature does not appear to be correlated with income.
Neither of these controls changes the basic result.


Another potential (and insidious) possibility is that the colonizers of the earlier settled
islands wiped out the native population and replaced it with Europeans with higher
human capital or more ability to trade. We partially reject this explanation based on the
fact that most of the Pacific Islands in our sample still have much of their native
population intact. For example, on Guam, one of the most economically successful
Pacific islands, 43 percent of the people can trace their roots back to the original
Chamorros who inhabited the island and 22 percent of the people are Filipino. In Tahiti,
67 percent of the people are Polynesian and another 17 percent are part Polynesian. Only
10 percent are white.


More formally, we test to see whether the modern ethnic composition of the islands
explains differences in output. This ties in nicely with Acemoglu et al, whose work
suggests that higher rates of long run settlement are associated with better institutions.
Column (4) of Table IV tests the effect of modern ethnic composition on output along
with the length of colonial experience. We find that the modern ethnic composition is
significantly correlated with output. The omitted category is Asian and natives, so higher
numbers of blacks, whites or mixed race are correlated with higher income. This is



                                                                                             24
consistent with the notion that more European influence, in this case in the form of
population transfers, leads to higher income. As in Acemoglu et al, settlement colonies
appear to do better. The results do not, however, support obvious conclusions about the
quality of European influence. The coefficient on percentage white is not significantly
different than the coefficient on percentage black.



VI.B. The Identity of the Colonizer and the Timing of the Colonial Experience


Tables V and VI investigate differences in the quality of colonial experience in a much
more basic level. Two different hypotheses are examined. First, does the identity of the
colonizer matter?     Are years under French significantly different than years under
Spanish rule? Second, does the timing of colonialism matter? Is there a difference
between years spent as a colony in the 16th century versus the 18th century?


Columns (1) and (2) of Table V ask whether the nation doing the colonizing is related to
modern day GDP per capita. Years spent as a colony are included in the regression
individually. Given the number of regressors, the individual coefficients are surprisingly
well estimated and some conclusions about a ranking of colonizing countries can be
made. Perhaps unsurprisingly, a year spent as a US colony is associated with a larger
income increase than a year spent under any other country. The difference between the
US and the other countries is significant. The Dutch, British and French comprise the
second best group and are statistically identical. The Spanish are next with a coefficient
that is significantly lower than the Dutch, but not the British and French.


The Portuguese are significantly worse than all the others. They are the only country that
shows a significant negative effect of an additional year of colonialism. It should be
noted however that this results rests on a base of only two islands (St. Helena in the
Atlantic and Huvadu in the Maldives) and that the Portuguese experience was limited to
the 17th century and earlier. As we will show shortly, years of early colonialism are not
necessarily identical to years of later colonialism.




                                                                                       25
The fact that there is no evidence that the British islands are outperforming the French
islands is interesting in light of work by LaPorta et al [1996] that show significant
differences in performance related to British and French legal systems. The French and
the British are not, however, the only countries to adopt these legal systems. For column
(2) we group the years of colonization by the legal system of the colonizers. The US and
Britain use the British Common law legal system. The Dutch, French, Spanish, and
Portuguese use the French Civil law legal system For completeness (and to be consistent
with LaPorta et al) we include a category for Japanese and German colonies using the
German legal system. We find that there is no significant difference between the three
systems.


Table VI examines the question of Magellan versus Cook raised earlier in the paper. Are
differences in pre and post enlightenment colonialism evident in our data? Column (1)
splits the number of years of colonialism into years before 1700 and years after 1700. 18
The results suggest that only the years after 1700 are positively associated with modern
outcomes. An additional 100 years of post-1700 colonialism is associated with 64%
higher per capita income. The coefficient is highly significant and significantly different
than the coefficient on pre-1700 colonial years. This suggests that the colonial era of
Cook was indeed different from that of Columbus and Magellan.


Column (2) breaks the years into three eras, pre-enlightenment, post-enlightenment, and
post 1900. Once again, the pre and post enlightenment years are significantly different
from each other. The 20th century years are not significantly different from either era. In
column (3) we add a dummy for whether an island was a colony in 2000 in order to
isolate the effect of transfers from other mechanisms. With this additional control, years
of 20th century colonialism become statistically worse than years between 1700 and 1900.
Being a colony at the end of the 20th century remains positively associated with income.
This result suggests that decolonization during the 20th century was problematic.
Colonies that made it to the end of the century are much better off than countries that did
not. Interestingly, the net result of being a colony for the entire 20th century is not

18
     The results are robust to moving the cutoff to 1750.


                                                                                        26
significantly different than zero. Obviously, conclusions involving decolonization do not
fit our natural experiment story since the end of colonialism is almost certainly
endogenous. This result must therefore be seen as more of an interesting correlation than
causal.



VI.C. A Broader Sample of Countries

Our results suggest that the length of colonial experience is positively correlated with per
capital GDP in a sample of islands. The IV results further suggest that these results are
not being driven by the selective colonization of islands that have features conducive to
good modern outcomes. Given the similarity of the IV and OLS results, it may be
instructive to check the basic results against a larger more traditional sample of countries.
Table IV shows the results from regressing per capita GDP against the number of years a
country was a colony for a sample of non-island developing countries. This sample is
consistent with the countries included in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson.


The basic results match quite nicely with our island results. Each additional century of
colonial tenure is associated with a 40 percent increase in GDP. This is not statistically
significantly different from the 45 percent coefficient found in the island sample.
Including latitude as a control does not significantly change this coefficient.         One
advantage of using this sample is that standard measures of modern institutional quality
can be included. Column (3) of Table IV includes expropriation risk as an additional
regressor. Expropriation risk is significant and negative, as expected. This reduces the
point estimate on colonial tenure, but it remains large and significant. In column (4) we
include the Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson measure of log settler mortality with
similar results.


While the results from this sample are not as well identified as from the islands sample,
they are still instructive. The basic relationship appears to extend beyond our island
sample. The results are robust to the inclusion of standard modern institutional measures
and geographic controls.



                                                                                          27
VII. Concluding Remarks

We have argued for an "islands as experiments" approach where random variation in the
colonial experiences of islands can be used to think about the long run effects of colonial
history on economic performance.      The most interesting fact in our sample is a robust
positive relationship between the years of European colonialism and current levels of
income. While some of this relationship could be driven by smart selection of islands by
colonizers, we suspect that part of the relationship is causal. When we instrument for
colonization and settlement using wind patterns, we obtain coefficients on years of
colonization that are identical to our OLS results.


While the basic results suggest that longer European colonial exposure is good for the
modern inhabitants of the islands in our sample, there are a few interesting caveats that
we can introduce. First, there is a discernable pecking order amongst the colonizers.
Years under US and Dutch colonial rule are significantly better than years under the
Spanish and Portuguese.


Second, later years of colonialism are associated with a much larger increase in modern
GDP than years before 1700. These findings are consistent with the Acemoglu et al.
result that the quality of the colonial experience is important for modern outcomes. It is
not difficult to believe that colonialism in the post-enlightenment era led to more efficient
and beneficial institution transfer than colonialism under the encomienda system and its
contemporaries. This is not to say that we find the early colonial years to be detrimental
to modern GDP – we do not. However, given the human toll on the early natives, it is not
unreasonable to think that pre 1700 colonialism should be considered as a net negative.




                                                                                          28
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins
of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review
91(5): 1369-401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of Fortune:
Geography and Development in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4), 1231-1294.

Aldrich, Robert, France and the South Pacific Since 1940, University of Hawaii Press,
Honolulu, 1993.

Ashcraft, Norman, Colonialism and Underdevelopment: Processes of Political Economic
Change in British Honduras, Teachers College Press, New York, 1973.

Aten, Bettina, Alan Heston and Robert Summers. 2002. Penn World Tables Version 6.1.
Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP).

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer, 2005. “History Institutions and Economic
Performance: The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American
Economic Review 95(4), 1190-1213.

Barro, Robert J. 1991 “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Nations,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 106(2): 407-43.

Beckles, Hilary, A History of Barbados: From Amerindian Settlement to Nation-State,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.

Black, Clinton V., The Story of Jamaica from Prehistory to the Present, Collins Clear-
Type Press, London, 1965.

Brett, E. A., Colonialism and Underdevelopment in East Africa: The Politics of
Economic Change 1919-1939, NOK Publishers, Ltd., New York, 1973.

Campbell, Gwyn, An Economic History of Imperial Madagascar, 1750-1895: The Rise
and Fall of an Island Empire, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, 2005.

Campbell, I. C., A History of the Pacific Islands, University of California Press,
Berkeley, 1989.

Carano, Paul and Pedro C. Sanchez, A Complete History of Guam, Charles E. Tuttle
Company, Rutland, VT, 1964.

Carrión, Arturo Morales, Puerto Rico: A Political and Cultural History, W.W. Norton &
Company, Inc., New York, NY, 1983.




                                                                                   29
Dietz, James L., Economic History of Puerto Rico: Institutional Change and Capitalist
Development, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1986.

Dominican Republic and Haiti: Country Studies, Richard A. Haggerty (ed.), Federal
Research Division, Library of Congress, Washington D.C., 1991.

Douglas, Norman and Ngaire Douglas (eds.), Pacific Islands Yearbook, 17th ed, Fiji
Times Ltd., Fiji, 1994.

Dupay, Alex, Haiti in the World Economy: Class, Race, and Underdevelopment Since
1700, Westview Press, Inc., Boulder, Co, 1989.

Fieldhouse, D.K., The West and the Third World: Trade, Colonialism, Dependence and
Development, Blackwell Publishers, Oxford, UK, 1999.

Gallup, John Luke; Sachs, Jeffrey D; Mellinger, Andrew D, "Geography and Economic
Development." International Regional Science Review, vol. 22, no. 2, August 1999, pp.
179-232.

Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and, Andrei Shleifer,
"Do Institutions Cause Growth?," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
10568, June 2004.

Graham, Norman A. and Keith L. Edwards, The Caribbean Basin to the Year 2000:
Demographic, Economic, and Resource-Use Trends in Seventeen Countries, Westview
Press, Boulder, Colorado, 1984.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output Per Worker Than Others,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, 83-
116.

Hezel, Francis X., Strangers in Their Own Land: A Century of Colonial Rule in the
Caroline and Marshall Islands, University of Hawai’i Press, Honolulu, 1995.

Hope, Kempe Ronald, Economic Development in the Caribbean, Praeger Publishers,
New York, NY, 1986.

Hough, Richard, Captain James Cook, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., New York, 1994

Howard, Rhoda, Colonialism and Underdevelopment in Ghana, Africana Publishing
Company, New York, 1978.

Howe, K R, Where the Waves Fall: A New South Sea Islands History from First
Settlement to Colonial Rule, University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, 1984.




                                                                                     30
Huxley, Anthony (ed.), Standard Encyclopedia of the World’s Oceans and Islands, G.P.
Putnam’s Sons, New York, NY, 1962.

Indian Ocean: Five Island Countries, Helen Chapin Metz (ed.), Federal Research
Division, Library of Congress, Washington D.C., 1995.

Islands of the Commonwealth Caribbean: A Regional Study, Sandra W. Meditz and
Dennis M. Hanratty (eds.), Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, Washington
D.C., 1989.

Iyer, Lakshmi. "The Long-Term Impact of Colonial Rule: Evidence from India." Harvard
Business School Working Paper, No. 05-041, 2005.

Jiménez de Wagenheim, Puerto Rico: An Interpretive History from Pre-Columbian
Times to 1900, Markus Wiener Publishers, Princeton, NJ, 1998.

Knight, Franklin W., The Caribbean: The Genesis of a Fragmented Nationalism, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1978.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997.
“Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52(3), 1131-1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998.
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106(6), 1113-1155.

Lyons, Martyn, The Totem and the Tricolour: A Short History of New Caledonia Since
1774, New South Wales University Press, Kensington NSW Australia, 1986.

McArthur, John W. and Jeffrey D. Sachs, “Institutions and Geography: Comment on
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2000),” NBER Working Paper No. 8114, 2000.

Malcolm, George A., The Commonwealth of the Philippines, D. Appleton-Century
Company, Inc., New York, 1936.

Maude, H. E., Of Islands and Men: Studies in Pacific History, Oxford University Press,
Melbourne, 1969.

Mauro, Paolo. “Corruption and Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
1995, 100:3, 681-712.

Newbury, Colin, Tahiti Nui: Change and Survival in French Polynesia 1767-1945, The
University Press of Hawaii, Honolulu, 1980.

Pacific Islands, Naval Intelligence Division, Geographical Handbook Series: General
Study, Volume I, 1945.




                                                                                     31
Pacific Islands, Naval Intelligence Division, Geographical Handbook Series: Eastern
Pacific, Volume II, 1943.

Pacific Islands, Naval Intelligence Division, Geographical Handbook Series: Western
Pacific (Tonga to Solomon Is.), Volume III, 1944.

Pacific Islands, Naval Intelligence Division, Geographical Handbook Series: Western
Pacific (New Guinea and Islands Northward), Volume IV, 1945.

Parsons, James J., San Andrés and Providencia: English-Speaking Islands in the Western
Caribbean, University of California Publications in Geography (Vol. 12), University of
California Press, Berkeley, 1956.

Philippines: A Country Study, Frederica M. Bunge (ed.), Federal Research Division,
Library of Congress, Washington D.C., 1984.

Pons, Frank Moya, The Dominican Republic: A National History, Hispaniola Books,
New Rochelle, NY, 1995.

Rodney, Walter, How Europe Underdeveloped Africa, Howard University Press,
Washington, D. C., 1974.

Roger, Robert F., Destiny’s Landfall: A History of Guam, University of Hawai’i Press,
Honolulu, 1995.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., "Institutions Don't Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per Capita
Income," National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers: 9490,
2003.




                                                                                   32
                                              Table I
                                          Summary Statistics

These are summary statistics for the variables in the islands database. See the text for details on variable
sources and construction. Islands still without an elected legislature are coded as getting a legislature in
2004.



 Variable                                       Obs         Mean        Std. Dev.    Min          Max
 Island's GDP per Capita 2000                          80   7,953.38     8,909.50      264.00      53,735.00
 Log (GDP Capita)                                      80       8.42          1.12        5.57         10.89
 Infant Mortality 2002                                 80      18.68         15.21        4.00         79.00
 Number of Centuries as a Colony                       80       2.18          1.54        0.00          5.11
 Northerly Vector of Prevailing Wind                   80       0.18          1.28       -1.55          4.20
 Easterly Vector of Prevailing Wind                    80      -4.20          2.02       -6.88          4.42
 No Historical (1500-1820) Off Island
 Trade Except Fish or Coconuts (0-1)                   80       0.48         0.50         0.00          1.00
 Agriculture Used Imported Slaves                      80       0.40         0.49         0.00          1.00
 Year of First Elected Legislature                     80       1939           69        1639           2004
 Had Legislature by 1800                               80       0.08         0.27         0.00          1.00
 Had Legislature by 1900                               80       0.14         0.35         0.00          1.00
 Percent Current Pop Native                            77      49.07        45.06         0.00        100.00
 Percent Current Pop White                             77       7.86        16.06         0.00         95.88
 Percent Current Pop Black                             77      23.65        36.98         0.00         95.00
 Percent Current Pop Mixed                             77      12.60        24.05         0.00         93.20
 Number of Centuries British                           80       0.86         1.23         0.00          3.95
 Number of Centuries French                            80       0.40         0.82         0.00          3.69
 Number of Centuries Spanish                           80       0.38         0.95         0.00          4.05
 Ever British                                          80       0.68         0.47         0.00          1.00
 Ever French                                           80       0.31         0.47         0.00          1.00
 Ever Spanish                                          80       0.25         0.44         0.00          1.00
 Absolute Value of Latitude                            80      15.66         7.71         0.50         51.92
 Island Area (1000s sq km)                             80       5.92         20.5        0.003         110.0
 Island Population                                     70    302,720    1,394,832          102    11,000,000
 Island is in Pacific                                  80       0.49         0.50         0.00          1.00
 Island is in Atlantic                                 80       0.44         0.50         0.00          1.00
 Island is in Indian                                   80       0.07         0.27         0.00          1.00




                                                                                                               33
                                                          Table II
                                         Outcomes Regressed on Years of Colonization

                We regress Log GDP per capita and infant mortality on the number of years the island spent as a colony of
                a European power. Columns (1), (2), (4), (6) and (7) are OLS. Columns (3), (5) and (8) are two stage least
                squares where we instrument for centuries of colonial rule or the first year as a colony using the 12 month
                average and standard deviation of the east-west wind speed for each island.
                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)
                                  Log GDP Log GDP Log GDP Log GDP Log GDP                                 Infant       Infant          Infant
                                    Capita        Capita      Capita -       Capita        Capita-      Mortality     Mortality      Mortality
                                                                 IV                           IV        Per 1000      Per 1000       Per 1000 -
                                                                                                                                         IV
Number of Centuries a Colony            0.413         0.450         0.441                                   -2.801         -2.611       -10.244
                                    (0.065)**     (0.083)**     (0.157)**                                 (1.156)*       (1.259)*      (4.344)*
First Year a Colony                                                              -0.396       -0.545
                                                                             (0.101)**     (0.232)*
Final Year A Colony                                                               0.014        0.007
                                                                                (0.014)      (0.017)
Remained A Colony in 2000                                                         0.800        0.732
                                                                             (0.149)** (0.206)**
Abs(Latitude)                                           0.048          0.048      0.039        0.042                       -0.763         -0.771
                                                   (0.011)** (0.011)** (0.011)** (0.013)**                             (0.211)**      (0.221)**
Area in millions of sq km                            -21.046        -20.984    -20.429      -23.791                      263.524        321.185
                                                   (3.937)** (3.961)** (4.707)** (6.169)**                            (149.986)+     (143.722)*
Island is in Pacific                                    0.779          0.767      0.747        0.944                       -7.427       -18.724
                                                    (0.457)+         (0.522)    (0.470)      (0.569)                      (9.498)      (13.608)
Island is in Atlantic                                   0.615          0.622      0.427        0.298                       -7.349         -1.117
                                                      (0.400)        (0.410)    (0.367)      (0.403)                      (8.581)        (8.555)
Constant                                   7.524        6.172          6.192    13.673        16.356       24.771          41.579         60.751
                                      (0.166)** (0.526)** (0.659)** (1.942)** (4.173)** (3.677)** (10.898)**                         (18.551)**
Observations                                  80           80             80         80           80            80              80            80
R-squared                                  0.320        0.578          0.578      0.642        0.630        0.080           0.353          0.082
                 Robust standard errors in parentheses. We cluster at the island group level since several of the islands (e.g.
                 the Cook Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia) are used as separate observations from a cluster
                 of politically related yet geographically distinct islands.

                + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                            34
                                                         Table III
                                               Comparison of different Samples
             Column (1) is the base sample used in the rest of the paper. Column (2) uses only GDP figures obtained
             from the UN, but includes disaggregation of islands that are part of a group. Column (3) uses only the raw
             UN GDP data. Columns (4) and (5) limit the sample to the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. Columns (6) and
             (7) are two stage least squares for each ocean where we instrument for centuries of colonial rule using the
             12 month average and standard deviation of the east-west wind vector for each island.

                                      (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)            (7)
                                  Log GDP         Log GDP         Log GDP        Log GDP       Log GDP          Log GDP        Log GDP
                                  per Capita      per Capita      per Capita     per Capita    per Capita       per Capita     per Capita

Sample                               Base         UN data -        UN data        Pacific        Atlantic       Pacific - IV   Atlantic-IV
                                                disaggregated
                                                    groups

Number of centuries a colony              0.450            0.557          0.426        0.522          0.293          0.470          0.600
                                     (0.083)**        (0.112)**      (0.110)**   (0.084)**         (0.146)+       (0.192)*       (0.235)*
Abs(Latitude)                             0.048            0.058          0.064        0.063          0.040          0.064          0.045
                                     (0.011)**        (0.013)**      (0.017)**   (0.015)**         (0.017)*      (0.015)**      (0.015)**
Area in millions of sq km              -21.046          -21.621        -22.265      -20.698         -21.685        -19.806        -22.192
                                     (3.937)**        (3.902)**      (3.802)**   (1.802)**       (6.647)**       (4.016)**      (6.292)**
Island is in Pacific                      0.779            0.995          1.090
                                      (0.457)+           (0.690)      (0.576)+
Island is in Atlantic                     0.615            0.499          0.415
                                        (0.400)          (0.581)        (0.527)
Constant                                  6.172            5.701          5.708        6.670          7.465          6.710          6.337
                                     (0.526)**        (0.755)**      (0.630)**   (0.284)**       (0.501)**       (0.300)**      (0.924)**
Observations                                 80               61             61           39             35             39             35
R-squared                                 0.578            0.625          0.538        0.553          0.431          0.549          0.332
              Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the island group level.
              + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                          35
                                           Table IV
                    Possible Mechanisms for GDP – Colonialism Relationship
                                                            (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                        Log GDP         Log GDP         Log GDP        Log GDP
                                                        Per Capita      Per Capita      Per Capita     Per Capita
Number Of Centuries A Colony                                   0.393          0.387            0.378          0.313
                                                         (0.100)**       (0.104)**       (0.103)**      (0.091)**
No Complex Trade Goods During Colonial Period                 -0.435                          -0.464         -0.497
                                                             (0.279)                         (0.282)      (0.291)+
Mining During Colonial Period                                                 0.492
                                                                            (0.323)
Organized Agriculture During Colonial Period                                  0.298
                                                                            (0.295)
Livestock During Colonial Period                                              0.094
                                                                            (0.398)
Agriculture Used Imported Slaves                              0.115                           0.218
                                                            (0.369)                         (0.388)
Year Of First Elected Legislature                             0.000                                          0.000
                                                            (0.001)                                        (0.001)
Had Elected Legislature By 1800                                                               0.288
                                                                                            (0.462)
Had Elected Legislature By 1900                                                              -0.470
                                                                                            (0.399)
Percent White                                                                                                0.016
                                                                                                         (0.008)*
Percent Black                                                                                                0.008
                                                                                                           (0.007)
Percent Mixed                                                                                                0.018
                                                                                                        (0.005)**
Abs(Latitude)                                                   0.044         0.047            0.045         0.042
                                                          (0.011)**      (0.014)**        (0.011)**     (0.013)**
Area in millions of sq km                                    -22.389        -23.420         -22.125       -25.058
                                                          (3.985)**      (4.658)**        (3.154)**     (3.755)**
Island is in Pacific                                            0.921         0.792            0.820         1.286
                                                            (0.430)*      (0.470)+         (0.455)+     (0.412)**
Island is in Atlantic                                           0.578         0.635            0.425         0.306
                                                             (0.404)        (0.384)          (0.410)       (0.400)
Constant                                                        5.549         6.145            6.621         5.696
                                                            (2.351)*     (0.517)**        (0.583)**      (2.214)*
Observations                                                       80             80              80            77
R-Squared                                                       0.600         0.598            0.608         0.686
   Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the island group level.
   + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                            36
                                           Table V
                      The Effect of Colonialism by Colonizing Countries

                                                  (1)                            (2)
                                            Log GDP per Capita             Log GDP per Capita
         Centuries US                                        1.498
                                                        (0.346)**
         Centuries Dutch                                     0.516
                                                        (0.083)**
         Centuries British                                   0.411
                                                        (0.112)**
         Centuries French                                    0.410
                                                        (0.124)**
         Centuries Spanish                                   0.274
                                                        (0.089)**
         Centuries Portuguese                               -0.894
                                                        (0.157)**
         Centuries German                                    0.734
                                                           (1.036)
         Centuries Japanese                                 -1.097
                                                           (0.743)
         Centuries British Legal                                                               0.319
                                                                                           (0.145)*
         Centuries French Legal                                                                0.391
                                                                                          (0.108)**
         Centuries German Legal                                                                0.276
                                                                                             (0.544)
         Abs(Latitude)                                          0.048                          0.048
                                                           (0.014)**                      (0.014)**
         Area in millions of sq km                           -18.410                        -21.985
                                                           (4.957)**                      (3.983)**
         Island is in Pacific                                   0.672                          0.695
                                                              (0.543)                        (0.515)
         Island is in Atlantic                                  0.643                          0.797
                                                              (0.473)                      (0.458)+
         Constant                                               6.264                          6.369
                                                           (0.609)**                      (0.586)**
         Observations                                              80                             80
         R-squared                                              0.629                          0.544

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the island group level.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                       37
                                            Table VI
                                     The Timing of Colonialism
                                                        (1)                (2)                 (3)
                                                    Log GDP per        Log GDP per         Log GDP per
                                                       Capita             Capita              Capita
   Centuries a Colony before 1700                            0.110             -0.001              -0.032
                                                           (0.169)           (0.201)             (0.207)
   Centuries a Colony after 1700                             0.640
                                                        (0.112)**
   Centuries a Colony 1700-1900                                                  0.930                 0.854
                                                                            (0.221)**             (0.198)**
   Centuries a Colony after 1900                                                 0.208                -0.454
                                                                               (0.317)               (0.452)
   Remained a Colony in 2000                                                                           0.839
                                                                                                  (0.251)**
   Abs(Latitude)                                               0.049              0.047                0.030
                                                          (0.012)**          (0.011)**             (0.013)*
    Area in millions of sq km                                -19.691           -22.493              -20.067
                                                          (4.886)**          (5.086)**            (4.692)**
    Island is in Pacific                                       0.946              1.086                0.915
                                                            (0.436)*          (0.422)*             (0.382)*
    Island is in Atlantic                                      0.622              0.580                0.493
                                                            (0.363)+            (0.351)              (0.317)
    Constant                                                   5.842              5.881                6.456
                                                          (0.528)**          (0.500)**            (0.529)**
    Observations                                                  80                 80                   80
    R-squared                                                  0.605              0.623                0.670
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the island group level.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                               38
                                      Table VII
              GDP and Colonialism within Non-island Developing Countries
We started with the Acemoglu-Robinson-Johnson [2001] database and added our own measure of length of
colonial period. We dropped the three island countries that were in AJR and our islands database.

                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)
                                                 Log GDP      Log GDP      Log GDP     Log GDP
                                                 Per          Per          Per         Per
                                                 Capita       Capita       Capita      Capita
           Number of Centuries a Colony          0.401        0.358        0.287       0.232
                                                 [0.097]**    [0.090]**    [0.072]**   [0.084]**
           Abs(Latitude)                                      2.952        1.406       1.825
                                                              [0.883]**    [0.746]+    [0.822]*
           Mean Temperature                                   -0.023       -0.013      0.005
                                                              [0.023]      [0.019]     [0.021]
           Expropriation Risk                                              0.404
                                                                           [0.067]**
           Log Settler Mortality (AJR)                                                 -0.403
                                                                                       [0.093]**
           Constant                              7.276        7.344        4.873       9.034
                                                 [0.215]**    [0.686]**    [0.682]**   [0.728]**
           Observations                          64           64           64          60
           R-squared                             0.22         0.40         0.63        0.56
Robust standard errors in parentheses. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                         39
                                        Appendix I
                 IV First Stage Regression and Reduced Form Regression

Columns (1) and (2) are OLS. Column (1) is the first stage regression using our preferred set of
instruments. We regress the islands' number of centuries as a colony on the northerly and easterly vectors
of the island's prevailing wind. Column (2) is a reduced form in which we show the direct effect of wind
on modern day GDP.

                                                                          (1)                 (3)
                                                                 Number Of            Log GDP Per
                                                                 Centuries A               Capita
                                                                     Colony
         East-West Vector Of Wind                                     -0.265                  -0.139
                                                                  (0.081)**                (0.066)*
         Monthly StDev of East-West Vector                             0.885                   0.260
                                                                  (0.302)**                  (0.255)
         Area in millions of sq km                                    10.983                -16.278
                                                                    (4.417)*              (4.810)**
         Abs(Latitude)                                                 0.020                   0.060
                                                                     (0.016)              (0.014)**
         Island is in Pacific                                         -1.684                  -0.059
                                                                  (0.387)**                  (0.514)
         Island is in Atlantic                                        0.760                  0.768
                                                                   (0.379)*                (0.544)
         Constant                                                    -0.013                  6.342
                                                                    (0.964)             (0.892)**
         Observations                                                    80                     80
         R-Squared                                                    0.624                  0.440
         F Statistic for Instruments                                   5.96
         Prob > F =                                                    .005

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the island group level.
        + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                       40
                                       Appendix II
               IV Results Using Alternative Sets of Wind Based Instruments

In addition to specifying the prevailing wind as two vectors per island, we also tried several other measures
of wind speed and direction and used these to instrument for an islands' years of colonization. Below are
the second stage results and F-statistics for three different types of wind related instruments. Column (1)
takes eight compass headings and measures the knots of prevailing wind along each heading and each
month. The instrument is the sum of knots*months that the prevailing wind blew on that heading. We use
knot*months along headings 2,4,6,8 as the set of instruments. In column (2) we use simply the
knot*months of wind of blowing towards the South West. Wind on this compass heading is the single
strongest predictor of an island being discovered and colonized early. In column (3) we perform a similar
exercise but limit ourselves to four compass headings and measure the wind as negative if it blew away
from a compass heading instead of towards it. In other words, we have only 4 headings but the wind speed
can be positive or negative. We use all four points as instruments.


                                            (1)                         (2)                    (3)
                                      Log GDP Capita              Log GDP Capita         Log GDP Capita
                                          (2SLS)                      (2SLS)                 (2SLS)
Number Centuries a Colony                           1.038                       0.827                  0.703
                                               (0.309)**                      (0.499)              (0.302)*
Area in 1000s Sq                                 -25.488                     -23.900                -22.959
Miles                                          (4.886)**                   (5.220)**              (4.153)**
Abs(Latitude)                                       0.048                       0.048                  0.048
                                               (0.013)**                   (0.011)**              (0.011)**
Island is in Pacific                                1.649                       1.338                  1.154
                                                (0.715)*                      (0.876)              (0.650)+
Island is in Atlantic                               0.135                       0.307                  0.408
                                                  (0.532)                     (0.612)                (0.467)
Constant                                            4.695                       5.223                  5.536
                                               (0.998)**                   (1.375)**              (0.918)**
Observations                                           80                          80                     80
R-squared                                           0.282                       0.456                  0.523
F Statistic for Instruments in                       4.48                        2.52                   1.81
First Stage                                        0.0032                       0.118                  0.139
Prob > F =
Robust standard errors in parentheses
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                                         41
                                                  Appendix III
                                        List of Islands in Our Dataset
Island           Group/Country                    Other Country      Year First   Number of     GDP per
                                                                       Sighted         Years     Capita
                                                                                   Colonized
Aitutaki         Cook Islands                                             1789            13         2,814
Andros, North    Bahamas                                                  1492           479        14,296
Anguilla         Anguilla                                                 1493           354         9,617
Antigua          Antigua and Barbuda                                      1493           349         7,653
Ascension        Ascension                        United Kingdom          1501            82        24,514
Atiu             Cook Islands                                             1777            13         1,930
Barbados         Barbados                                                 1510           384         9,739
Bermuda          Bermuda                                                  1503           395        53,735
Bonaire          Netherlands Antilles             Netherlands             1499           478        15,931
Cuba             Cuba                                                     1492           389         2,535
Curacao          Netherlands Antilles             Netherlands             1499           492        15,931
Dominica         Dominica                                                 1493           246         3,484
East Falkland    East Falkland                    United Kingdom          1592           231        24,514
Efate            Vanuatu                                                  1606           186         1,164
Fefan            Federated States of Micronesia                           1687           101         1,335
Funafuti         Tuvalu                                                   1819            62         1,204
Futuna           Futuna                           France                  1616           117        21,776
Grand Cayman     Grand Cayman                                             1503           369        34,173
Grande Comore    Comoros                                                  1505            88           264
Grande Terre     Guadeloupe                                               1493           376         7,900
Grenada          Grenada                                                  1498           344         3,440
Guam             Guam                             United States           1521           443        34,364
Hispaniola DOM   Dominican Republic                                       1492           313         3,029
Hispaniola HTI   Haiti                                                    1492           331           485
Huvadu           Huvadu                                                   1558           335         2,151
Jamaica          Jamaica                                                  1494           168         3,056
Kadavu           Fiji                                                     1789            95         2,031
Kosrae           Federated States of Micronesia                           1688           101         2,751
Lifou            Loyalty Islands                  New Caldonia            1774           231        12,455
Luzon            Philippines                                              1521           297         1,002
Mahe             Seychelles                                               1502           220         7,764
Majuro           Marshall Islands                                         1526           100         1,896
Malaita          Solomon Islands                                          1568            86           791
Mangaia          Cook Islands                                             1777            13         2,171
Mangareva        Gambier Is                       French Polynesia        1687           124        13,955
Manihiki         Cook Islands                                             1822            13         2,895
Martinique       Martinique                       France                  1502           226        21,776
Mauke            Cook Islands                                             1823            13         2,493
Mauritius        Mauritius                                                1507           359         3,839
Mayotte          Mayotte                          France                  1529           161        21,776




                                                                                               42
                                                 Appendix III
                                  List of Islands in Our Dataset (continued)
Island             Group                            Other Country      Year First   Number of     GDP per
                                                                         Sighted         Years     Capita
                                                                                     Colonized
Mitiaro            Cook Islands                                             1823            13         2,734
Moen               Federated States of Micronesia                           1528            87         1,335
Montserrat         Montserrat                                               1493           372         8,919
Nauru              Nauru                                                    1798            78         2,702
New Britain        Bismarck Archipelago             Papua New Guinea        1616            61           729
New Caledonia      New Caledonia                                            1774           231        12,455
Niue               Niue                                                     1774             1         3,600
North Caicos       Turks and Caicos Islands         United Kingdom          1512           238        24,514
Oreor              Palau                                                    1710           120         6,076
Palmerston         Cook Islands                                             1774            13         2,493
Penrhyn            Cook Islands                                             1788            13           989
Pohnpei            Federated States of Micronesia                           1689           101         2,711
Puerto Rico        Puerto Rico                                              1493           511        18,047
Pukapuka           Cook Islands                                             1595            13           724
Rakahanga          Cook Islands                                             1606            13         1,528
Rarotonga          Cook Islands                                             1789            13         6,433
Reunion            Reunion                                                  1513           341         6,200
Rurutu             Austral Islands                  French Polynesia        1769           236        13,955
Saba               Netherlands Antilles             Netherlands             1493           372        15,931
Saipan             Northern Mariana Islands         United States           1521           440        12,500
Sint Maartin       Netherlands Antilles             France                  1493           356        16,000
St Croix           US Virgin Islands                United States           1493           250        11,868
St Eustatius       Netherlands Antilles             Netherlands             1493           375        15,931
St Helena          St Helena                        United Kingdom          1502           494        24,514
St John            US Virgin Islands                United States           1493           250        18,012
St Kitts           St. Kitts and Nevis                                      1493           360         8,132
St Lucia           St Lucia                                                 1500           481         4,424
St Martin          Netherlands Antilles             Netherlands             1493           356        21,776
St Thomas          US Virgin Islands                United States           1493           250        14,061
St Vincent         St Vincent and the Grenadines                            1498           299         2,891
Tahiti             Society Islands                  French Polynesia        1767           208        13,955
Tahuata            Marquesas                        French Polynesia        1595             5        13,955
Tarawa             Kiribati - Line Islands                                  1788            66           538
Tol                Federated States of Micronesia                           1528           101         1,335
Tongatapu          Tonga                                                    1643             0         1,430
Tortola            British Virgin Islands           United Kingdom          1493           356        33,671
Trinidad           Trinidad and Tobago                                      1498           289         6,347
Tristan da Cunha   Tristan da Cunha & Gouh          United Kingdom          1506           188        24,514
Tutuila            American Samoa                   United States           1787           175        34,364
Yap                Federated States of Micronesia                           1686           101         2,751




                                                                                                 43
                                              Appendix IV
                                             GDP by Sector
    This is for a subsample of islands in the database. Source is CIA World Factbook 2002, which in turn uses
    both UN Data and national government statistics from the relevant countries.
island                                       ocean       GDP            Agriculture      Industry      Services
Bermuda                                      Atlantic    36 B           1%               10%           89%
Grand Cayman                                 Atlantic    1.27 B.        1%               3%            95%
Jamaica                                      Atlantic    10.21 B.       6%               24%           70%
Anguilla                                     Atlantic    104 Mill       4%               18%           78%
New Britain                                  Pacific     11.4 B.        32%              36%           32%
Majuro                                       Pacific     115 Mill       14%              16%           70%
Mauritius                                    Indian      13.85 B.       6%               33%           61%
US Virgin Islands                            Atlantic    2.4 B.         1%               19%           80%
Tongatapu                                    Pacific     236 Mill       26%              12%           62%
Pohnpei                                      Pacific     277 Mill       50%              4%            46%
Montserrat                                   Atlantic    29 Mill        5%               14%           81%
New Caledonia                                Pacific     3.158 B.       5%               30%           65%
Guam                                         Pacific     3.2 B.         7%               15%           78%
Cuba                                         Atlantic    31.59 B.       8%               35%           58%
British Virgin Islands                       Atlantic    320 Mill       2%               6%            92%
St Vincent                                   Atlantic    339 Mill       10%              26%           64%
Dominica                                     Atlantic    380 Mill       18%              24%           58%
Barbados                                     Atlantic    4.496 B.       6%               16%           78%
Grenada                                      Atlantic    440 Mill       8%               24%           68%
Kadavu                                       Pacific     5.007 B.       17%              22%           61%
Martinique                                   Atlantic    6.117 B.       6%               11%           83%
Puerto Rico                                  Atlantic    65.28 B.       1%               42%           57%
Antigua                                      Atlantic    750 Mill       4%               19%           77%
Tarawa                                       Pacific     79 Mill        30%              7%            63%
Malaita                                      Pacific     800 Mill       42%              11%           47%
St Lucia                                     Atlantic    866 Mill       7%               20%           73%
Reunion                                      Indian      9.387 B.       8%               19%           73%




                                                                                                          44
                                          Figure 1
                          GDP Per Capita versus Years of Colonialism

Circles represent islands in the Atlantic, triangles are islands in the Pacific and squares are islands in the
Indian Ocean.




                                                                                                                 45
                                          Figure 2
                    Years of Colonialism Versus Easterly Vector of Wind

Circles represent islands in the Atlantic, triangles are islands in the Pacific and squares are islands in the
Indian Ocean.




                                                                                                                 46
