                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               IMPORTED MATERIAlS PRICES, WAGE POLICY,
                   AND MACROECONOMIC STABILIZATION


                          Richard C. Marston

                         Stephen J. Turnovsky



                        Working Paper No. 1251t




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            December 1983




An earlier version of this paper was presented to a neting of the
NBER International Studies Program. We are grateful to par-
ticipants for their helpful suggestions. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those   of the National Bureau of   Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #1254
                                                            December 1983




   Imported Materials Prices, Wage Policy, and Macroeconomic Stabilization




                                   ABSTRACT

     This paper analyzes two simple wage rules that keep employment constant

when there are shocks to the prices of imported materials. One rule ties

nominal wages to the GNP deflator rather than the consumer price index. The

second rule, followed by Japan after the second oil price shock, ties the real

wage to real GNP. The paper shows the effects on output, real income, and

other macroeconomic variables of choosing either rule in place of the real

wage stability provided by conventional wage indexatiori.




Richard C. Marston                                Stephen 7.   Turuovsky
Wharton School                                    Department   of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                        University   of Illinois
Philadelphia, P1 19104                            1206 South   Sixth Street
                                                  Champaign,    IL 61820
215—898—7626
                                                  217—333—2354
I. INTRODUCTION

     The response of an economy to increases in the prices of imported raw

materials depends critically upon wage behavior, since real shocks of this

kind require adjustment in relative factor prices. If real wages are rigid,

as they are in many European countries, these price increases result in a fall

in employment, together with a reduction in both gross output and domestic

value added. The fall in employment is mitigated if real wages can adjust

downward in some fashion. However, the amount of adjustment required depends

upon the production structure of the economy. Without detailed knowledge of

that structure, an appropriate wage policy is difficult to formulate.

     This paper shows that two simple wage rules provide just the right amount

of real wage adjustment to ensure that employment remains constant in the face

of such price shocks. The first rule, which has been advocated in several

different countries, is a wage indexation scheme that ties nominal wages to

the GNP deflator, rather than to the consumer price index.' The second rule

is a little less familiar, but can be shown to be equivalent to the first.

This rule, which was followed by the Japanese trade unions after oil prices

rose In 1979, ties the real wage to the real GNP. Shinkai (1980) attributes

to this rule Japan's recent success in avoiding the macroeconomic stagnation

experienced in other industrial countries.2

     The choice between real wage stability on the one hand, and employment

stability on the other, is not an easy one to make. But it is important to

know the issues involved in making a particular choice. This paper analyzes

how gross output, employment, real income, real wages and prices respond under

alternative wage policies. Three wage policies, in fact, are considered.

These are:




                                      1
       (i) fixing the real wage, i.e., tying the nominal wage to the consumer

           price index as is done in many countries with wage indexation;

     (ii) adjusting the real wage so as to keep employment constant, and

     (iii) adjusting the real wage so as to keep real income constant.

The responses of the key macroeconomic variables to these three policies

follow systematic patterns which simplify the choices among policies

considerably. Real wage resistence has definite costs which can be described

in terms of employment and price behavior. But against these must be weighed

the costs of alternative policies, as the analysis makes clear. Only when

these costs are taken into account can sensible decisions about wage

indexation and employment policy be made.

     The setting of this analysis is a small open economy under flexible

exchange rates. The country treats all foreign variables, including the

foreign currency price of raw materials, as given. But the economy produces a

final good which is distinct from the foreign final good, so that changes in

the real exchange rate (between these final outputs) can occur. As a result,

the real price of raw materials varies, depending upon the wage policy

adopted. This provides another dimension which needs to be taken into account

in choosing among the alternative wage policies.

     The next section of the paper describes the production technology of the

domestic economy, including the alternative concepts of value added relevant

for the GNP—based wage rules discussed above. Section III then describes the

three wage policies outlined above and shows how the employment stabilizing

rule Is equivalent to the two GNP—based rules. We also compare these policies

with wage behavior in a full information, labor market clearing economy.

Section IV analyzes and compares the impacts of the three policies in a world

where domestic and foreign final goods are perfect substitutes so that the law



                                      2
of one price for these goods prevails. Section V analyzes the general model

and shows that the results of the simpler case continue to hold even when

changes in the relative prices of final goods (the real exchange rate)

occur. The main conclusions are reviewed in a final section.


II. DOMESTIC PRODUCTION BEHAVIOR

     The key aspect of the model is the domestic production sector and

accordingly this is described in some detail. In doing so, it is important to

distinguish between the different concepts of value added and to define

precisely what we mean by the value added deflator.

    Gross output, Z of the domestic final good is assumed to take a

separable form Z =   F[f(L,        Nt]    where Lt represents labor,   represents

capital, and Nt denotes imported raw materials. The quantity V =       f(L,   1)
is defined to be domestic value added, measured in terms of inputs.3 For

simplicity, value added is assumed to be a Cobb—Douglas function of labor and

capital, while gross final output is a CES function of value added and

imported materials

     (1)                           Vt =   Ln)K
     (2)                Z =   [N; + (1 —
Although it is reasonable to assume a Cobb—Douglas production function for
domestic value added, existing estimates for the elasticity of substitution

between Nt and V, denoted by a =    1/(1 + p), are typically much lower than
unity, and hence production of gross output is more appropriately described by

a CES function. Throughout our discussion we shall restrict a to be less than

or equal to one (a   1). While this is plausible for the situation we wish to

analyze, it is of course theoretically possible for a > 1, in which case some

of the implications we draw would require appropriate modification.4


                                           3
     It is convenient to conduct our analysis using linearized approximations

for these production functions with all variables expressed as percentage

changes about an initial equilibrium (denoted by the subscript 0). Let lower

case letters denote the percentage change in the corresponding level variable,

so, for example, z (Z — Z0)/Z0.                Then for small changes (1) and (2) may be

approximated by

        (1')                             v = (1       —



        (2')                          z = c1n + c2V

where                  c1 =   (Z0/N0)'                c2 = (1 —


and hence                 0 < c1 < 1, 0 < c2 < 1, c +                    =   1
                                                                    c2

In deriving (1') from (1) we assume that the time period being considered is

sufficiently short so that capital remains fixed, i.e., kt = 0.                     Note that

(1') and (2') can also be derived as log—linear approximations for (1) and

(2).
        Domestic producers are assumed to choose the short—run inputs L and N to

maximize profit
                                           —              —
                                               WL             PNt

where          denotes the price of gross output, W denotes the nominal wage rate,

and P is the domestic price of imported raw materials. Given the

separability of the production process, this optimization can be broken down

to the following pair of decisions:


         Ci) Choose Lt to maximize:                           —
                                                                  WtLt

        (ii) Choose Vt and Nt    to   maximize: P[8NP + (1 —                     )v]'   —
                                                                                            PNt
                                                                                                  —
                                                                                                      PVt



                                                  4
where in subproblems (i) and (ii) p denotes the value—added deflator, to be

defined below.

      Linearizing the corresponding marginal productivity conditions for these

two problems yields the following expressions for £,                             n,    and v in terms of

      p,   p and the nominal wage wt:


       (3a)                                =
                                               v    —
                                                         (w
                                                                 —
                                                                     p)
                                                                 —
       (3b)                           n =      z
                                           =Z— —         __,_v   —    -




      As Arrow (1974) has shown, the value added price index is defined

implicitly by the dual to the CES              production            function (2), namely

                                                                                 1+p
                               =                   + (1 —


In deriving (4) use is made of the facts, obtained from the marginal

productivity conditions, that


                                       PnN                                                Pvv
                   c =    (Z   IN   )P = OO         c = (1           -    )(Z   /v )P =
                                         00                                                00

so that c1 and c2 represent the shares of imported materials and value added,

respectively, in gross output. Next, linearizing (4) yields


                                               =
                                                         n
                                                             +
                                                                     v
                                        Pt         c1p           c2p
and hence
                                       =
                                           ic2          —
                                                             (c1/c2)p      .




The   price   of final output is thus a weighted average of the prices of raw

materials and value added, the weights being their respective shares in final


                                                        5
output. This implies that the value added deflator is a weighted average of

the price of final output and of imported inputs, with the weight on the

former being greater than unity and the weight on the latter being negative;

i.e., an "external average" in Arrow's (1974, PP. 15—16) terminology. Note

also that equation (5) can be obtained directly by substituting the optimality

conditions (3b) and (3c) into the production function (2') and using the fact

that c1 + c2 = 1.

      En addition to the value added concept already defined in (1) and (1'),

there is a second measure of value added that is important in the discussion

below; that measure is expressed in terms of the final good rather than in

terms of the physical inputs. It is defined below both in natural units (6)

and in percentage changes (6'):


      (6)                       v   =
                                        z   —
                                                 (P/Pt)N
                     v =            —                +     —
      (6')                 z/c2         (c1/c2)(n
    measures the real income accruing to the domestic factors of production,
V
capital and labor,6 in contrast to Vt which measures the real net output of

these factors. (We later define a second measure of real income defined in

terms of a consumer price index).

      Using (2') and (5), we can show that the two measures of value added are

related in the following equivalent ways


      (7)
                                 v=v÷p—p
      (8)                  v   = v — (c1/c2)(p —

Thus the two measures will be different to the extent that the relative prices




                                                6
of final output and value added, or the relative prices of final output and

imported materials, diverge.

       To complete our description of the production sector we solve equations

(1'), (2'), (3a), (3b), (3c) for the real variables: employment, £,                                        value
added measured in terms of inputs, v, and in units of the final good, v,

final output, z, and imported materials, •                              We     express each of these

variables in terms of the two relative prices that are important in the

discussion below; these are the real wage facing the producer (w —                                           and

LLL LdI.            UI. LL1 .LmpuL-Leu                       ,fl        --          r.t_               -
                                             ULdLCE.LdI.S
                                                                        nt"          £[I   resuicing   expressions

are
                     Vt  =            1 (w
                                    =——                            Cl         fl
       (9a)       (1 — )
                                                   —
                                                       1))
                                                              —




       (9b)      v =      —   (1—a)           —              C1
                                                                             — p)
                                        (w

                      =   -   (1   a)                                   - +
       (9c)                             (w -                       [1               xJ(p -
                          —   (1 — a)                  —
                                                            [c1(1 —          a) +   a]
       (9d)      n =             a    (w                                                   tPt —
                                                                        02

From these expressions it is evident that all quantities are inversely related

to each real price.


III. ALTERNATIVE WAGE POLICIES

      It is evident from the expressions (9a)—(9d) that the response of the

economy to a change in the real materials price depends crucially upon the

adjustment of real wages. We now introduce the three alternative wage

policies we wish to analyze.




                                                       7
1.   Stabilizing the Real Wage

     This policy is the familiar one of setting the nominal wage so as to keep

constant the real wage, defined in terms of labor's consumption basket.

Formally, this is described by an indexation rule,


     (10)
                                    w_P=O,
where p= cSp. + (1 —            + er), 0 < 5 < 1, is the consumer price index
                         ô)(p
(CPI), Pt =   foreign   price of the foreign final good, et = exchange rate

(expressed as the domestic price of foreign currency), and tS is the share of

the domestic good in the domestic consumption basket. As in Section II all

variables are expressed in terms of percentage changes. Defining the relative

price of foreign to domestic goods, which we also call the real exchange rate,

by                                        f
                                  St =   Pt + e — Pt

the domestic CPI can be written as


     (11)                          =     + (1 —


Thus a wage policy of stabilizing the real consumer wage is equivalent to

adjusting the real producer wage to the relative price in accordance with


     (10')                      w —      = (1     —


2.   Stabilizing Employment

     As already noted earlier, since the capital stock is fixed in the short

run, (the percentage change in) value added v is proportional to (the

percentage change in) employment. Accordingly, stabilizing employment is

equivalent to stabilizing this form of value added. From equation (9a) it is

seen that this policy involves setting the real producer wage w —          in
                                                                      Pt


                                              8
accordance with the rule


     (12)


That is, in response to a one percent increase in the real domestic price of

imported materials, the real producer wage must be reduced by (c1/c2)

percent.7 From Section II c1/c is the ratio of the values of imported raw

materials to domestic value added. This ratio almost certainly is

substantially smaller than unity, in which case the required downward

adjustment in the real producer wage is substantially less than proportional.

     We show now that the rule described by (12) is equivalent to the two wage

rules outlined in the introduction, namely: (i) tying the nominal wage to the

value added deflator, p; (ii) tying some measure of the real wage to some

measure of real GNP. We consider these rules in turn.

     First, equation (12) Immediately implies

                                       c1 +c 2        c
                                                          in
                                   =
                                          c2       Pt c2t
and noting c1 + c2 =   1   together with (5) yields


                               =          — (c1/c2)p      =


thereby demonstrating case (i). The reason why this rule stabilizes
employment is seen immediately from the production function (1') and the

optimality condition (3a). What it does is to fix the real wage relevant for

the employment decision, namely the nominal wage deflated by the value added

deflator.

     The second rule is a little more difficult to interpret, since there are

several definitions of both value added and the real wage. We consider two

natural variants. The first is to tie the real producer wage to value added



                                               9
measured in units of final output (which is one measure of real income); i.e.,


        (13)                           w p =v
The second is to tie the nominal wage deflated by the value added deflator to

value added in physical units, Vt,

                                         V
        (13)                           w_p=v
The two expressions are equivalent as can be seen by substituting (7) into

(13).

        Rules in either of these forms will stabilize employment and value

added. To show this, we rewrite (9a) and (9b) in terms of the value added

deflator using (5):


                              —        —   V        1     —   V
        (9a )            Vt       (w           = __a(wt

        (9b')            v — (w        —       = — ! (w   — pV)


According to these expressions, either real wage rule (13 or 13') keeps the

nominal wage equal to the value added deflator. But we have already shown

that tying w to p keeps employment and value added constant because it

stabilizes the real wage relevant for employment decisions. Hence either real

wage rule can be used to stabilize employment and value added.



        It is useful to compare the first two wage rules with wage behavior in a

full information, frictionless economy. Gray (1976) has argued that if labor

contract lags are the sole reason for departures from pareto optimality, a

wage rule should be chosen which most closely resembles wage behavior in a

frictionless economy without contract lags. To determine wage behavior in

such an economy, we need to extend the previous model by including a labor


                                               10
supply function. This is specified to be


     (14)                       =
                                    n(w
                                           —
                                               p),            n > 0,


reflecting the fact that labor supply is a function of the real consumer wage.

     In a frictionless economy, labor market equilibrium is assumed to hold.

Thus equating labor demand, specified by (9a), with labor supply, specified by

(14), we find that the equilibrium solution for the real producer wage is



     (15)          W—p
                     I..   L
                               na(i
                                LLLL            I..
                                                        c1/c2
                                                        j1UL L -t

Recalling   (10') and (12), we may express (15) in the form



     (16)     (w —    tf   =
                                      (w   —              +
                                                                 na (w
                                                                         —
                                                                             t2
where the subscripts 1, 2, and f denote the real wages under policies 1, 2,

and full information, respectively. It is immediately seen from (16) that the

real wage in a frictionless economy is a weighted average of those under

policies 1 and 2, and therefore in general lies in between them. The weights

depend upon (1) the elasticity of labor supply, n, and (ii) the elasticity of

output with respect to capital, a. In the limiting case when the supply of

labor is infinitely elastic, n +      , the           frictionless rule converges to policy

1. At the other extreme, the frictionless real wage coincides with policy 2,

namely tying the nominal wage to the value added deflator, when the supply of

labor becomes totally inelastic (n =       0).         Jewi1l not explicitly analyze the

effects of this intermediate wage rule on output and other macroeconomic

variables, but it should be obvious that the effects of this rule will lie

between those of policies 1 and 2.



                                               ii
3.   Stabilizing Real Income

     Policies 1 and 2 represent polar extremes of quantity and price

adjustments in the labor market. In both cases, as will become apparent

below, real income is reduced if the price of materials rises in real terms.

Given the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas production function for Vt (which keeps

the shares of wage income and profit income constant), a reduction in total

income also implies a proportionate reduction in both components of income.

As a third policy we consider one in which the nominal wage is adjusted so as

to keep real income and its components constant. By real income we mean value

added measured in units of the consumer basket which we denote by            so the

wage rule is


     (17)                   y =         v   +
                                                Pt
                                                           = 0


By combining (11) and (9b) we can show that for real income to remain

constant, the real producer wage must be adjusted In accordance with the rule



     (18)        w
                               —C
                                    1
                                            (    n
                                                     Pt)
                                                             a(1
                                                                 (1 —
                                                                        6)
                                                                        )S
That is, the real producer wage must fall in response to either a rise in the

real price of Imported materials or a rise in the real exchange rate. The

required reduction In the real wage in response to a rise in the price of

imported materials, by c1/1.c2(1 — cL)), is greater than that required by the

second wage policy of stabilizing employment (see (12) above). The extra fall

in the real wage raises labor income relative to the second wage policy

because the elasticity of labor demand with respect to the real producer wage

exceeds unity (implying that employment rises more than proportionately as the




                                                12
real wage falls). This tradeoff between real wages and real income is

discussed further below.

        In this third wage rule, s is an endogenous variable dependent upon

demand as well as supply behavior. In all three wage rules, moreover, the

real domestic price of imported materials, p —
                                                            p,   is an endogenous variable

since it depends upon s. To show this, we express p' —
                                                                     Pt in terms of s as
well as the real foreign price of imported materials,


                                        —
                                            Pt    St + Ot

               f       f   f
where      =       —
                           q   being the nominal price of imported materials in

foreign currency.

     With the wage rules depending upon endogenous prices, we cannot generally

assess the effects of the rules until we have specified demand behavior as

well as supply behavior. In section IV we focus on the limiting case where

domestic and foreign final goods are perfect substitutes so that the law of

one price keeps the price of domestic output at its purchasing power parity

(PPP) value. In this case the real exchange rate is constant, or s =               0.   The

real price of imported materials, moreover, is equal to the exogenous real

foreign price. As a result the analysis of each wage rule is considerably

simplified.


IV. IMPLICATIONS OF ALTERNATIVE WAGE POLICIES UNDER PPP

     The main reason for beginning with this case is that it helps to clarify

the general case to follow. Most of the effects we wish to consider can be

obtained simply by a consideration of the production sector alone and carry

over virtually unchanged to the general case where domestic and foreign final

goods are imperfect substitutes. We shall focus on the effects of an

exogenous increase in the real price of raw materials under the three


                                                 13
alternative wage rules, on:

       (1) the real wage;

      (ii) employment;

     (iii) real income;

      (iv) final output;

       (v) the domestic nominal price level (exchange rate).
                                                -

These results are summarized in Table 1.

1.   Stabilizing the Real Wage

     If the real wage is stabilized, an increase in the real price of imported

materials leads to a fall In employment, as well as a fall in real income and

final output. The effects of the increase in this price can be traced

throughout the production sector. First, the higher price of imported

materials reduces the use of materials, as well as gross output, though to the

extent that materials and value added are substitutable in production (as

reflected in a), the fall in the latter is smaller. Secondly, the policy of

fixing labor's real wage also fixes the real producer wage if PPP holds. With

the latter real wage fixed, employment must fall. With capital fixed in the

short run, value added (vt) must also fall as well. Thirdly, real labor

income must fall since real wages are fixed and employment falls. Moreover,

the fact that value added is produced by a Cobb—Douglas production function

means that the share of labor income in total income remains constant. Thus

the fall in real labor income implies a corresponding reduction in real

income, t•
     To consider the effects on the domestic price 'level, which under the

assumption of PPP is equivalent to the nominal exchange rate, requires the

introduction of the domestic money market. In general this is assumed to be

described by the pair of equations



                                      14
        (19) m -        p = y1(v + Pt — p)          -
                                                        12r             1 > 0, 12 > 0


                                                + e+1 —
        (20)                            r =                       e
where          =   domestic money supply, measured as a percentage change;

        e+1 = expectation              of et for period t+1, formed at time t;

        r = domestic          nominal interest rate;

               =   foreign   nominal interest rate;

and all other variables are as defined previously. Equation (19) is just the

usual money market equilibrium condition, where the demand for money depends

positively upon real income (defined in terms of cost of living units) and

negatively upon the domestic nominal interest rate. The assumption that

domestic and foreign bonds are perfect substitutes is expressed by the

uncovered interest parity condition (20).

     We now invoke the additional assumption that the foreign price shock is

unanticipated and is expected to be transitory; that is,                      is just a purely

stochastic disturbance. This assumption simplifies the solution of the model

when expectations are formed rationally, since in this case the expected

exchange rate is just equal to a stationary value (which we assume to be zero,

i.e., e+1 = 0.)               If we substitute (20) into (19) and invoke the PPP

assumption, we find


                                        (1 + 2t = 11v         —
                                 1fl                              Y2r
Assuming mt and              remain fixed, we obtain


     (19')
                                              —1        dv        0
                                       dO (1 + 12) °t
Art Increase in the foreign materials price lowers real Income, and therefore

the demand for money. In order for the domestic money market to remain in



                                                   15
equilibrium, the real money stock must fall. Given the nominal money stock

the domestic price level Pt must rise; i.e., the nominal exchange rate must

depreciate.

2.   Stabilizing Employment

     Suppose now that the wage rate is set so as to stabilize employment. In

this case an increase in the materials price leads to a fall in the real wage

accompanied by an equivalent fall in real income and a fall in final output.

The impact effect of such an increase in    is to reduce the use of materials,

thereby reducing the employment of labor and gross output, as for polIcy 1.

In order to restore the employment of labor, the wage rate is reduced in

accordance with (12). Given the complementarity of the two factors of

production, the additional labor tends to increase the use of materials,

thereby partially but not fully offsetting the initial fall in demand for

materials, so that on balance final output falls. The fact that the real wage

falls means that real labor income and hence total income falls, doing so by

an amount which in general is in excess of the fall in gross output. The

effect on the nominal price level is virtually the same as in policy 1 and the

same reasoning applies.

3.   Stabilizing Real Income

                                                    ÷       —   Both of the
     Real labor income is by definition equal to        w
above policies lead to a reduction in this quantity. If the real wage is

stabilized, the reduction occurs via a reduction in employment; if employment

is fixed, the reduction is through a lower real wage. Either way, the real

income of labor is reduced. Indeed, as we have noted before, given the Cobb—

Douglas production function, total real profit and total real income, t' are

reduced similarly. Thus as a third policy we consider one where wages are

adjusted so as to maintain total real income (as well as real wage income)



                                      16
fixed. In this case we see from Table 1 that the real wage falls, while

employment and gross output rise.

     To consider this policy, suppose that initially there is no adjustment in

the real wage. An increase in the materials price thus leads to a fall in the

demand for materials, leading to a reduction in employment, gross output, and

real income. Now suppose that y (or equivalently, £ + w —                  p)   is

stabilized by adjusting the real wage in accordance with the rule specified in

(18), which for PPP reduces to

                                                     —c1
     (18')                    w — Pt    =
                                                       —   c)
                                            c2(1
The induced effect on employment stemming from this real wage cut exceeds the

reduction directly due to the higher materials price, and hence on balance

employment rises. Real labor income is maintained constant because employment

rises enough to offset the lower real wage. The effect on final output is

proportional to (1 —   a),   implying that final output rises if a              1 as we

assume.

     The effect on the price level is obtained from the money market

equilibrium condition as before. In this case

                              dp            1 dv
                                                2c
                                   =—                           —
                                        1   +
                              aç
Stabilizing   real income leaves the demand for real money balances unchanged,

so the price level is also stabilized.

4.   Comparison of Effects

     The expressions summarized in Table 1 indicate a strong ordering in

effects as we move through the three policies 1 — 3.                Real wages are

stabilized under policy 1 but decline under either alternative policy; the

decline is largest when real income is stabilized. Even policy 3 does not



                                                17
require a fall in the real wage as large (in absolute percentage terms) as the

rise in the real price of materials as long as c11(c2(i —   )) <   1, i.e., as

long as the ratio of the value of materials to labor is less than one.

     A similar ranking applies for employment. The negative and positive

employment effects which correspond to stabilizing the real wage and real

income, respectively, are bracketed about the zero effect when employment is

stabilized. The ranking for real income is reversed from that for real

wages. The adverse effects on real income are reduced as we move from the

policy of stabilizing wages through stabilizing employment to stabilizing real

income. These same algebraic orderings are obtained for final output, the

only difference being that in policy 3, final output actually rises.

     Finally, the same ordering as obtained for real wages applies to the

nomiaal price level. Stabilizing the real wage has the greatest positive

effect on the price level exceeding that when employment is stabilized; when

income is stabilized, the price level remains constant.

     Overall, these results indicate a range of tradeoffs associated with

different wage policies. If the objective of wage policy is to stabilize the

real wage, then employment and real income must fall; if the objective is to

stabilize employment, then the real wage and real income must fall. So

policies 1 and 2 provide a clear choice between real wage stability and

employment stability. Wage behavior in a frictionless economy without

 contract lags, often used as a standard for judging wage policies, would lie

 somewhere between these two extremes. If the objective of wage policy is to

 stabilize real income or to stabilize prices, on the other hand, policy 2

 dominates policy 1, since both real income and prices vary more under a real

 wage stabilization policy. Policy 3, moreover, dominates both alternative




                                       18
policies since under that policy real income and the price level are

completely stabilized.


V. ALTERNATIVE WAGE POLICIES IN THE GENERAL CASE

      We now relax the assumption of PPP maintained in Section IV and allow the

domestic and foreign goods to be distinct. This means that the relative

price, s, becomes an endogenous variable. To determine it, we need to extend

the model to include a demand side. In equation (21), the real demand for the

domestic product is expressed as a function of real income, both deflated by

the general price index, as well as the real interest rate and relative

prices.8


                                                             —
      (21)               z + Pt —   p = d1[v +       p

                                    1*      —    I
                          d2[r —                Pr)] + d3s

where 0 < d1 < 1, d2 > 0, d3 > 0. We assume that d1 has a value between zero

and one so that an increase in real income leads to a less than proportionate

increase in real demand.

      Because aggregate demand is a function of the real interest rate,

r —            — p),   the behavior of the real part of the system depends upon

future expectations, which in turn depend upon the nature of the materials

price increases impinging on the economy. We assume that these disturbances

are both unanticipated and temporary. Under these conditions, it can be

established that the rational expectations solutions for expectations of the

CPI and the exchange rate are equal to some stationary values (which we assume

to be zero),

                                           1*
                               e*
                                t+1,t
                                         =pt+1,t =0.


                                           19
The aggregate demand equation can be simplified further by substituting in

equation (21) the following equation for v obtained by solving (3b) and (6'):


                                           — ci
                                             — (1
       (22)                     v =
                                            C2
                                                           c)(s   t+
The result is the first of two equations describing how gross output and the

relative price are jointly determined. The second equation, reproducing (9c),

describes aggregate supply of the final good.




(23)
       I

           1



               1
                      —d5
                                 Iri
                                  I   II
                                                 i    c1 (1 -
                                                         (1 —      d)
                                                                    1
                                                                        tt


                                                                                — (1       °'          —
                            +                 —            (1     c +
                   (1 —
                                  LstJ                                  co)O.                    (w


The price coefficient in the aggregate demand equation,


           d5 = [d26 + d3 + (1
                               —
                                      d1)(1       )    — d1c1(1 —       )/c2J/(1
                                                                                       —
                                                                                           d1)
                                                                                                 > 0


reflects the total effect of an increase in the relative price, s, on

aggregate demand, including the indirect effect of s on real income. We

assume that the total effect of a rise in s is to raise aggregate demand, so

d5 > 0. In obtaining the aggregate demand equation, we have assumed for

convenience that the foreign interest rate and the price of the foreign good

(in foreign currency) are constant ( = 0 and p =                          0).    The increase in the

real price of materials,              thus is due to an increase in the nominal price,
 f


       The two equations of (23) express output and 'relative prices as a

function of the real price of materials,                        and the real producer wage. The

real wage, in turn, depends upon which of the three wage policies are

followed. We express these policies, given by (10'), (12), and (18) above, in



                                                      20
terms of s and           as follows:


(24a) w — p = (1 —                                                                      labor's real
      t t                           t                                                   wage constant


(24b) w Pt = — _! (s +                               ,                                  employment constant

                 =—            C1                                 — ci(1 — 5)           real income
(24c) W —                        —                (St +                         t
                        c2(1            cL)                         (1 — c)             constant

By substituting one of these expressions into (23), we obtain solutions for Zt

and s. These are reported in Table 2 together with the real price of

materials, s + 0' as well as three other variables previously analyzed in

the case of PPP:        (i) labor's real wage, (ii) employment, and (iii) real

income. The latter expressions are obtained by substituting w —
                                                                                                  s and
   into the following equations:


        (25a)    w —           = (w            —          — (1 —


                    =   — ! (w                —          —   c1
        (25b)                                     F))               s +

                    =   —   (1                                    —    1            — (1 —
        (25c)                                     (wt —                    (s +

Equation (25a) follows directly from the definitions of p and s; equation
(25b) reproduces (9a); while equation (25c) is obtained by solving (9b) and

(17).

        We begin with these last three variables which are described in the first

three rows of Table 2. As is evident from this table, the qualitative

effects of an increase in the real price of materials follow the same patterns

as in the much simpler PPP case discussed in Section IV. In order to

stabilize employment in policy 2, real wages must fall but real income falls

less than in policy 1.              In order to stabilize real income in policy 3, real

wages must fall even more, but employment now rises. The reasoning is



                                                              21
basically unchanged from before. Similarly, in the fourth row we see that

final output falls most when real wages are fixed and actually rises when real

income is fixed.

       Underlying these changes in production variables are changes in relative

prices which are of interest in themselves. For policies 1 and 2, an increase

in the real price of materials has an ambiguous effect on the relative price

of final goods, s, while for policy 3 the effect is positive if a < 1. The

indeterminacy in the case of policy 1, for example, arises because the

increase in the price of materials reduces both aggregate supply and aggregate

demand (through its impact on real income). As the expressions in (23)

indicate, an increase in      reduces both demand and supply with the net effect

on s, which can be viewed as the equilibrating price in the output market,

depending upon which effect dominates. Similar reasoning applies for policy

2. In the case of policy 3, however, the fall in the real wage is large

enough to offset the increase in          so that aggregate supply function

increases, causing Zt and s to rise unambiguously.

       Despite the ambiguities regarding the direction of movement of s, we can

establish that s always acreases the most (in algebraic value) for policy 3

and increases the least (or decreases the most) for policy 1. This provides

the key to understanding the adjustment of the real price of materials

measured in domestic units,      —        =        +   For all three wage policies
                                     Pt
St +     rises,   as one would expect. The more labor's real wage is allowed to

adjust downwards (i.e., as we move from policy 1 through to policy 3),

moreover, the greater is the positive effect of this foreign shock on the

domestic real materials price. So by stabilizing employment, and even more so

by stabilizing real income, we turn the price of materials measured in

domestic units against the domestic economy. The reason is that s rises more



                                              22
as we move from policy 1 to policy 2 and finally to policy 3, SO St +      must

also rise more. This is one cost to be borne if we follow a policy of

stabilizing employment or stabilizing real income.

     Finally, we may note that the effects of the increase in the materials

price on the domestic price level can be derived from the money market

equilibrium condition, equation (19), as it was under PPP. The effects mirror

those obtained for the relative price, s. We do not know whether p rises -or

falls for policies 1 and 2, but can establish that p definitely falls for

policy 3. Moreover, we can derIve the following rankIng,



                            I        I         I
                          dp       dp         dp
                                1 dO 2 dO

where the subscript denotes the policy. Thus the price level always rises the

most (or falls the least) under policy 1.


VI. CONCLUSION

     Increases in the prices 'of imported materials confront policy—makers with

a difficult set of choices involving real wages, employment, and real

income. If real wages remain fixed in response to such price increases,

whether because wages are indexed to the consumer price index or because they

are linked to prices in negotiated settlements, costs are imposed on the

economy. These costs include reductions in employment, GNP, and real

income. Flexibility in the real wage, by contrast, may enable employment, and

even real income, to remain constant in the face of such external shocks.

     Real wage flexibility is difficult to achieve in practice.'° This paper

has shown, however, that two indexation rules provide just the right degree of

wage flexibility to stabilize employment. One rule is to tie nominal wages to


                                         23
a value added deflator rather than the consumer price index, as is

traditionally done. The other rule, which we have shown to be equivalent to

the first, is to tie real wages to real GNP. Just how these rules would work

out in practice is suggested by the recent macroeconomic performance of Japan

which, after the second oil shock of 1979, kept its real wages in line with

real GNP. We have also shown how real income, as well as real labor income,

can be stabilized by further reductions in the real wage large enough to raise

employment. No country has pursued this more extreme policy, but the pattern

of results in this case reveals further the nature of the tradeoff between

real wages and employment.




                                      24
                                   FOOTNOTES


      Countries where such proposals have been debated include Denmark, Israel
and the United Kingdom. See, for example, the study of wage indexation by
Braun (1976). Recently the Congressional Budget Office (1981) has compared a
variety of indexation rules for the United States including tying wages and
federal benefits to the GNP deflator specifically to exclude the impact of
import prices. Marston (1982) examines the effects of wage indexation to the
price of the domestic (final) good, but imported materials are not included in
that analysis.

     2Shinkai (1980, p. 19) quotes a union 'white paper': "[Ojur wage demand
is based on our assessment of the impact of [the] oil price rise and growth
prospect, and aims at a real wage increase lower than the real GNP
growth . . ."
         must be separable in Nt and Vt in order for V to be well defined.
(See Arrow, 1974, p. 4). There is some debate about whether a production
function separable in Nt and V is appropriate for oil and other forms of
energy (as opposed to raw materials). Berndt and Wood (1979), for example,
propose an alternative production function where oil       combines with
capital to fçrm a composite separable from labor (and other raw materials),
z = ZLL, Z1(K ,   0)j.
increase in such a model.
                          Johnson (1981) analyzes the effects of an oil price


     4The combination of a CES function for gross output and a Cobb—Douglas
function for value added was previously employed by Bruno and Sachs (1979) and
Bruno (1981). Note that in their simulation model, Bruno and Sachs choose an
elasticity of substitution between Nt and Vt equal to 0.2. (Bruno and Sachs,
1979, p. 36).

     5Equations (1') and (2') are the first order terms of a Taylor series
expansion around the initial equilibrium. If a log—linear approximation is
instead used, with the lower case letters denoting logarithmic differences,
then (1') holds exactly while (2') is a first—order approximation.

         is sometimes called a single—deflated measure of value added since it
is obtained by deflating nominal value added by the price of the final good.
See Bruno (1981, p. 4).

     7Bruno (1981, p. 7) derives a similar condition for keeping employment
constant in response to an Increase in raw materials prices. He points out
that with employment stabilized, the marginal product of capital (and hence
its rental) must fall by the same proportion as the marginal product of labor.

     8Note that like the other equations In the model, (18) is in percentage
changes. Thus d1 and d3 represent elasticities, while d2 is a semi—
elasticity.

     9The determinants D1 and D2 are both necessarily positive if d5 > 0, as
assumed. We assume that the aggregate demand coefficients, d2 and d3, are
large enough so that D3 > 0.



                                      25
     '°If nominal wage rigidities inhibit the required adjustment of real
wages, it may be possible to achieve the necessary adjustment in the real wage
through the introduction of appropriate taxation on wages. We are grateful to
Joshua Aizenman for this point.




                                      26
                                  REFERENCE S


Arrow, Kenneth J., 1974, "The Measurement of Real Value Added," in Paul A.
     David and Melvin W. Reder, eds., Nations and Households in Economic
     Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz (New York, Academic Press).

Berndt, E. R. and D. 0. Wood, 1979, "Engineering and Econometric
     Interpretations of Energy—Capital Compleinentarity," American Economic
     Review 69, June, pp. 342—55.

Braun, A. R., 1976, "Indexation of Wages and Salaries in Developed Economies,'
     International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 23, pp. 226—71.

Bruno, Michael, 1981, "Raw Materials, Profits, and the Productivity Slowdown,"
     NBER Working Paper No. 660, April.

Bruno, Michael and Jeffrey Sachs, 1979, "Supply Versus Demand Approaches to
     the Problem of Stagflation," NBER Working Paper No. 382, August0

Congressional Budget Office, 1981, Indexing with the Consumer Price Index:
     Problems and Alternatives (Washington, D.C., Congressional Budget
     Office).

Gray, Jo Anna, 1976, "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
     Monetary Economics 2, 221—35.

Johnson, Karen H., 1981, "The Impact of an Oil Price Increase on Aggregate
     Supply," International Finance Discussion Papers No. 182, July.

Marston, Richard C., 1982, "Real Wages and the Terms of Trade: Alternative
     Indexation Rules for an Open Economy," NBER Working Paper No. 1046,
     December.

Shinkai, Yoichi, 1980, "Oil Crises and the Stagflation (or Its Absence) in
     Japan," Institute of Social and Economic Research, Osaka University
     Discussion Paper No. 110, November.




                                      27
                                           Table   1


            Effects of an Increase in the Price of Imported Materials:
                                     PPP Case




Policies   1.    Stabilize                             2.   Stabilize              3.   Stabilize
     'N          Real Wage                                  Employment                  Real Income
Effect                —
                              Pt                                    '                           v

     —                                                               C'                 —          ci
                          0                  >                                 >                    —   a)
                                                                     C2                     c2(i
                     —                                                                           C'
                                                                    0                              — a)
                          ac2                                                           c2(1
                     —                                               Cl
                                                                                                  0
 y=v                      ac2                                        C2

            ci                                                      c
    z:                    — a                <
                                                                                        Ci
     t               [i            + aa]                                                        (1 — a)
           -;                                                       c2                      2


                     11                                         11        Cl
                                             >                                 >                 0
    p:           1   +                                      1   +
                          2   ac2                                   2     C2
                                                                                                                Table 2

                                                                                 Effects of en Increase in the Price of Imported Materials:
                                                                                                        General Case




'..Policies                                                   1. Stabilize                                                2. Stabilize                        3. Stabilize
      'N                                                            Real Wage                                               Euployment                          Real Income
Effect                                                               w —
                                                                                                                                                                       Y

          —                                                                                                                   — C1.1                                   C1,1
                                                                            0                                   >                              >
              p:                                                                                                                                                  (1    —u)D3
                                                                            c1$1                                                                                      c1$1
                                                                                                                <                0
                                                                            aD1                                                                                  (1   —a)D3

                                                                            ct,1                                                c1$1
                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                        _;_                                                   --5;-
                                                                                                                                                          —             +         +
                                                                            c1f2                                                c1d40                                                 (1 —   6)]
                                                                                                                                                   c1(1       a)[426         d3
                                                                            aD1                                                      D2                                 U3

                                                                                 —        —                                           —
                                                       c1[a(1
                                                                     — a)            (1                                      c1(d1        a)                                  a)
                                                                                              d1)]                                                               c1(1
                                                                                                                (
                                                                            aD1                                                 D2                                      D3
                                                                    —
                                                        + (1                         —           —
                                              c2[d4                 a a)                 d1)(1       6)]                        c2d4                            c2(d26
                                                                                                                                                                —
                                                                                                                                                                       + d3)
                                                                            D1                                                   U2                                    D3


                                   —    6)(1 —a)         >0
 l        '2 s-d3+(1
      —            —   a + on) +                  —             —            —
          d4(1                   d1(1                  a)(j         6)(1          a)
                                                                            —
      —                                                 —   d )                  a)              —
                                                                            a
        (1 —d1)(c2d5 + c1a) + (1
      — (1 —         +
                                                                        '                [c2(1       6) + c1]

 D2          d1)(c2d5 c1a)
      —                        —              —   a)
 U3       c2(d26                       c1(1
                       + d3)
