                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
S




                         REAL EXCHANGE RATE EFFECTS
                              OF FISCAL POLICY


                               Jeffrey   Sachs

                              Charles rp1osz



                           Working Paper No. 1255




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                              January 1984




    This paper is an outgrowth of related work conducted with Francesco
    Giavazzi and Jeff Sheen. We thank them for useful comments and
    suggestions. This research was  partially supported by a grant from
    the EEC Commission and was completed while Charles Wyplosz was on a
    Fuibright Fellowship. The research reported here is part of the
    NBER's research program in International
                                             Studies. Any opinions
    expressed are those of the authors aM not those of the National
    Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     14BER Working Paper #1255
                                                     January 1984



                 Real Exchange Rate Effects of Fiscal Policy



                                    ABSTRACT




    This paper develops a framework for analyzing the effects of fiscal policy

on the real exchange rate. The short—run impact of various types of fiscal

measures are considered as well as the dynamics of adjustment to long—run steady

states. The analysis and related simulations suggest that the effect of fiscal

policy changes on the real exchange rate can vary widely and will depend closely

on a number of structural features, including the degree of asset substitutability,

the composition of government spending, and the initial size of the public debt

and net external position.




                                                 Jeffrey Sachs
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Littauer ,Ul14
                                                 Harvard University
                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138

                                                 (617) b95—4112


                                                 Charles Wyplosz
                                                 INSEAD
                                                 Boulevard Constance
                                                 77305 Fontainebleau
                                                 France

                                                 (6) 422—1i805
1.   Introduction

                                 dictum of the static Mundell—Fleming nxdel that   a
     The   faus and     simple

fiscal   expansion   induces a real exchange rate appreciation is found by ignoring

several of the key channels linking exchange rates and fiscal      policy. The
                                      (1) the growth of public debt that my follow a
Mundell—Fleming nDdel ignores:
fiscal expansion; (2) the fiscal measures that mist ultimately be taken to

service the growing debt; (3) the wealth and portfolio implications of current

account deficits induced by the fiscal expansion; and       () forward—looking

expectations in the asset narket. Once these factors are brought to bear, the

conclusions regarding both short— and long—term exchange rate uovements my

easily   be reversed.
                                                            and composition of
     A fiscal policy change has direct effects pn the level

national spending, as well as on the level and composition of national wealth.

Spending effects my pull the exchange rate in one direction, while portfolio

 effects pull in the other. A thorough analysis of these effects is made

 difficult by the fact that a "single" fiscal policy change is itself, in

 general, a seauerjce of actions, in which different stages of the fiscal action

 have differing implications for the exchange rate.       A debt—financed +ax cut, for

 example, involves a sequence of growing public debt and       rising   debt—service

 obligations. Over time, taxes must increase, or expenditures must fall, in

 order to service the debt. In forward—looking asset markets, the current

 exchange rate will react to the current tax change, as well as to the

 anticipated growth in debt and the future changes in taxes and expenditures.
                                                                  out the short—run and
         There is not, to date, a simple framework for sorting
                                          —2—


long—run effects of fiscal policy on the real exchange rate. It is the purpose

of this paper to offer such a framework, by recasting the standard

Mundell—Flerning      framework in a dynamic   setting. Surprisingly few studies have

focused on fiscal policy in a dynamic setting. Some results can be found in

Kouri (1976) for the case of perfect substitutability of domestic and foreign

assets and perfect foresight. The assumption of perfect capital

substitutability is dropped in Thrnovsky (1976), but his nrdel, as those of

Branson (1976) and Hodrick (1980), abandon the assumption of forward looking

expectations. On the other side, the nodels of Branson and Buiter (1962) and

Kouri are in many respects close to ours, except that these authors choose not

to   take    account the important role of a growing public debt. For a recent
             into

survey and extensive bibliography on exchange rates and fiscal policy, see
Penati      (1983).

       The nndel analyzed in this paper, and presented in the following section,

focuses on the real side of the econonw. It specifies a goods narket. with

standard spending and trade balance equations, and a portfolio balance        ndel

which takes perfect asset substitutability as a special case.         To this basic

static structure are added three dynamic considerations: the effect of budget

deficits on the stock of public debt, the effect of current account imbalances

on the stock of foreign asset holdings, and the assumption of perfect foresight

governing the exchange rate. The steady state effects of fiscal policy are.

taken up in Section 3, where we consider the case of a balanced budget expansion

and of a tax cut. The case of an increase in public spending is not included as

 it can be thought of as the combination of a balanced budget expansion together
                                     —3—


with a tax cut. We then deal with the dynamics. In the balanced budget case,

we offer a graphical solution, in Section 4.   In the case of a tax cut, we study

analytically the impact effect and resort to simulations in order to examine the

entire transition path. This is done in Section 5.

     In order to keep the nodel analytically tractable, we have had to resort to

some simplifying assumptions, which are spelled out in detail in the next

section. Most of them are of pure convenience and relaxing them does not

modify the results in any essential way, as we show through simulation

experiments, presented in Section 6. One of them should be pointed out at the

outset: we assume here that prices are perfectly flexible so that output never

departs from the full employment level. Although we believe that 'we still

capture the nm forces relating the real exchange rate to a fiscal expansion,

we are clearly unable to cover the stabilization aspects of fiscal policy in an

open econony.

     The rain results of the paper can be broadly stated as follo's. When

domestic and foreign assets are close substitutes, a fiscal expansion leads to a

short—run appreciation and a long—run depreciation. Exactly the opposite occurs

with low asset substitutability, namely the real exchange rate depreciates in

the short run and appreciates in the long run. Intuitively, the fiscal

expansion creates an excess demand for domestic goods. Unless output is fully

responsive, and in most of the paper we actually assume fixed output, goods

market equilibrium is restored by crowding out private demand, through a

 reduction of wealth or a rise in the real interest rate, or by crowding out

 foreign demand through a real exchange rate appreciation. High asset
substitutability means that the domestic interest rate is closely tied to the•

world rate of interest (taking into account, of course, the expected rate of

depreciation), and cannot adjust to the goods market disequilibrium.

Furthermore,    in the short   run, wealth is fixed, except possibly for valuation
                                                                                     A
effects.    Hence we need an immediate appreciation to eliminate excess demand.

In the long run, the current account nust be brought back to equilibrium, which

calls    for a depreciation, while wealth is reduced to crowd out private demand
and maintain goods nnrket equilibrium. When asset substitutability, is low, the
domestic interest rate is free to increase in response to goods market pressure
and to allow for the anticipated portfolio reshuffling. If this effect is
strong   enough that   the crowding out of private spending outweighs the direct
fiscal   expansion, it is easy to. see how the results obtained under close

substitutability get reversed.



2.   The Model

        The static part of the model describes the goods market equilibrium

condition. We consider an econonv specialized in the production of a good which

is an imperfect consumption substitute for a single foreign good. The relative

price of the foreign 'good is denoted A, which we will also term "the real

exchange rate." The econon is small. in the narket for foreign capital and

output, so that world interest rates and prices of the foreign good are

exogenous. This is the traditional set up as found in Mundell (1963) and Kouri

(1916). The goods market clearing condition is:
                                        —5—




(i)         =c+g+T
where      is the domestic output, assumed to be constant, c is total private

spending, g is public spending and T represents the trade balance. All

variables are real and defined in terms of the domestic good.

      Private spending is an increasing function of disposable income (y—r) and

financial wealth, w, and a decreasing function of the interest rate, r. This is

described by the following linear equation;


(2)          c = (l—s)(y—r) + 6w   .




As suggested by finite—horizon optimizing behavior of households (see, e.g.,

Blanchard (1983)), the coefficient 6 in (2) will generally exceed the interest

rate, i.e., 6 >    r.   We will naintain this assumption throughout.

        Domestic residents hold two categories of interest bearing assets:

domestic public debt B and foreign bonds B*. We denote the real value of the

public debt as b = B/P (and s.milarly b* =     B*/P*).   With the real exchange rate

equal to A, private real financial wealth is:


(3)          wb+Ab'
Foreign residents do not hQld domestic assets. The trade balance, expressed in

units of domestic goods, is a decreasing function of domestic spending, and an

increasing function of foreign spending c and of the real exchange rate:


(h)          T_mc_mGg+fl*c*+UA
                                                —6—


                                                                                to differ from
In (14), we allow for the public marginal prospensity to import

the private sector's marginal propensity m. Throughout the paper c is assumed

to remain constant and will be dropped.

        We now introduce the three dynamic            equations   of the xdel. First is the

governnent    budget constraint, which describes the path of the real value of
public debt:


()           =r+g—t
where a dot represents a tine derivative ( db/dt). This equation is
linearized around the initial steady state (an initial steady value is

characterized by the 0 subscript as in b0) and, for simplicity of notation, we

express all variables as deviations from their initial steady state values (so

that 3?=o).



 (5')          =    rb    +
                               b0r + g—    r




 The initial value of r is set equal to the world rate of interest r*. As will

be     seen shortly,     this assumption implies a zero risk premium in the initial


 steady    state1
         Foreign    assets are acquired through current account surpluses, which equal

 the sum of trade surpluses and net service account receipts:




 (6)          t" T + r*Xb*


 This equation can be linearized around the initial steady state, where A0 =
                                                                             1:


                    =   r*b*   +          + T
 (6')                              r*bX
                                                     —7—


       The evolution of X is tied to the interest rate differential r_r* so as to

maintain     portfolio balance. A simple linear portfolio balance condition can be
cast   as)
              OXb* — (l—9)b =         a(r*_r+X/X)

It expresses the relative dennnd for foreign end                   domestic assets as a function
of    the expected yield differential. As we assume perfect foresight, the yield

differential is given by the real interest differential plus the rate of

depreciation. The parameter 6 is interpreted as the narginal propensity to hold

foreign assets out        of   wealth, while a is a measure of the degree of asset

substitutability. This formulation allows two channels for deviations from the

interest parity condition: less than perfect substitutability (a finite), or no

capital bility (@ =            o).      It can be inverted and re—arranged to give:


(y)                 =r   —   r*   +   $[exb*   —   (l—O)b], with   4' =   1/a


Linearizing (7) and assuming no risk premium in the initial steady state yields

the following condition:


(7')            =   r r*
                     —         + ip[eb* + 8bX — (i—oThJ


        Pending   the description of the fiscal policy experiments to be conducted,
the nodel is now complete. It focuses solely on the real side of the economy,

as no equations      have been         given   for the nominal variables such as the price
level    or nominal exchange           rate. A more        complete nodel, with these equations,

shows that     our set—up         is restrictive in one key way. As prices are implicitly
                                       —8—


and in particular the stock of outstanding public debt, so that b(O) c bc. We

overlook this effect by taking b(O) = b0       assumption. This simplification is

exactly correct under any of the following three circumstances:       i) there is no

initial outstanding public debt (b0 =   0);   2) government bonds are indexed; or

3) the denand for money is interest inelastic and independent of wealth, so that

a constant money supply implies a constant price level.        Our treatment is

approxinately correct if the interest elasticity of money is small. The

simplification is crucial to keeping down the dirnmensionality of the model, and

thereby to deriving analytical results. In section 6.1 we explain how the model

is changed if we eliminate the simplification and show, through simulations,

that the assumption seems to be of minor consequence.

       We now turn to the specification of the fiscal policy rules. They have to

satisfy (5). As is well known (see, e.g., Christ (1979)), (5) is a source of

potential instability. This instability is removed if the policy rule implies

that any budget deficit is corrected over time quickly enough to overcome the

ever—increasing debt service component rb. A convenient (though by no means

necessary!) way of guaranteeing stability is to assume that the government

closes the deficit at a rate is, bringing its debt to a long run target level :

 (8)          =



With   (5) and (8), it is easy to specify the three following types of fiscal

expansion where, again, all variables are defined as deviations from their

 initial steady state values:

                                              g =   A     =
 (9)        Balance Budget Expansion                          A+b0r
                                       —9—



(10)        Tax Cut                          g = 0            —ut +         ÷
                                                                      b0r

(ii)        Government Spending Increase      r =   0    g = pS — b0r — (I1+r*)b


The balanced budget expansion implies an immediate and equal increase in g and

r. Subsequently, as the interest rate changes, so do the interest payments on

the existing debt. In order to mintain a balanced budget, the government must

either raise taxes, as in (9), or reduce spending (not shown).

       In the tax cut case, government spending is kept constant throughout.

Taxes are initially cut by the aiunt Ar = —pB.          Thereafter, in order to satisfy

(5) and (8), they must be raised so as to close gradually the budget deficit in

the face of a rising debt, and to service the interest on existing debt.

The last case, the spending expansion, is analogous: g is initially increased

by u, and then is gradually reduced.

        It is important to realize two implications of (io) or (11). Consider the

tax cut case: the government can only set two out of the three policy variables

Ar, p and 6. If, for exanple, it decides on the magnitude of the tax cut, the

faster it decides to close the ensuing deficit (the larger ji),         the lover will
be the final level of the debt     = —At/u.     Conversely, if it accepts a high

value for E, it will imply a slow adjustment parameter P.2 The second

implication of (10) and (11) is that the fiscal stance in the steady state is

the opposite of the initial nove: an initial expansion will lead to a long run

contraction as is shown by the following steady state levels:


               =
(10')              b0   +


(ii')              —b0j —   r*
                                                   —10—




From (io') we see that a tax cut that               raises     ultinately raises r. These

results are the simple consequence of the long—run requirement that the budget

be in equilibrium:




       The full m3del consists of equations Ci) to (8) together with any of the

three policy regime equations (s), (io) or (11). It can be reduced to a system

of two differential equations in A and b* as shown below for the balanced

budget case (i.e., using (9)) and for the tax cut case (i.e., using (io)).


Balance Budget Expansion


                                        +
                                            b(5/     +   t°)         +
(12)         [11 =      [a/(l_m)                                         so)] [x
             L*i        L_m)          +
                                            rb                       r*
                                                                             i   L

                              [l(rnrnG)     +   s(l—m)]/'(l—m)
                    +A
                                            G
                              L       (rn-rn )/(l-rn)
Tax Cut


                         a/(l-m) +b(o/ + o)                    (s +
(13)                =                                                     se)]   [Al
                                                                     r*
             [x]         a/(l—m) +r*b                                        ]   L*i

                    +
                             -fl    I L6
                                            -   (1s)(p+r*)l/     -   scl-e)1
                             14
                                                         0


with      = + +                   Note that in (13) Ar = —pt, and b(t) =             _(At/p)(l_e_hit).
                  (l—s)b0.
       Because of our specification (B), the public debt b follows a path

 independent of A and b*. As it turns out, the transition matrix governing the
                                            —11—


law of ixtion of A and b* is the saUte under both policy regimes. It differs in

the case of a public spending expansion as described by (ii).

       Because   b* is predetermined and A is non—predetermined, stability requires
that the determinant be negative. This is the case when:

(lb)

As   can be seen from (2), (3)      and (6), this condition implies that an increase

in foreix asset holdings will have a negative effect on the current account

(a*/ab* <      0).   Since we assume that 6 >      r*,   (i1) will always be satisfied.




3.      Steady State Effects

        The steady state is attained when both goods and assets         markets are in
equilibrium      with 5.   = C, while the current account is in balance. We show below

that,    in   general, a fiscal expansion leads to a long—run depreciation when

domestic and.foreign assets are        close substitutes, and to a long—run
appreciation in the case of a low degree of substitutability. Heuristically,
the fiscal expansion creates an excess demand for domestic goods and a' trade
deficit. Given the spending and trade balance functions (2) and (14), a return
to equilibrium requires adjustments in w, r and A. Consider first the case of
perfect asset substitutability. In the steady state, portfolio balance requires
r = r*, so that the adjustment will be achieved through changes in w, i.e., in
Ab*, and in A. In order to eliminate the excess demand for goods, we need
either an appreciation or a reduction in wealth. But an appreciation would
worsen the current account so that what actually happens is a drop in wealth
                                       —12—


(brought about by current account deficits along the adjustment path). The

stability condition (114) implies that the drop in wealth has a stronger effect

on spending than on the current account, because a reduction in Ab*, which

decreases spending and improves the trade balance, also implies a worsening in

the interest service account. So, while a reduction in wealth alone would

restore goods nurket equilibrium, it has to be supplemented by a depreciation to

bring the current account back into balance. Now, if domestic and foreign

assets are imperfect substitutes, the reduction in Xb* must be accompanied by a

higher interest rate in order to naintain portfolio balance. This, in turn,

depresses private spending. If this effect is strong enough to ire than offset

the expansionary effect of the fiscal stimulus, the preceding results are

inverted and the long—run adjustment is characterized by a high interest rate,

an increase in wealth and an exchange rate appreciation (the country will then

run current account surpluses on the adjustment to steady state).

       We now formally establish and qualify these results, using Figure 1 for

the    case of a balanced budget expansion and   Figure It for the case of a tax cut.

The    CA schedule depicts the balanced current account condition together with
goods market equilibrium. Substituting (2) and (It) in the goods market
equilibrium condition (1), we obtain the following expression for the trade

balance:


(15)        T = [aX + (m_m0)gl/(l—m)


From (15), we see that the trade balance is only a function of A and g.        This is

so because goods market equilibrium forces the other determinants of T, r and w
                                         —13—


to adjust so that private spending always exactly fills the gap left by public

and foreign demand for domestic goods. What (15) implies is that net foreign

asset holdings Ab* affect the current accountonly through the interest service

account, r*Ab*. Starting then from current account balance, an increase in Xb*

creates a surplus and requires an appreciation to restore equilibrium, thus the

downward sloping CA schedule. The GG schedule describes goods market equilibrium

together with portfolio balance when       = 0:   the interest rate is solved out.

It is downward sloping because an increase in Xb* raises wealth and therefore

private   spending. The resulting excess demand for domestic goods must be
eliminated   through an exchange rate appreciation. Note that, in addition to a

direct wealth effect, under imperfect substitutability an increase in Ab* also

raises spending by pushing down the interest rate, requiring a larger

appreciation and leading to a steeper GG schedule. The GG schedule is steeper

than the CA schedule because, holding Xb* constant, an appreciation reduces

demand and worsens the current account by exactly the same amount (the reduction

in   net foreign demand), while the stability condition (in)    is that the wealth

effect    on spending of an increase in Ab* is larger than the interest paynent
effect on the current account.


       3.1   Balanced Budget Expansion

       Figure 1 shows the case of a balanced budget expansion, where public debt

 remains unchanged.4 We consider first the case where the private and public

 marginal propensity to import are equal: m             In this case, the fiscal

 expansion does not alter the composition of spending and, from (15), ye see
          —14—




A




A




                       A
A0   A'


                           CA




                      Cl
                                Ab*


           Figure 1
                                              —15—



that it does not directly affect the current account, so that the CA schedule

remains unchanged. Yet, a balanced budget expansion, as described by (9),

raises demand for domestic goods by s(1—m)à. Equilibrium in the goods market

can be restored either by an appreciation or by a drop in wealth: the GG curve

shifts down and to the left, from G0G0 to G1G1 in Figure 1. Consequently, if

   =   m, the exchange rate unambiguously depreciates in the long run, with

foreign wealth, and therefore net foreign asset holdings, falling.5

       It is easy now to consider the case when              * m, so that fiscal policy

alters the composition of demand. We only need to add this new effect to the

previous case. Starting then from point B, if m° < in, the fiscal expansion

displaces demand away from foreign goods toward domestic goods. This shift

affects the goods market and the current account by the same amount, moving both

schedules downwards as the same appreciation is required to crowd out foreign

demand and restore both equilibria. Consequently, the change in A is reduced

when      <   in.   For uP much less than in, A nay actually appreciate in the long

run. On the càntrary, with        riP >   in, both   curves shift upward, increasing the

size of the depreciation. Thus, only a strong change of the composition of

demand towards domestic goods is capable of producing a long run appreciation.

       The portfolio balance effect (when assets are imperfect substitutes) does

not alter this result. As b* is reduced, with a constant stock of public debt

b, the domestic interest rate must rise to convince domestic residents to hold a

larger share of their wealth in the form of domestic assets. Higher interest

rates, in turn, crowd out private spending, jartially undoing the expansionary

effect of fiscal policy. As a consequence, we obtain less of a depreciation and
                                         —16—



a smaller drop in wealth. Graphically, the GO curve becomes steeper because the

wealth effect on spending is strengthened through the interest rate channel, but

the downward shift is the same. What this implies, then, is that we now need a

relatively smaller shift of the composition of demand        c m) to obtain a long

run appreciation.

       This is summarized in Figure 2, where the long run change in the real

exchange   rate is described as a function of ?6'. The parameters Oip capture the
portfolio balance effect on the interest rate, while is the total interest
elasticity of spending. With t = 0, the domestic interest rate cannot depart, in
the steady state, from the world level r*. As $ increases, the interest rate
bears   a larger share of the adjustment to the excess demand of goods, leaving to

A the task of adjusting, when riP * in, to the change in the composition of

demand.

        The role of the size of the initial outstanding public debt b0 is entirely

                 =   + (l—s)b0.   The larger the initial debt, the nxre interest elastic
captured by

is private spending because a rise in the interest rate raises the burden of the

debt, forcing the government to raise taxes.

        Finally, we consider the role of the initial debt position of the country

vis—a—vis the rest of the world b8. It does not affect either the change in A

or the change in wealth, i.e. in Ab*. Hence, the change in b*, after

linearization, is:

(i6)            =     —




This is shown as Figure 3. When b = 0, b and wealth change by the same
amount.     If b > 0, a long run depreciation increases the domestic value of

forei assets and requires less of an increase in b* to achieve a given
         —                       —17.-
         x   —




                 mG >Tn



     0


                      C
                  m        <ni



                          Figure 2




                            b*

                                         Xb C   0


                                            b =0
                                                     Xb >   0




                                                    Xb *




—I




                 Figure 3
                                      —18—


increase in wealth, while with b < 0, the depreciation amounts to a higher

debt and calls for b* > Ab*.   (The results are reversed when the exchange

rate appreciates in the long run.) The only important point here is that

for b sufficiently large in absolute value, b* and wealth nay actually move

in opposite directions.


     3.2 Tax Cut

    As government spending is kept unchanged (see (10), we know from (15) that

there is no direct effect of a tax cut on the trade balance so that the CA

schedule never shifts, allowing us to focus exclusively on the goods r.rket

schedule GG.6 The GG schedule nay shift up or down, depending on the relative

magnitudes of three effects. First is the long—run increase in taxes necessary

to generate the revenues of a higher debt service (see (10')): this depresses

spending. Second is the direct wealth effect of the public debt increase, which

raises spending. The stability condition (ib) guarantees that the first effect

always dominates, so that the overall steady state direct effect of the tax cut

is indeed expansionary. In Figure 14, this is shown as the shift from G0G0 to

01G1. The third effect is the portfolio balance effect.    As b rises,'vith

domestic and foreign assets imperfect substitutes, the hone interest rate rises,

reducing domestic spending. This tends to push the GG schedule back to the

right in Figure lj•   The conclusion is that if assets are close substitutes, the

economy moves to a point like A1. On the contrary, with low substitutability,

the interest rate may increase by enough to depress demand, outweighing the

first two effects, and pushing the GG schedule to the right, as G002 in Figure   47
                    —19—




A




                                    CA



                                          Xb *


                Figure 4




                           ——


                                    \I)




            ,
        /
    ,                           —




                Figure 5
                                                   —20—



The conclusion, then, is that there exists a critical value of j, say

such that i       C            leads to long—run depreciation, and ij   > *0   leads to long—run

appreciation. The critical value is given by                   = La —




b.     The Dynamics of a Balanced Budget Expansion

       In this section, we describe graphically the behavior of the system defined

by (12). From Section 3, we know that several combination of outcomes are

possible for A arid b' in the steady state. We only discuss here a subset of the

possible cases. The laws of nDtion are described in Figure 6 with the schedules

     = 0 and          =   0.     The interpretation of these schedules is similar to,

respectively, those given for the GO and CA schedules of Section 3. The system

is saddle—path stable when (il4) is satisfied, convergence occutring along SS.

       We first take up the case where in0 = m so that the                 = 0 schedule remains

unchanged after a balanced—budget expansion. In Figure 7.1, we show that, on

impact, there is a jump appreciation as the econolv moves from point A to

point B. This corresponds to the excess demand for domestic goods created by

the fiscal expansion. Equilibrium is restored through a crowding out' of foreign

demand as a result of the appreciation. There is also a crowding out of private

spending as the hone interest rate rises for two reasons: the expected

depreciation and, with imperfect substitutability, a lower value of Xb due to

the appreciation.9 The convergence process that follows, from point B to

point C is one of a continuous depreciation and current account deficits.

       When in0       > in, in     addition to the previous effects, we now have a shift

towards foreign goods which shifts back both schedules upwards as it reduces
             —21—




r   S
                       L


        I                      *
                              b =0




                       x =0


            Figure 6
                                      —22—



the excess demand for domestic goods and worsens the curent account surplus. When

   = m + s(1—m), for example, the 5.0 schedule actually stays in its initial

position as shown in Figure T.2. In this case, the shift of spending away from

domestic goods exactly offsets the expansion created by the fiscal policy

change.   Yet domestic demand weakens since asset market equilibrium requires an
increase in the domestic interest rate to rake up for the expected depreciation.
Consequently,   we need a crowding in of foreign demand, and this is achieved

through a jump depreciationJ° The convergence path is as in the previous case.

     When, on the contrary, m0 < m, we have seen the possibility of a long run

appreciation, together with an increase in b*, provided assets are sufficiently

imperfect substitutes. This is shown in Figure T.3. There is a jump

appreciation for two reasons. First, there is a strong excess demand for

domestic goods as the change in the composition of spending reinforces the

effect of the balanced budget expansion. Second, with the expectation of an

appreciation, portfolio balance requires a drop in the interest rate. The

ensuing convergence path includes a continuous appreciation and current account

surpluses.

     We conclude this section with a summary of the initial impact of the fiscal

expansion on the real exchange rate.11 The results are described in Figure 8.

One channel is the change of composition of demand which occurs when the

government's marginal propensity to import differs from the private sector's

marginal propensity: this is crucial in determining the sign of the initial

change. The size of the change is shown to be related to the portfolio balance

effect. The lower the degree of asset substitutability, the ntre the burden
                                    '1   —




    A
            (1=0)           (X=0)


Q

                                                                      C
                                                                     in =ni
                                                 A




                             Figure 7.1



                    (X=0)
    A


                                C



                                                                       C       m+s(1—m) >Tfl
                                                                     in

                                                      tb*=O)

                                             A
                                                     (b*=0)0



                              Figure 7.2




             (X=0 0
        (1=0)1
                                    A

                                                                           C
                                                                      ni       <m
                                                                       eJj large
                                                        (c,*0)   1




                             Figure 7.3
      —24—




          ss2(1—m)
utG >m—



                     Oi




    Figure 8
                                                —25—



of    adjustrnt can be absorbed by a change in the interest rate, and the smaller

the exchange rate jump.



5.      The Dynamics of a Tax Cut

        5.1 The Solution

        The system (13) is not amenable to a simple diagrammatic solution as in

the    balanced budget case. Our          strate'     in this section, therefore, is to
characterize the general structure of the convergence path, to show analytically
the impact effect, and describe            the convergence path through simulations.
        The general solution to (13) is:




(ii)          b* =   S*(1...e2t)   +                  (j + bgr*)    (eS2t_e_L1t)
                                       (s1+u)(s2+p)

(18)          x    =X —
                          -:m      br* (b*_S*) +      ___ e'

where              — (a—o)      (l_s)(ii+r*)
        A =                              and s, 2 are the eigen values of the
transition        matrix, i >   O,s< o.'2 As usual, all variables are expressed           as

deviations from the steady state.

       Although the above laws of motion are hard to "see through," they yield a

certain number of insights into the characteristics of the convergence path.

From (18), we see that when the last term is small, there is a tendency for A

and b* to nove in opposite directions, i.e. to observe an appreciation

(reap. a depreciation) together with a current account surplus (resp. a deficit).
                                                    —26—



Yet this will not always be the case, especially in the early part of the

adjustment process. From (iT) we see that                   the   convergence path of b*, and

therefore A, will not necessarily be nonotonic as in the balanced budget case.
                                            the expected change of the exchange
This will be important in interpreting X as

rate since it now may include a perfectly foreseen non—monotonic path. If in

the long run net forei asset holdings are to decrease (resp. increase), so

that Th c 0 (resp. *              > o),   the first term in (17) shows that the current

account will tend to be in deficit (resp. surplus). Yet, the second term alerts

                                                       be true early in the adjustment process,
us to the possibility that this xiny.not

if      <     i.e.    if the government is slow in curbing its budget deficit.




        5.2 The Impact Effect

        Solving (18) at time zero when the tax cut is put in place and using the
                                                                                             0:
steady state solutions of footnote 7 we obtain the jump of A at time t


 (19)        x(o) —   A
                          0
                              =   Ar
                                       6 +   (l_s)(s1_r*)
                                                            —
                                                                —(i—o)
                                                 s1¼S7P
                                                                three channels: a wealth effect on
We observe the effects of the now familiar

 spending (6); a tax reduction effect (1—s); and a portfolio balance effect
                                                                     increased demand for domestic
 (1p(l—e)). The two first terms correspond to an
                                                       The third term reflects the increase in
 goods and act toward an appreciation.
                                                                            of
 the interest rate due to an increase in b, and the corresponding lessening
                                                            substitutability, the two first effects
 domestic spending. With perfect or high
                                                                   impact. (Note that this is the
 dominate and the exchange rate appreciates on
                                                            in the long runt) On the contrary,
 case where the exchange rate depreciates
                                           —27—




when asset substitutability is low, the exchange rate depreciates on impact and

appreciates in the long run 113 There is, finally, an intermediate situation

where the exchange rate appreciates both on impact and in the long run. Note

that the degree of substitutability enters as t't(i—e), where $(l—e) is the

effect of the increase in b on the interest rate, and • is the interest

elasticity of private spending. If, at the margin, domestic residents want to

hold iinstly foreign assets, i.e. 6 is close to 1, then the increase in b does

not affect the exchange rate. Figure 9 summarizes the foregoing dicussion,

describing the impact effect x(o) — A0 for a given tax cut. It is based on

simulations described in the next section.


      5.3 Simulations

      In   order to examine the complete path of adjustment, we      now turn to some

simulation exercises. The simulations are based on the following parameter
values:
             r*.05              p     .l
             s =.2              ó   =.1             • =.8

            m =in*=.3           mGo                 a =.12              e    =.

and   the initial steady state values chosen are:

                = 1.0           c0 = 0.663          g0 = 0.337               = 0
                                                                        T0


             b00                b0                   ToO.337            A0=1

       The experiments reported concern a tax cut enacted at time t =         0.   The

reduction in taxes is t     = 0.05,   i.e. 5   percent   of total output. With p = .1,
                             —28—




          A (0)— A
                     o



— i=O.1

   Ip=1




                     -.3±—-——Th-
                         0             5   10   ii




                              FIgure   9
                                           —29—



this implies that domestic debt increases in the long—run by .5, i.e. 50 percent

of output.

        A.      Perfect Asset Substitutability

        Figure 10 presents the results obtained when domestic and foreign assets

are perfect substitutes. Following the initial jump appreciation, the exchange

rate continuously depreciates towards its steady state value, which represents a

long run depreciation relative to the initial value (the exact values obtained

are shown in Table 1 at the end of the section). Public debt is accumulated by

domestic residents, replacing net foreign asset holdings. This entails a path

of continuous current account deficits. Notice that wealth must fall in the

steady state so that the cumulative current account deficits exceed the

accumulated budget deficits. The reason can be seen with the goods market

equilibrium condition (is). As A depreciates in the long run, it creates an

excess       demand for domestic good. With g    unchanged, private spending must be

reduced and this is brought about by

the wealth reduction, since r returns to the world level r*. The path of r is

shown in the last panel of Figure 9. On impact it rises above r* and then

approaches      monotonically its steady state value.
     B.        Moderate Imperfect Substitutability

     As noted earlier, there is a range for t. the degree of imperfect asset

substitutability, such that the exchange rate appreciates both in the immediate

short   run and in the long run. This case of "moderate" imperfect

substitutability      is shown in Figure 11, for $ =    .2,   and exhibits a number of

interesting particularities. First, as the possibility was noted in our earlier
                                          —30—


discussion of the laws of notion (17) and (18), the convergence paths of A and
                                                       where A and b* move in the sane
b* are not monotonic. Second, there is a period
                                                           rate while the current
direction, so that we obtain a depreciating exchange

account is in surplus. Third, the exchange rate jump appreciates on impact, and

then immediately starts depreciating.
                                                                  the tax cut creates
       What happens can be explained as follows. On impact,

an    excess demand for goods (smaller than when i = 0    because of the larger

                                                                           As asset
increase     in   the interest rate), hence the jump in appreciation.

                                            we still have b = b0 and b* =
stocks can only change gradually, at t = 0,

so that with r(O) >       r, portfolio balance   requires that the exchange rate be

                                                                  creates a trade
(correctly) expected to depreciate. The surge in spending
                                                 rate depreciates. Over time b grows,
deficit, rapidly reversed as the exchange

 so   portfolio balance becomes compatible, with r > r*     and   C   0.

        C.    Strong   Imperfect Substitutability
        Finally,    in Figure 12, we show the simulation obtained for J = 2. Here we
 find an     impact  depreciation and a long run appreciation. After the fiscal
 expansion, the current account actually moves into surplus,          as the sharp rise in

                                                                              account is
 home interest rates reduces domestic absorption. While the current
                                              exhibits a non—monotorlic          path. For
 always in surplus, the exchange rate, again,

 thesame reason as in the previous case, the exchange rate must be expected to
 depreciate at t = 0, so that the initial upward jump of A is followed by further
 depreciations.
                                                 interest rate lies above the world
         In the last two cases, the long run
                                                 the share of domestic assets in
 level because of the long—run increase in
                                     —31-'




                                               1.
               LAMBDA
                                               1.
               BONDS


I              ESTAR




    1.5


                                              U.

      5.....
                    I
                F


                                                             Figure 11 (=.2)
    0.0—F
                 N
                                             1.2
    -.54
                                             1. . 0—


    —L0".           I     I      I
                                                3_.




                                                             /
                                                       Si'
               Figure 10 (t=0)
                                             0.0                  I—      I

                                                       Figure 12 (*=2)
                                            —32—




                                    high interest rates crowd out private
private portfolios. The relatively
                                                               of foreign assets
demand, leading to current account surpluses, the accumulation
and the rise in private wealth.
                                                                              in
       The various simulation results discussed in this section are presented
Table 1:

                                            Table   1

                                      Sinulation    Results
                                   4, = 0      4' =     .2         4'
                                                                        = .5

                                               1.0                 1.0             1.0
                                   1.0
              A0
                                   o.8i            0.897           0.96
              x(o)
                                                                   0.918           0.873
                                   1.175           0.976


                                                   0.078            o.o88          0.109
              r(0)
                                   o.o66
                                                   0.091            o.iob          0.l1
                                   0.050

                                                   0.081            0.283          0.136
                                  —o.6
                                                             ---                   -

                                                                                alone
                            recalling here that what matters for x(o) is not 4'
        It   ray be worth

                     =   + (1—s)b0.    Here we have taken b0 = 0.              For a positive
  but 4, where
                                                                        much more
                                   imperfect substitutability $ becomes
  initial debt, the degree of
                                                                    result. We will have
  powerful in reversing the perfect substitutability

  examples of that in the next section.




  6.     nsions
                                                                         simulations of the tax cut
         In this section, we propose to explore, through
                                                                                           imposed on
                            importance of some of the restrictive assumptions
   case, the practical
                                        —33—



our earlier ncidel. We consider, successively, the effect of price changes on

the real value of nominal domestic bonds, the case of variable output, and the

distinction between short and long term interest rates.


       6.i. Real and Nominal Debt

       As the fiscal expansion is bound to bring about changes in the price level,

the real value of the domestic public   debt is going to be affected) We have
assumed   away this complication so far, by assuming a zero interest elasticity in

the demand for noney as a way of making the price level constant. In this

section we reconsider the question by adding to the itdel (equations (1) to (7),

(10)) the following equations:


(20)        b=B/P

(21)          = P(g—t) +   iB

(22)            r   +


(23)


(21)       pP—l
(25)       e=A+p
       These equations need little explanation. We simply   introduce   the

distinction   between the nominal (B) and real (b) value of public debt, and
write in (21) the government budget constraint in nominal terms. We also define
in (22) the nominal interest rate through the Fisher relation. We introduce
the interest rate in the demnd for noney equation (23), where R is the
                                          —34—




(25)        eX+p
       These equations need little explanation. We simply introduce the

distinction   between the nominal (B) and real (b) value of public debt, and

write in (21) the government budget constraint in nominal terms.                We also define

in (22) the nominal interest rate through the Fisher relation.              We introduce

the interest rate in the demand for xney equation (23), where R is                the

log of the nominal nxney stock, which remains constant. p = log P is
linearized in (2b). Finally, we define the nominal exchange rate e =                  Ap in   the

linearized    form (25). This assumes constant prices abroad, normalized at 1, and

in the initial steady state e0 = 1.        Prices are still assumed to be fully

flexible, so that output stays at its full employment level. When y = 0,
                                                                                          this
model is identical to the ntdel of the previous sections. In Table 2, we report

the    results of simulations performed for selected values of -y, after
linearization    of (2) and (21). We have taken         = 1 and i0 =
                                                                       r0
                                                                            =   r*,   with the

value of R adjusted so that in the initial steady state, p0
                                                                       = 0.      Of course, we

need to assume b0 * 0, so that we put b0 at 50 percent of GDP. Thus the

simulations were run with:


                =   0.5,   = 1 (so that Ar = —0.05 as in Section 6)


                = 0.1875
                               t0
                                    = 0.213.

and correspond as before to a tax cut of 5 percent of output.
                                          —35—




                                       Table 2

                  —y=0
                            4' =
                           yO.5
                                     ___
                                     y2
                                                  ___
                                                   y=O       y0.5        y0      i0.5

                                                             0.973      1.117    1.1114
x(o)              o.8614   0.863    0.862         0.974
                                                             0.953      0.8145   0.8145
3:                1.175    1.175    1.175         0.953

                           0.064    0.064         0.079      0.079      0.099    0.099
r(0)              0.0614
                                    0.05          0.080      0.080      0.097    0.097
P                 0.05     0.05

                                    1.10          1.0         1.015      1.0     1.025
p(o)              1.0      1.007

                                                              0.1493     0.5     o.1468
b(0)               0.5     0.1497   0.45          b.s

                           0.670     0.962        0.9714      0.988      1.117   1.139
e(0)               o.864


The three different values of $ correspond to the three cases discussed in

 Section 5. It is interesting to note, first, that with b0 > 0, considerably

 smaller values of 4, ritdify the qualitative results obtained under perfect

 substitutability (when p    = o). Actually,     with an initial debt equal to 50

 percent of Gil?, small departures of the perfect substitutability case produce

 quite strong effects.

         The other striking result is that with our parameter values, the effect

  of price increases on the real value of nominal assets produce effects of

  minimal importance on the real exchange rate (less than one percent). Even for

  an interest semi—elasticity as high as y =      2,   with the price level jumping on

     impact by 10 percent, the effect on X remains trivial. At this stage, we
                                                           = 0 is tenable.
     conclude therefore that our earlier assumption
                                                —36—



       6.2 Variable Output

       In this section, we drop the assumption of perfectly flexible prices, by

postulating a Phillips curve relationship:


(26)        .    w(y —


       The utidel consists of equations (1) to (8), (10), and (22) to (26). Thus

we revert to the zero interest elasticity assumption in the demand for ney.

       Two broad results stand out. First, the exchange rate is higher on

impact the lower w is. When output supply is allowed to respond to the

expansionary pressure of the tax cut, the exchange rate appreciates by less, or



                                               Table 3



                         w=.5
                                ip=0
                                   w=.25
                                           .

                                               =.Ol
                                                               =.2 w=.25
                                                                           __________
                                                                                   w=.25


A(0)       o.8b14    0.853         0.856       o.8614    0.897     0.927   i.o46   1.118

r(0)       0.066     0.062         0.063       0.065     0.078     0.078   0.109   0.101

y(0)       1.0        1.008.       1.007       1.007     1.0       1.013   1.0     1.029



depreciates nrre, than in the fixed output case. Although this effect is by no

means trivial, the qualitative features of our earlier results reiin unchanged.

The second result is the well known one that the output response to fiscal

policy in an open econonv is inversely related to the degree of asset

substitutability. This is shown itst clearly in Figure 13, where the output

response is shown for different values of 4i when w =            0.25.
p=0             1.03

1j)
      =   0.2
                i.02
                                                                                 I.0
                            I'I'                                                 -4
                1.01   II
                       II




                1.00



                                        20             30        40         50
                       0           10



                                        Figure   13:   Output Response (u=.25)
                                               —38—




       6.3 Short—Term and         Long—Term Interest Rates
       So far we have assumed that        private   spending is responsive to the short
term interest rate        r.   The short term rate is the relevant one in the portfolio
balance condition (assuming that          portfolios   can be costless],y re—arranged each

period).      But it would clearly be preferable to have private spending depend

upon a long—term rate. The distinction nay veil be important, given the crucial

role played by the interest effect on spending. We define the real long term

interest rate as the rate associated with a consol which pays a constant flow of

dividends equal to one. Accordingly, the price of the consol is 1/B and its

total return includes both dividends and capital             gains or losses. With capital
gains   equal to d(l/R)dt, the real return is therefore:




        B +   d(l/R)/dt   = B —   1/B

We assume that the short—run public debt and the domestic consols are jrfect

substitutes, so that their returns must be the same:


(21)           r=R-/B
Upon linearizing, we have:


(21')            =   r*(R_r)

where we assume that in the initial steady state B0 =             r0
                                                                       =   r".   The resulting

model consists of (1) to (8), (10) and (27), where in equation (2), r is

replaced by B. The parameters and initial values used in the simulations are
                                              —39—


exactly as in Section 5. Note also that we revert to. the full—employment case

and assume y =    0, thus eliminating the effects discussed in Sections 6.1 and
6.2. The results of the tax cut are presented in Figures 114, 15 and 16 and

summarized in Table 14,      These figures correspond to Figures 10, 11 and 12 above.




                                              Table 14




                   NoR       WithR             NoR        WithR         NoR      WithR

     x(o)          o.8141i    0.81].           0.897       0.939        a.o146   1.110

     r(0)          0.066      0.072            0.078       0.067        0.109    0.060

     R(O)           ——        0.059              ——        0.086         ——,     0.123

     P = F         0.05       0.05             0.092       0.092        0.114    o.1i4




     Consider first the perfect substitutability case as in Figure 114. The long

term interest rate smooths it          the   fluctuations of the short term rate. Hence

on impact    the long—nm rate jumps less, and            thus private demand is not so much

reduced   as   when it depends on the short term rate. With a stronger excess

demand in the goods market, the exchange rate impact appreciation is larger.

Exactly the opposite occurs in Figure 15, where the long term interest rate

increases by more than the short term rate on impact. In this case, both rates

have to rise in the final steady state, and this increase is immediately

anticipated by the long rate. With a strong effect of interest rates on demand,

less of a real exchange rate appreciation is needed to crowd out private deinnd
                                          —40--




                                 no long—term rate

                                     long—term rate



                                            .O8
                                                            I'I'
                                            .06
                                                       JR
                                            .04             I       I    I
            0    10    30    50
                                                                        30   50
                                                        0          10


                                      Figure 14 (i40)




        0       10    30    50                          0          10   30   50


                                      Figure 15 (t=0.2)




,)—                                           2
                                             .4-



0— -                                         .4..
                                                  -I




8—
       0        10    30    50                          0          10   30   50

                                    Figure 16 (i=2)
                                            —41—



     and maintain goods market equilibrium. In the case of Figure i6,             the   long—term
     rate increase leads to a. larger jump depreciation.


     7.    Conclusion

           The broad result which stands out from this analysis is that the behavior

     of the exchange rate, both on impact and      in   the long run, is ambiguous. The

     oft—cited benchmark case of   a jump appreciation     and a    long run   depreciation,

     is far from general. It is not robust to varying assumptions about the degree

     of asset substitutability or to the composition of government spending. It also

     appears that initial conditions, characterized by the initial size of the public

     debt or the net external position, play a significant role. Two countries, with

     an otherwise identical structure, can react differently to fiscal policy because

     of past history!

           Several issues remain, of course, concerning the robustness of the results

     presented here. They rely on standard components of macroeconomic nde1s which,

     we believe, are not particularly controversial. The questions, therefore,

     center around the many simplifying assumptions that have been made to.allow for

     analytical tractability (for instance, the assumption that price flexibility

     ensures a fixed output). Variable output may veil affect the determination of

     the real exchange rate, though at this stage, we have few general results to

     offer   on this point. Also at issue is our treatment         of rrrnetary policy. There

     are   many ways to describe "constant ixnetary policy," some ire appealing than
     the case of a constant nominal noney stock. Finally, we have no capital
     accumulation   in our rindel. Ax investment function would introduce some new,
—I
                                      —42—



potentially conlicating features: dostic wealth would differ fron our

definition, the irginal productivity of capital would be driven in the long run

to   a level consistent with the real interest rate, thus making the

full—employment output level endogenous.                                          ¼
                                                 —43—



                                               Footnotes


1.   This equation can be derived as follows. Consider a Tobin portfolio wdel:

Ab* =   B*(r*      +      —   r)w,   with B*? > 0 and b =   B(r*    + £IA —   dv,   with B' C 0.

Taking the ratio and linearizing we obtain the equation in the text.

2.   More generally and nre realistically, p can be set to vary over time.

3.   The reason is that r changes as a function of all three variables A, b and

b*. With (11), as long as b0 * 0, this brings about changes in g, and

therefore in T           —    c — g, thus affecting the current account equation (6).

With (8) or (9), (i) implies that c, and therefore T, is only a function of X,

as is shown in section 3. Note, however, that there are alternative policy

regimes compatible with (5) and (8). For example, a government spending

expansion can be represented as g = jiB —               (p+r*)b   and t =
                                                                            b0r,   instead of

(11). In this case the transition nutrix is as in (12) and (13).

1•   The equations of these schedules are:

        (CA):          aX + (l_n)r*w + (mm0)A0

        (GO):          aX + (l—m)(6+')e$)w + [(rn—n?) + s(l—m)]A=O

5.   The formal result is: I = (A/a)[—(rn—m0) + (1_m)sr*/(6+9g_r*)]

          =    _sa/(6+$Oip_r*), and
              =   —(A/a)[s(a   + (1_m)r*b)/(ô + 184I_r*) —
                                                                  (m—rP)b1.

     This result can be understood as follows. With an excess denand in the

goods market, a drop in wealth from point A to point A' provides the required

adjustment. But as it implies a reduction in Xb*, interest earnings are

reduced, prompting a current account deficit. This is corrected by a
                                                    —44—


depreciation, and a further reduction in wealth to tnintain goods market

equilibrium, as we ntve along G1G1 from A' to B.

6.   The equation of the schedules in this case are:

      (CA)           ciA +   (l_m)r*(Ab*)     = 0

                                                                  (l—s)r'   —   •t(i—e)l   = 0
      (GG)           aX +    (l_m)(6+8i)(Ab*)       +   £16   —


7.   The steady state solution is:

          =    r*Z(1_m)[5_(l_s)r*_iP(1_O)I/a(6+e*_r*)
               =   _E[6_(l_s)r*_t$(l_O)1/a(6+9Ip_.r*)
              =
                  _EIl+(1_m)r*b/aJ [6_(l_s)r*_t1p(1_e)1/(6+e1P_r*)
8.   We do not consider the case where b is negative and sufficiently large, in

absolute value, to lead to an increase in '5* when the exchange rate

depreciates. This case obtains when a devaluation worsens the current account

because it aggravates interest payments on the external debt by more than it

improves the trade balance.

9.    The role of perfect foresight is seen by considering the polar case of

static expectations when             =   0:   more appreciation is required, as r either

does not change at all under perfect substitutability, or increases by less

otherwise, so that nnst of the crowding out is achieved at the expense of

foreign demand. This is seen graphically as a jump to B' on the                                  = 0

schedule.

10. With static expectations, there is no need for a change in A on impact as

the interest rate stays constant: the econon remains in point A on the

I    =0   schedule.

11. Applying the nEthod proposed by Dixit (1980), it can be shown that the

initial exchange rate change is, for b = 0:
                                                   —45—




                                            ss2(1—m)
    x(o) -
                A0
                     =   (A/)[G   - m +


where 2 is the negative elgenvalue of (12).

12. They satisfy the condition:

                 +
                     s   = a/ø(1—m) +     r*   +
                                                   b(ó/+6i)
     If b is not too negative, we see that                    >   r,   2 <   < r".
13. From footnote 7, the condition for a long run appreciation is

            6   — (1_s)r*.       From (19), the condition for a jump depreciation is

        >   6 — (l_s)r*      +
                                 (1—s)s1.
                                               Note the difference with the balanced budget

case of Section 14, where (see Figure 8) a high * cannot alone bring about a

short—run depreciation. The reason is that b does not change, so that we then

miss the portfolio balance effect at work in the tax cut case.

lb. This was pointed out to us by Rudi Dornbusch.
                                         —46—



                                      References


Blanchard, O.J., 1983, "Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons," unpublished paper,

    MIT, October.

Branson, W.H., 1976, "The Dual Roles of the Government Budget and the Balance

     of Payments in   the Movement from Short—Bun   to Long—Run Equilibrium,"

     Quarterly   Journal   of Economics 90, August, pp. 3145—368.

Branson, W.E. and Buiter, W.H., 1983, "Monetary and Fiscal Policy with Flexible

     Exchange Rates," in: Bhandari, J.S. and Putnam,       B.H., Economic

     Interdependence   and Flexible Exchange Rates, JIlT Press, Cambridge.

Christ, C., 1979, "On Fiscal and Monetary Policies and      the   Governuent Budget

     Restraint," American Economic Review 69, September, pp. 539—552.

Dixit, A., 1980, "A Solution Technique for Rational Expectations Models with

     Applications to Exchange Rate and Interest Rate Determination," manuscript,

     University of Warwick, November.

Fleming, J.M., 1962, "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Under

     Floating Exchange Rates," IMP' Staff Papers 9.

Hodrick, R.J., 1980, "Dynamic Effects of Government Policies in an Open

     Econon," Journal of Monetary Economics 6, April, pp. 213—2140.

Kouri, P.J.K., 1976, "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the

     Short Run   and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian
     Journal of Economics 2, pp. 280—304.
Mundell, R.A., 1963, "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Under Fixed and
   Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics and Political
                                         —47—



     Science 29, pp. b'r5—b85.

Penati, A. ,1983, "Expansionary Fiscal Policy and the Exchange Rate: A Review,"

     IMP   Staff   Papers 30(3), Septenther.

Turnovskj, S., 1976, "The Dynamics of Fiscal Policy in an Open &onor,,"

     Journal of' International Economics 6, pp. 115—142.
