                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ARE CURRENCY APPRECIATIONS CONTRACTIONARY IN CHINA?

                                               Jianhuai Shi

                                          Working Paper 12551
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12551


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2006




This is a revision of a paper presented at the 17th Annual East Asian Seminar on Economics on
“International Financial Issues around the Pacific-Rim”, Hawaii, June 22-24, 2006, organized by the National
Bureau of Economic Research. I thank Ashvin Ahuja, Dante Canlas, Michael Dooley, Peter Garber,
Takatoshi Ito, and Andrew Rose for insightful comments, and Guoqing Song for help in obtaining data used
in this research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2006 by Jianhuai Shi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Currency Appreciations Contractionary in China?
Jianhuai Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 12551
September 2006
JEL No. F31, F41, O53

                                          ABSTRACT


The Chinese economy has been in a state of external and internal imbalances for some years,
which has something to do with the undervaluation of renminbi (RMB). But the Chinese
Government hesitates to allow RMB to appreciate because of the worry that RMB appreciations
are contractionary thus have negative impact on China's economic growth and employment. The
purpose of this paper is to empirically assess the effects of RMB real exchange rate on China's
output. The econometric results of the paper show that (1) even after source of spurious
correlation is controlled for, RMB appreciation has led to a decline in China’s output, suggesting
that RMB appreciations are contractionary, and that (2) once the international finance linkage of
Chinese economy is accounted for, the effect of RMB real exchange rate shocks on China’s
output and the power of the shocks in explaining the change of China’s output are diminished.
The paper gives some possible explanations to those findings, and points out that the findings do
not necessarily imply that China should continue maintaining the undervaluation of RMB.

Jianhuai Shi
China Center for Economic Research
Peking University
Beijing 100871
China
jhshi@ccer.pku.edu.cn
1    Introduction


      In recent years, the renminbi (RMB) exchange rate and China's exchange rate
policy have received the extensive concern of the international community. Has RMB
been undervalued? If so, by how much it is undervalued? Should RMB be revaluated
or appreciated? These questions have all caused the hot debate at home and abroad.
Though there is no unanimous conclusion on by how much RMB is undervalued, it is
more unanimous view of researchers that RMB is undervalued. For example,
Goldstein (2004 ) estimates that RMB has been undervalued by 15-30% in 2003
according to a simple fundamental equilibrium exchange rate (FEER) model; Frankel
(2004 ) uses a modified purchasing power parity method to estimate that RMB was
undervalued by 35% in 2000, and judges that it is undervalued at least that much at
present; Shi and Yu (2005 ) use a behavior equilibrium exchange rate (BEER) model
to draw that RMB was undervalued by about 12% on average during 2002-2004;
Coudert and Couharde (2005 ) use a FEER model to estimate that RMB exchange rate
was undervalued by 23% in 2003.
      No matter being undervalued or overvalued, exchange rate misalignment
certainly results in a distortion of the economy that exerts a negative impact on
economic structure and macroeconomic performance of the economy. For example, in
recent years, the Chinese economy has been in a state of obvious external imbalance
and internal imbalance1 which certainly has something to do with the undervaluation
of RMB. According to the Swan Diagram, a classic framework for analyzing the
macroeconomic policy of an open economy, allowing RMB to appreciate is a direct
and effective method to resolve the imbalances of Chinese economy (Shi, 2006), but
the Chinese Government seems hesitate to allow RMB to appreciate2, would rather

1
  Specifically, external imbalance is evidenced by the large current account surplus and a big
growth in foreign exchange reserves; the internal imbalance manifests itself in the overheating of
the economy and the pressure of inflation.
2
  Under China’s new exchange rate regime, if the monetary authority reduces the intensity of
exchange market intervention, or widens the band of RMB exchange rate floating, the market will

                                                2
adopts other measures such as adjusting the export tax rebates, relaxing the controls
on capital outflow, and adjusting the interest rate or deposit reserve ratio, etc. to deal
with external and internal imbalances of the economy.
      Why then, even under the situation that there is obviously an undervaluation of
RMB and the Chinese economy suffers from external and internal imbalances, the
Chinese Government still resists RMB appreciation? According to traditional
macroeconomics textbook model, currency appreciations are contractionary: at least
in the short run, appreciations will raise the price of domestic goods relative to the
price of foreign goods (namely the real exchange rate appreciation), cause the export
to drop and the substitution of the home produced goods with the imported goods, and
thus reduce the aggregate demand3. So, the hesitation of the Chinese Government is
consistent with the view of traditional macroeconomic theory. Though the Chinese
Government has announced that China does not pursue too big trade surplus,
indicating that the Chinese policy makers would like to reduce the surplus through
various kinds of means, the Chinese Government certainly worries about that RMB
appreciations are contractionary as what traditional macroeconomic theory says, thus
have a negative impact on China's economic growth and employment, even make the
Chinese economy fall into a long time recession as what had happened in Japan
during the 1990s (as often but may not correctly being cited by those who argue
against the RMB appreciation). This is the main reason why the Chinese Government
is unwilling to allow RMB to appreciate. Under the situation that there is a high rate
of unemployment caused by the economic reform and economy transition into the
market economy, keeping the high rate of economic growth and maintaining
employment are obviously the higher than all goals of the Chinese Government.
      Must appreciations be contractionary and depreciations be expansionary? For a
long time, for example, at least since Hirschman (1949), the economists have realized
that appreciations are not necessarily contractionary, nor are depreciations necessarily


promote RMB to appreciate progressively because of the steady expectation of RMB appreciation.
In this paper, we do not distinguish “appreciation” from “revaluation”.
3
  This is the expenditure-switching effect of exchange rate change.

                                              3
expansionary. Marked by Krugman and Taylor (1978), there appears a so-called
“contractionary devaluations” literature4. On the demand side, the literature
emphasizes the expenditure-changing effects of exchange rate change ignored by the
traditional macroeconomic theory and provides a series of mechanisms and channels
that devaluation can cause outputs to drop. On the supply side, the literature
demonstrates the “contractionary devaluations” effect mainly through the influence of
devaluation on the cost of imported intermediate goods, the cost of wages and firm's
working capital5. After the 1994 Mexico currency crisis and 1997-98 East Asian
financial crisis, the “contractionary devaluations” literature obtains renewed attention
of economists (Kamin and Rogers , 2000), and has got new development. The new
development emphasizes the importance of the balance sheet effects in explaining the
economic recession caused by the devaluation in the financial crisis (Frankel, 2005).
       According to the “contractionary devaluations” literature, currency revaluations
are likely to have an expansionary rather than a contractionary impact on the economy
in developing countries. For instance, currency revaluation has the real cash balance
effect and the real wealth effect: it lowers the domestic price level, therefore leading
to real cash balance and real wealth increase, which tends to expand personal
spending (Bruno, 1979, Gylfason and Radetzki, 1991). Currency revaluation also has
an income reallocation effect (Diaz-Alejandro, 1963, Cooper, 1971, Krugman and
Taylor, 1978): it tends to transfer real income from groups with high marginal
propensity to saving toward groups with low marginal propensity to saving, causing
total domestic expenditure to expand. This is because that revaluation raises the real
wage through reducing the price level, causing the real income to shift from
entrepreneur to the laborer, and laborer has higher marginal propensity to consume


4
  This literature is mainly about the exchange rate policy of developing countries. Devaluations
are usually included in stabilization program of developing countries and balance of payment
problems in developing countries generally are devaluation pressure. Therefore, the
“contractionary devaluations” literature mainly investigates the situation of devaluation. However,
many channels of the contractionary devaluations are equally suitable to the situation of
revaluation.
5
  See Lizondo and Montiel (1989) for a survey of “contractionary devaluations” literature. Caves,
Frankel and Jones (2002) provide a simple introduction of 10 kinds of “contractionary
devaluations” effects.

                                                 4
than that of entrepreneur. This income reallocation effect may be remarkable in
developing countries, because the laborers in developing countries usually have
limited wealth and are subject to strong liquidity constraint, so their marginal
propensities to consume are nearly equal to 1. Moreover, in developing countries, new
equipment investment usually includes a large amount of imported capital goods,
currency revaluation will lower domestic prices of those goods, which will help to
expand investment expenditure and, therefore, total expenditure (Branson, 1986, van
Wijnbergen, 1986)6. Finally, currency revaluation will lower the domestic prices of
imported intermediate goods and raw materials (such as petroleum and minerals)
which, in turn, will lower the production costs of all final goods (including
non-tradable goods) and the lowering of marginal costs relative to the prices of final
goods will lead to increased output and employment (Bruno, 1979, van Wijnbergen,
1986). Therefore, even if the net effect of revaluation on aggregate demand is
contractionary (the expenditure-switching effect is large enough to dominate the
expenditure-changing effect), the existed supply side effect might still makes the
revaluation to be expansionary.
        Regarding to the empirical literature, the majority research on the relationship
between real exchange rate and output in developing countries has demonstrated that
real devaluations were contractionary while real appreciations were expansionary,
suggesting that the channels the “contractionary devaluations” literature revealed are
important in developing countries. For example, in an influential early research,
Edwards (1986) uses a reduced form equation model to study a panel data set of 12
developing countries, and find that devaluations were contractionary in the short-term,
but turned to be expansionary after one year, and were neutral in the long-term.
Gylfason and Radetzki (1991) use a macroeconomic simulation method to find that
for the 12 developing countries studied, devaluations were all contractionary in the
short-term as well as in the mid-term. Kamin and Rogers (2000 ) use a vector
autoregression model (hereafter abbreviated as VAR model) to study the relation


6
    Those are the expenditure-changing effects of exchange rate change.

                                                 5
between real exchange rate and output in Mexico, and find that real devaluations were
contractionary while real appreciations were expansionary. Other recent researches,
such as Hoffmaister and Vegh (1996) on Uruguay, Moreno (1999) on six East Asian
countries, Akinlo and Odusola (2003) on Nicaragua, and Berument and Pasaogullari
(2003) on Turkey, all support the “contractionary devaluations” hypothesis.
      What is the relationship between RMB real exchange rate and China’s output
then? Are RMB appreciations contractionary as what textbook says, or expansionary
as what the “contractionary devaluations” hypothesis suggests? The purpose of this
paper is to study the effects of RMB real exchange rate on China's output by using
VAR models to a sample of 1991q1--2005q3. The rest of the paper is organized as
follows: Section 2 gives a brief historical review of China’s exchange rate regime, the
evaluations of the RMB real exchange rate and China’s output during the past decade,
in order to provide a background for the issues to be discussed; Section 3 describes
the models to be employed and the data to be used, and discusses the time series
characteristics of the variables; Section 4 takes an econometric analysis of the VAR
models through impulse-response function graphs and variance decompositions of
forecast errors; Finally, section 5 summarizes the conclusions drawn from this
research.




2   An Brief History of RMB Exchange Rate Evaluation and China’s

    Output Fluctuation: 1991—2005


      In the early stage of 1990s, what China implemented was a double exchange
rate system: Official fixed exchange rate coexisted with a market exchange rate
formed in the swap foreign exchange market. By 1992, up to 80% of the foreign
exchange transactions were conducted at the swap foreign exchange market and the
market exchange rate essentially had reflected the demand for and the supply of the
foreign exchange. Because the swap market exchange rate was higher than official

                                           6
exchange rate implying a subsidy to exporter, the double exchange rate system caused
the unfair competition and resource distortion, and was unfavorable to attract the
foreign direct investments7. Against these negative effects, the official exchange rate
of RMB was increasing (devaluating) constantly, from 4.7 yuan per U.S. dollar in
1990, devalued to 5.4 yuan per dollar in 1992, until 5.8 yuan per dollar by the end of
1993. In January 1, 1994, China reformed its double exchange rate system by unifying
the two exchange rates and established a single and managed floating exchange rate
system based on market supply and demand. Afterwards, the nominal rate of RMB
had gone through disconnected small pieces of appreciation, this course went on until
1997 when the financial crisis of East Asia was outburst.
       Under the situation that the external demand dropped and the currencies of
China’s principal trade partners devalued against U.S. dollar by a wide margin (except
Hong Kong), the market participators generally had anticipated that RMB would
follow those currencies to devaluate. In order to stabilize the regional exchange rates
and prevent the currencies from competitive devaluation, the Chinese Government
announced against the market expectation that RMB would not be devalued. From
then on, the RMB exchange rate was fixed at 8.28 yuan per U.S. dollar, and the
so-called managed float became a de facto dollar peg, this system lasted until July of
2005. On July 21, 2005, China instituted a reform of its exchange rate regime by
revaluating the RMB by 2.1 percent and terminating its peg to the U.S. dollar in favor
of a managed float based on a basket of currencies. Under the new exchange rate
regime, the daily fluctuation of RMB exchange rate is restricted within 0.3 percent on
both side, and the RMB exchange rate has not moved very much because of the
market intervention conducted by The People's Bank of China (PBOC). Figure 1
portrays the track of RMB nominal exchange rate against the U.S. dollar during the
past sixteen years.




7
  Under this kind of system, the foreign investment must be converted into RMB according to the
official exchange rate first, when the foreign investors need foreign exchanges, however, they can
only obtain them through the foreign exchange swap market, at the market exchange rate.

                                                7
                                  [Figure 1 about here]


      In contrast with the relative stableness of bilateral nominal rate of RMB, the
effective real exchange rate (hereafter referred to as the real exchange rate) of RMB
presented a large fluctuation in the past periods in more than 10 years. As can be seen
from Figure 2, the real exchange rate of RMB had gone through six different stages
over the past more than 10 years. (1) 1991q1 --1993q2: The real exchange rate of
RMB experienced a large amount of depreciation, this is mainly because that the
nominal rate of RMB had presented a large devaluation; (2) 1993q3 --1998q1: The
real exchange rate of RMB experienced a large amount of appreciation which is
mainly because of higher inflation in China during the period and a small extent
appreciation of RMB nominal rate. After the financial crisis of East Asia, the
appreciation of RMB real exchange rate is mainly due to the sharp devaluations of the
currencies of some China’s trade partners; (3) 1998q2 --1999q4: The real exchange
rate of RMB experienced a certain degree of depreciation, this is mainly because that
there appeared a deflation in China; (4) 2000q1 --2002q1: A certain degree of
appreciation of RMB real exchange rate appeared in this period, this is mainly the
reflection of the mild inflation in China and a deflation in the trade partners in this
period. The real exchange rate of RMB of 2002q1 rebounded to the level of 1997q4;
(5) 2002q2 --2005q1: The real exchange rate of RMB turned to the course of large
depreciation, this is mainly influenced by the fact that U.S. dollar depreciated largely
against Euro, Japanese yen, and other key currencies, so RMB also depreciated
largely against those currencies; (6) 2005q2 and q3: Subject to the influence of
appreciation of U.S. dollar against Euro and Japanese yen, the RMB real exchange
rate turned to appreciation state again.


                                  [Figure 2 about here]


      By investigating the detrended real output data of China, we can find that
China’s real output also experienced a large fluctuation over the past more than 10
                                             8
years. Concerning the correlation of the two variables, as Figure 2 shows, during the
whole sample period (1991q1-2005q3), the relationship between the RMB real
exchange rate and China’s cyclical output is not very clear, but since 2000q1, the two
have presented an obvious negative correlation, namely, appreciations of the real
exchange rate have been associated with falls of the cyclical outputs, while real
depreciations have been followed by expansions of the cyclical output. The relation
between RMB real exchange rate and China’s output accords with the forecast of the
traditional open economy macroeconomics: RMB appreciations are contractionary,
while RMB depreciations are expansionary.
       However, for the shown correlation between the RMB real rate and China’s
output in Figure 2, two issues are still need to be clarified: First, may the tight
correlation between the RMB real rate and China’s output be spurious? i.e., is that just
reflecting the response of both variables to the third external variable and as a matter
of fact the two variables have nothing to do with each other?             For example, a change
in government spending will influence the real exchange rate while influencing
aggregate demand. Models in Mundell-Fleming tradition predict that an increase in
government spending raises real interest rate, leads to an appreciation of the real
exchange rate8. Second, if real exchange rate and output are really relevant, what then
is the causality between them? In other words, does the change of the real exchange
rate of RMB cause the change of output, or, oppositely, does the change of the output
cause the change of the real exchange rate of RMB? In order to draw the answers to
above-mentioned questions, we employ preliminarily pairwise Granger causality test
to examine the Granger causality between the RMB real rate and China’s output. The
Granger causality tests will indicate whether a set of lagged variables has explanatory
power on the other variables. If the computed F-statistics are significant, we can claim
in Granger’s sense that one variable does Granger cause the other variable.
       Table 1 reports the results of the Granger causality test. The result of the test on


8
  While the sticky-price intertemporal models of the New Open Economy Macroeconomics
predict a fall in the real interest rate in response to an increase in government spending (Obstfeld
and Rogoff, 1995), hence a depreciation of the real exchange rate.

                                                  9
the whole sample (1991q1-2005q3) shows that, with 95% level of confidence, the
sample data reject the null hypothesis, indicating that China’s output Granger causes
the RMB real rate and the RMB real rate Granger causes the output as well. Because
there seems a difference on the relationship between RMB real rate and China’s
output before and after 2000q1, we divide the whole sample into two sub-samples
(1991q1-1999q4 and 2000q1-2005q3) and conduct Granger causality test on two
sub-samples separately. The results turn out to be surprise: for the first sub-sample,
the data reject the null hypothesis with 99% even higher level of confidence,
suggesting the output Granger causes the real exchange rate and the real exchange
rate Granger causes the outputs as well; while for the second sub-sample, upon which
there seems a strong correlation between the output and real exchange rate, the date
instead can not reject the null hypothesis, showing a strange result that the output does
not Granger cause the real exchange rate and the real exchange rate does not Granger
cause the outputs either. That means no variable is helpful in explaining the
movement of the other. One explanation to this looked strange result may be that the
number of observation in the second sub-sample is small that results in a small
F-Statistic; another explanation may be that there are other variables influencing both
RMB real rate and China’s output at the same time that has limited the usefulness of
the pairwise Granger causality test.


                                   [Table 1 about here]


      So, in order to investigate the relationship between RMB real exchange rate and
China’s output more precisely, we employ VAR models to control the influence of
variables which may have impacts on both RMB real exchange rate and China’s
output, therefore to answer above-mentioned questions. The estimated VAR models
also let us study other interested issues.




                                             10
3    Model and Data


3.1. The Models


       We use VAR model to study the relationship between the real exchange rate of
RMB and China’s output. We try to find out whether the correlation indicated by
Figure 2 is spurious or not, and what is the direction of causality between the real
exchange rate and output in China. Owing to the relatively small sample size, we can't
include all interested variables within one VAR model9, so we adopt the modeling
strategy of Kamin and Rogers (2000) as follows: we estimate a basic model at first,
and then, expand the basic model through entering another external variable to the
basic model each time. Following Kamin and Rogers (2000), the basic model includes
China's gross domestic product (GDP), RMB real effective exchange rate (REER),
China's inflation rate (INFL) and foreign gross domestic product (GDPF). Following
the tradition of business cycle literature, we detrend the data of gross domestic
product so as to focus upon the growth cycle. Therefore, GDP and GDPF represent
the cyclical components of gross domestic product (or GDP gap) of China and foreign
countries respectively. The reasons for selecting these four variables are as follows:
GDPF is taken as a proxy of external shocks. This variable let us examine the effect
on Chinese economy of external shocks. GDP and REER are the variables we want to
study. INFL is the “intermediate” variable in between the real exchange rate and
output, proxying all possible channels link the real exchange rate to output. Being
different from Kamin and Rogers (2000), we choose GDPF instead of US interest rate
as the proxy of external factors. This is based on the following consideration: China
still implements the capital controls, therefore, the relation between US interest rate
and China’s interest rate should not be very close; on the other hand, after fulfilled the
RMB convertible for current account transactions and formally joined the World

9
  Because a VAR model involves quite a lot of parameters to be estimated, introducing too many
endogenous variables will cause serious loss of the degrees of freedom, thus, affect the statistic
dependability of the results.

                                                11
Trade Organization, the openness of China's real economy is increasing constantly,
the ratio of foreign trade to GDP in China has reached a high level of 70% at present.
In that situation, the business cycles of the trading partners have important influence
on that of China through the channel of import and export.
      The basic model is too frugal to allow us to investigate more comprehensive
influence of the variables that influence both the real exchange rate and the output; it
may not be very efficient to study the problem of spurious correlation. For example, it
provides us with little sense of which channels link the real exchange rate to output.
Therefore, we enter one endogenous variable each time into the basic model, and
estimate more other VAR models in addition. That let us see whether our final results
are robust or not, at the same time let us control the size of the VAR model within the
appropriate level according to the sample. We enter government spending (GOV) and
money supply (M2) into the basic model respectively to examine fiscal and monetary
channels in the relationship between real exchange rate and output. In addition, we
enter US interest rate (RUS) so as to investigate the international financial linkage of
Chinese economy and examine the efficiency of capital controls in China. Therefore,
besides the basic model which is indicated as model 1, we further estimate three more
VAR models. The models can be expressed in the form of unrestricted VAR model as
follows:
                               kl
                      Yt l =          Ail Yt l−i + ε tl , ε tl   IID ol , Ωl   l = 1, 4
                               i =1


Where,

                  Yt1 = (GDPFt , INFLt , REERt , GDPt )′

                  Yt 2 = (GDPFt , INFLt , GOVt , REERt , GDPt )′

                  Yt 3 = (GDPFt , M 2t , INFLt , REERt , GDPt )′

                  Yt 4 = ( RUSt , GDPFt , INFLt , REERt , GDPt )′



kl indicates the lags of l -th VAR model                   Ail is parameter matrix of l -th VAR model


                                                          12
for i = 1, 2,..., kl   ε tl is a random residual vector of l -th VAR model    ol is the zero

mean vector of ε tl      and Ωl is a covariance matrix of ε tl . According to AIC criterion

and SC criterion, the different numbers of lags are tried for each VAR model, and the
optimum lags turn out to be 4 for all four models.
         We take the familiar two-stage approach to estimate the VAR models, at the
first stage, the variables are regressed on lags of all the variables in the system, at the
second stage, the Cholesky decomposition technique used by Sims (1980) is
employed to orthogonalize the residuals so as to identify the primitive structural
system. The Cholesky decomposition imposes a recursive contemporaneous causal
structure on the VAR models. The model variables are ordered in a particular
sequence, and variables higher in the ordering are assumed to cause contemporaneous
changes in variables lower in the ordering. Variables lower in the ordering are
assumed to affect variables higher in the ordering only with a lag. Because of that,
determining a reasonable order for endogenous variables is an important issue in
employing a VAR model. We select the variable orders of our four models as above,
the rationale for the orderings are as follows.
         GDPF is ordered first because GDPF captures the external shocks that may
have significant contemporaneous effects on Chinese economic variables like INFL,
REER and GDP due to the openness of Chinese economy. On the other hand, the
outputs of China’s trade partners as a whole are unlikely affected contemporaneously
by any Chinese economic variables. For REER, INFL, and GDP, we adopt an
ordering a little bit different from that of Kamin and Rogers (2000)10, we order INFL
prior to REER and GDP by assuming that inflation shocks have a contemporaneous
effect on RMB real exchange rate since RMB nominal exchange rate is stable due to
high official intervention, and on aggregate demand. In contrast, we assume that price
is sticky in the short run, so it responds to real exchange rate and aggregate demand
shocks only with lags. REER is ordered prior to GDP as we assume that real exchange
rate shocks have a contemporaneous effect on aggregate demand through traditional

10
     Kamin and Rogers (2000) adopt following ordering: REER→ INFL→ GDP.

                                              13
channel or those indicated by the “contractionary devaluations” literature, while
aggregate demand shocks do not affect contemporaneously the real exchange rate. In
model 2, GOV is ordered after INFL by assuming that government spending shocks
affect inflation only with a lag. In model 3, M2 is ordered prior to INFL under the
assumption that as the monetary policy instrument in China, money supply reacts not
to realized inflation but to expected inflation. In model 4, RUS is ordered prior to
GDPF because US interest rate shocks affect contemporaneously the world aggregate
demand, but due to the relative closeness of US economy, US interest rate is unlikely
affected contemporaneously by world aggregate demand and any Chinese economic
variables.


3.2. The Data


      The data are quarterly one; the sample interval is 1991q1--2005q3. 1991q1 is
the earliest time for which the quarterly gross domestic product data are available in
China, The gross domestic product data of 2005q4 are collected according to a new
statistical method and without comparability with the data in the past, and therefore,
we exclude it from our sample. Except for inflation rate, variables are the real ones,
US real interest rate is obtained by subtracting US inflation rate from the nominal
interest rate, and other real variables are drawn from the nominal ones divided by
consumer's price index. The base period is 1992.
      The foreign gross domestic product index, GDPF, is calculated according to the
trade-weighted average of gross domestic product indices of 14 principal trade
partners of China. GDP and GDPF are detrended gross domestic products. In business
cycle literature, the Hodrick-Prescott (H-P) filter is widely used to generate the
cyclical components. It is well known, however, that the H-P filter has an
end-of-sample problem, i.e. at the end of the sample the estimates are particular
unreliable. In addition, the filter depends on the choice of the “smoothness parameter”
which makes the resulting cyclical component and its statistical properties highly
sensitive to this choice. Those problems become serious when sample size is small.
                                           14
Because of the relatively small sample we have, we do not use the H-P filter in this
study; instead, we use quadratic detrending to construct GDP and GDPF data, which
is implemented by regressing the logarithm of quarterly real gross domestic product
on a trend and its quadrate. The regression with a quadratic time trend has higher
degree of goodness of fit than one with a linear time trend in our case.
      REER (RMB real effective exchange rate index) is taken from the International
Financial Statistics database of International Monetary Fund (IMF), a rise in it
indicating an appreciation. China’s inflation rate INFL is obtained by differencing the
logarithm of consumer's price index. GOV expresses the Chinese Government
spending. M2 is China's broad money supply. RUS indicates US real interest rate of 3
months Treasury bill. Except for INFL and RUS, variables are in the logarithm. GDP,
GOV, INFL and GDPF have been seasonally adjusted. Data of other countries or
regions come from the International Financial Statistics database of IMF. The data of
China’s variables except REER come from State Statistics Bureau, the People's Bank
of China, China Ministry of Finance and General customs of China. Taiwan GDP
annual data come from IMF World Economic Outlook Database 2006, which have
been translated into quarterly data.


3.3. The Time Series Characteristics of the Data


      Because many macroeconomic variables are not stationary, to avoid spurious
regressions, we need to test if the time series of relevant variables in our models are
stationary or not. If the variables turn out to be nonstationary, we need to know
further whether there exist long ran steady relations among those endogenous
variables or not. We take the unit root tests and cointegration tests for those purposes
below.


A. Unit Root Tests


      We use both the augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test and the Phillips-Perron
                                           15
test for unit root tests. Table 2 reports the results of the unit root tests of all relevant
variables in our models. For the level variables, both tests reveal that we cannot reject
the presence of unit root, which shows these variables all are non-stationary; on the
other hand, Phillips-Perron test rejects the null hypothesis of presence of unit root at
the 1 per cent level of significance for the first difference of all variables, while ADF
test rejects the null hypothesis at the 1 per cent level of significance for the first
difference of all variables except GDP. ADF test cannot reject the presence of unit
root for the first difference time series of GDP. Here, we adopt the result of
Phillips-Perron test for GDP, and therefore assert that all variables in our models are
the first order integrated variables, namely variables of I (1).


                                    [Table 2 about here]


B. Cointegration Tests


      Because all variables in our models are variables of I (1), we need to further test
if there are cointegration vectors for each model. We implement VAR-based
cointegration tests using the methodology developed in Johansen (1995). Table 3
reports the results of Johansen cointegration tests which indicate that there is at least
one cointegration vector for each VAR model. Therefore, nonstationary of data needs
less concern in this study. In fact, as elaborated in Sims, Stock, and Watson (1990),
when variables are cointegrated, using a VAR in levels model is not misspecified, and
the estimates are consistent. Some economists suggest that when one really don’t
know whether there is cointegration or what the cointegration vector is, the VAR in
levels approach is probably better than the approach that tests for cointegration,
estimates of cointegrating relations and then estimates a vector error correction (VEC)
model (Cochrane, 2005). We follow the suggestion and conduct our study on the
relationship between RMB real exchange rate and China’s output by using VAR in
levels model in next section.


                                              16
                                  [Table 3 about here]




4     Empirical Results


      This section comprises two subsections. The first subsection presents the
empirical results derived from our VAR in levels models. The estimation results of
the VAR models are given in the forms of impulse response functions and variance
decompositions, based on those, the empirical analysis of the relationship between
RMB real exchange rate and China’s output is then conducted. In the second
subsection, the robustness of the results obtained in the first subsection is investigated
through adopting different ordering of variables, using VEC model specification, and
substituting RUS for GDPF in the first three models as proxy of external shock. We
want to know whether the results change significantly or not when we make those
changes.


4.1. Results from the VAR in Levels Model


      In a VAR analysis, the dynamic interactions between the variables are usually
investigated by impulse response functions or forecast error variance decompositions.
In this subsection, we obtain our empirical results concerning the relationship between
RMB real exchange rate and China’s output by using these two instruments.


A. Impulse Response Functions


      The impulse response functions (IRFs) display the responses of a particular
variable to a one-time shock in each of the variables in the system. Figure 3 and
Figure 4 plot the IRFs of GDP and REER respectively calculated from four VAR
models. By investigating those IRFs graphs, the following results can be drawn:


                                            17
                                [Figure 3 and 4 about here]


      First, when one standard deviation positive (appreciation) shock to REER takes
place, there is an obvious decline of GDP, indicating that RMB real rate shocks have
a negative impact on China’s output. From the 8th quarter, the contractionary effect is
weakened to some extent but still obviously exists. After 18 quarters, the impact of
RMB real rate shock on output turns to be positive. This effect of RMB real
appreciation occurs in all models estimated, suggesting the robustness of the result.
This result is in contrast with that of, say, Edwards (1986) and Kamin and Rogers
(2000). In Edwards (1986), for 12 countries studied, devaluations (revaluations) were
contractionary (expansionary) in the short-term, but after one year, devaluations
turned out to be expansionary; while in Kamin and Rogers (2000), devaluations
(revaluations) were contractionary (expansionary) in short-term as well as in
medium-term in Mexico.
      Second, in model 4, which includes RUS, the contractionary effect of positive
shocks to REER on GDP is significantly less than that in other three models that do
not include RUS, the former is only about half of the latter. On the other hand, shocks
to RUS have a remarkable contractionary effect on GDP; the magnitude of the effect
is even larger than that of REER shocks. These two findings seem to indicate that on
one hand the capital control in China is less efficiency than we thought; on the other
hand, capital flows have a significant impact on the Chinese economy, which is even
larger than the impact of trade (the impact of REER) on the economy11. In other
words, after accounting for the effect of international finance linkage, the effect of
RMB real appreciation on China's real economy may be smaller than what we have
expected.

11
   The impact of a rise in RUS on the Chinese economy may function through following channel:
a rise in RUS results in a decline in US demands, which in turn causes the demand for China’s
export to decline. But because we have entered GDPF into the model 4, the influence of this
channel has already been controlled.


                                             18
      Third, one standard deviation shock to GDP has no obvious impact on REER.
After the 3rd quarter, the shock causes REER raise for some extent. This effect of
output shock occurs in all models estimated, suggesting the robustness of the result.
Because the measure of the IRFs graphs of REER is only about 1/10 relative to the
measure of those of GDP, we can think that the magnitude of impact of output shocks
on RMB real rate is much less than that of impact of RMB real rate shocks on output.
      Fourth, the impact of shocks to other variables accords with virtually the
economic intuition. For example, an increase in money supply has an obvious
expansionary effect, and causes the real exchange rate depreciation in short-term;
GDPF shocks have expansionary effect too; an increases in government spending
results in RMB real appreciation in first 2 quarters; inflation shocks cause a decline of
GDP in short-term. An important exception is the effect of INFL shocks on REER: an
increase in inflation causes real exchange rate depreciation. We should expect that an
increase in inflation causes the RMB real exchange rate to appreciate because the
nominal rate of RMB has been very steady since 1997. In addition, an increase in
government spending causes GDP to drop in the first two quarters. One possible
explanation of this may be that in the short run government spending has a strong
crowding-out effect in China.
      In sum, the analyses based on IRFs suggest that the RMB real appreciation
shock has contractionary effect on China’s output. After controlling the influence of
other variables, the RMB real appreciation shock still causes GDP to decline, which
excludes the spurious correlation between RMB real exchange rate and China’s
output. The empirical results seem also support the guess that the direction of the
causality between the RMB real rate and China’s output runs from the former to the
latter. Finally, the external shocks have remarkable effects on China’s output; in
particular, US interest rate shocks have a significant impact on China’s cyclical output.
When the effect of RUS is included in VAR model, the effect of REER turns to be
weaker for certain degree.


B. Variance Decompositions
                                           19
      The IRFs provide a useful tool to assess the direction as well as the magnitude
of response of a variable to various kinds of shocks; on the other hand, the variance
decompositions give the fraction of the forecast error variance for each variable that is
attributable to its own shocks and to shocks in the other variables in the system, so
allow us to appraise the relative importance of contribution of different shocks to the
variance of a particular variable. Table 4 provides the results of the variance
decompositions of GDP and RMB real exchange rate from four VAR models. The
following results emerge from the variance decompositions:


                                  [Table 4 about here]


      First, concerning the source of variation in GDP forecast error, for those models
that do not include RUS, “own shocks” is the first most important source at horizons
of 1 and 2 quarters, while RMB real exchange rate shock is the second most important
source. Beginning from the 3rd quarter, however, the RMB real exchange rate shocks
become the first most important source of variation in GDP, which accounts for
36%-70% of the GDP forecast error variance; In the medium and long-term horizon,
“own shocks” is the second most important source in model 1, which accounts for
about 24% of the GDP error variance, while the contributions of “own shocks” in
model 2 and 3 decrease greatly, only accounts for about 8% of the GDP error variance.
In contrast, shocks to GDPF and M2 turn to be the second most important source of
the GDP error variance in model 2 and 3 respectively in the medium and long-term
horizon, which account for about 14% and 26% of the GDP error variance
respectively.
      Second, in model 4, which includes RUS, “own shocks” to GDP is the first
most important source of the GDP error variance only at horizons of 1, 2 and 3
quarters. Beginning from the 4th quarter, however, the RUS shocks become the first
most important and predominant source of variation in GDP, which accounts for
36%-69% of the GDP error variance, while “own shocks” and GDPF shocks turn to
                                           20
be the second and the third most important source of the GDP error variance, which
account for about 13% and 11% respectively in the long-term horizon. In contrast,
REER shocks become the fourth important source of variation in GDP, which only
account for 7% in the long-term horizon. When RUS is included in VAR model, the
power of REER shocks in explaining the error variance of GDP has significantly
declined. This result is consistent with that we obtained in IRFs analysis.
      Third, in the source of variation in RMB real exchange rate forecast error, “own
shocks” is the first most important and predominant source, which accounts for
63%-98% of the forecast error variance at horizons of 1 to 4 quarters, and 40%-70%
after 8 quarters. On the other hand, the contribution of GDP shocks to the error
variance of REER is negligible at horizons of 1 to 4 quarters. In the medium and
long-term horizon, the contribution of GDP shocks to the error variance of REER is
about 30% in model 1, but drops by a large margin in other three models to under 7%
in model 2 and model 3 and about 12% in model 4. On the contrary, shocks to M2,
GDPF and RUS in other three models all have relatively large contribution to the
error variance of REER. What merits attention is that GOV has very little contribution
to the error variance of REER.
      In sum, the analyses based on the variance decompositions suggest that (1) the
shocks to RMB real exchange rate have a large contribution to the variation in
China’s output in models that do not include the US interest rate, and some
contribution to the variation in China’s output in model that includes the US interest
rate, suggesting the possibility of the spurious correlation between RMB real
exchange rate and China’s output can be excluded; (2) except for the basic model
(Model 1), the shocks to GDP have small contribution to the variation in RMB real
exchange rate, and the contribution is negligible at horizons of 1 to 4 quarters,
suggesting the possibilities of reverse causation running from the GDP to the RMB
real exchange rate can be excluded; and (3) when US interest rate is included in VAR
model, the power of REER shocks in explaining the error variance of GDP has
significantly declined.


                                           21
4.2. Robustness Analysis


       The results obtained in the previous subsection may be specific to the selected
ordering of endogenous variables. Therefore, it is interesting to estimate our VAR
models with different and plausible ordering. In addition, because all variables in our
models are variables of I (1) and there are cointegration vectors for each model, it is
worth trying to check the results obtained from the VAR in level models with those
obtained    from    the    cointegration    restricted    VAR      models,    i.e.   the   VEC
models12. Furthermore, the results of previous subsection suggest that the magnitude
of the effect of RMB exchange rate shocks on China’s output is diminished
remarkably by including US interest rate in the VAR model, therefore it is also
interesting to substitute RUS for GDPF as proxy of external shock in our first three
VAR models. In this subsection we therefore investigate the robustness of the results
as regards these three points.


A. Different Ordering


       Kamin and Rogers (2000) adopt orderings a little bit different from those of
ours in their VAR models. Except for GDPF, variables in our four VAR models are
ordered in Kamin and Rogers (2000) as follows. Model 1: REER→ INFL→ GDP;
model 2: GOV→REER→ INFL→ GDP; model 3: REER→ M2→ INFL→ GDP; and
model 4: RUS→REER→ INFL→ GDP. If we relax the assumption of price sticky in
short run, the above orderings seem plausible. For example, in model 1, an
appreciation of real exchange rate shifts demand away from non-traded goods and
decreases the price of non-traded goods and general price level for a given level of
nominal exchange rate. The adjustment of the price level then causes the change of
output.
       We re-estimate our four VAR models by adopting the above orderings and find

12
   Some economists argue that it is appropriate to estimate VEC model when variables are I (1)
and there are cointegrating relations between them (Engle and Granger, 1987).

                                               22
that the results are quite similar to those of previous subsection. Owing to the space
limitation, we only present the impulse response functions of GDP from the four VAR
models using orderings adopted by Kamin and Rogers (2000) (Figure 5).


                                           [Figure 5 about here]


B. Results from VEC Model


        The VEC models to be estimated have following forms:
                                     kl -1
             ∆Yt l = α l ECM t-1
                             l
                                 +           Γ il ∆Yt-il + ε tl , ε tl   IID ol , Ω l    l = 1,4
                                     i=1



where          l
           ECM t-1 = β l′Yt l−1 is the error correction terms                       reflecting the long-run

equilibrium relationship between the variables. β l ′ is the matrix of cointegration

vectors. The coefficient vector α l reflects how fast the deviation from long-run

equilibrium is corrected through a series of partial short-run adjustments. Γ il is

parameter matrix of variables in differences, the elements of them reflect the
short-term effect of the variables on a dependent variable.
        We estimate four VEC models adopting the same orderings of previous
subsection. By investigating the estimation results of four VEC models, we find that
the IRFs of VEC models are very similar with those of VAR models in direction and
dynamic path of the responses. The results of variance decompositions are basically
similar too. But one difference is: the effect of various shocks in VEC models case
seems more lasting than that in VAR models. Taking the response of GDP to the
REER shocks as an example, the contractionary effect of an appreciation of REER
sustains longer before the expansionary effect appears. Because restricted by space,
we only provide the results of variance decompositions of GDP and REER and
impulse response functions of GDP from the VEC models (Table 5 and Figure 6).




                                                          23
                           [Table 5 and Figure 6 about here]


C. Substitution RUS for GDPF in VAR Model


      When we Substitute RUS for GDPF in VAR Models and re-estimate the first
three VAR models of previous subsection we find that comparing to the situations of
original models using GDPF as proxy variable for external shocks, (1) the IRFs of
three new VAR models are similar with those of model 4 of previous subsection: the
magnitude of the effect of RMB exchange rate shocks on China’s output is
diminished, especially in medium and long-term; (2) the expansionary effect of REER
shocks appears earlier; (3) concerning the source of variation in GDP forecast error, in
all three new VAR models, the RUS shocks become the first most important and
predominant source of variation in GDP, while in contrast REER shocks turn to be the
second, the third and the fourth important source of the GDP error variance
respectively. The contributions of “own shocks” and M2 to variation in GDP have
exceeded the contribution of REER in the second and third new models; (4) the
effects of other shocks on GDP are similar between new models and original ones.
Figure 7 and Table 6 provide IRFs and variance decompositions of GDP from the
three new VAR models with RUS replacing GDPF as agent variable of external
shocks.


                           [Figure 7 and table 6 about here]


      In sum, the robustness analysis confirms that our basic result, namely the
shocks to RMB real exchange rate have a contractionary effect on China’s output,
essentially does not change even if we adopt the orderings of Kamin and Rogers
(2000) or use VEC model in our model specification. But after including the
international finance linkage of the Chinese economy, the effect of REER shock on
China’s output and the power of REER shocks in explaining the changes of China’s
output turn to be relative small, while US interest rate shock has relatively large effect
                                            24
on China’s output, the magnitude of it is exceed that of RMB exchange rate shocks.




5. Conclusion


      This paper has investigated the relationship between the RMB real exchange
rate and China’s output by using the VAR model technique. The empirical analysis
reveals several interesting findings. First, even after source of spurious correlation is
controlled for, RMB real appreciation has led to a decline in China’s output,
suggesting that currency appreciations are contractionary in China during past decade,
as the traditional open economy macroeconomics forecasts. Second, when the
international finance linkage of Chinese economy is accounted for, the effect of RMB
real exchange rate shocks on China’s output and the power of the shocks in explaining
the change of China’s output are relatively small while the effect of US interest rate
shocks on China’s output is relatively large. The intuition behind this finding may be
that the effectiveness of China’s capital controls has eroded over time and the scale of
capital inflows and outflows has become large enough so that external shocks through
international finance channel have significant influence on the Chinese economy,
which exceeds the influence of external shocks through international trade channel.
Third, besides shocks to RMB real exchange rate and US interest rate, shocks to
domestic money supply and foreign demand all have important effect on China’s
output. However, government spending shocks have less power in explaining the
change of China’s output.
      The conclusion that currency appreciations are contractionary in China is
remarkably different from those made by the similar empirical works on developing
countries. The possible explanations of this difference in conclusion are as follows.
First, in the existing research on “contractionary devaluations” effect in developing
countries, devaluations usually take place under an abnormal environment of currency
or financial crisis, and thus have been associated with economic recession, but RMB


                                            25
devaluations did not happen in case of currency or financial crisis till now; Second,
the urban economic reform began at the early 1990s has made many people lose their
jobs and traditional benefits on medicare, pension and education, etc., which has
strengthened the motive of precautionary saving of household in urban and township
areas. Under that situation, the income reallocation effect as well as the real cash
balance and the real wealth effects of currency appreciation may not play a very great
role.
        Third, China has absorbed a large amount of foreign direct investment for many
years. As the result, the technological progress and production capacity of China’s
manufacturing industry have been promoted rapidly, the substitutability of home
produced capital goods (included those produced by foreign investment enterprises) to
imported goods has been strengthened, therefore, the effect of RMB exchange rate on
domestic investment spending is not clear; Fourth, one condition that devaluation can
lead to a reduction in national output is that imports initially exceed exports
(Krugman and Taylor, 1978), China’s trade balance has been in the favorable surplus
for more than 10 years in the past except for 1993, therefore does not satisfy that
condition;
        Finally, Because of the characteristics of processing trade in China’s
manufacturing industry and administrative controls on prices (especially on those of
service sector), the supply side effect of RMB exchange rate on output is also
uncertain. In a word, it seems that the expenditure-changing effect and supply side
effect of RMB exchange rate are not remarkable in practice until now, therefore, the
effect of RMB exchange rate shock on China’s output is mainly embodied through the
expenditure-switching effect as traditional macroeconomic theory emphasized, in that
situation, the appreciations of RMB are likely contractionary.
        It is worth pointing out, however, that the conclusion that appreciations are
contractionary in China does not necessarily mean that China should continue
maintaining RMB exchange rate undervalued. Since the undervalued RMB has
already caused the Chinese economy to run into internal and external imbalances in
the past several years. Figure 2 tells us that China’s real GDP has been running above
                                            26
its long-term trend since 2003, and this kind of deviation is expanding. Indeed, the
situation of overheating of the Chinese economy is obvious. It is no doubt that
continuing the undervaluation of RMB exchange rate will further aggravate the
imbalances of the Chinese economy. On the other hand, the conclusion that
appreciations are contractionary in China implies that relative to other effects of
exchange rate change, the expenditure-switching effect is predominant in China;
therefore it is effectual to use the orthodox Swan Diagram to analyze macroeconomic
policy issues in China13. According to the Swan Diagram of Shi (2006), allowing
RMB to appreciate is helpful for the Chinese economy to realize internal and external
balances.
       In addition, China’s capital account surplus increases rapidly along with the
rapid increases in the current account surplus in recent years. The rapid increase in the
“double surplus” causes China’s foreign exchange reserve to expand in a wild manner
and the money supply and the domestic credit to expand passively, which have
aggravated the overheating of the Chinese economy and the difficulty of the
government's macro management. In particular, as China’s capital account liberalizes
gradually and the effectiveness of capital controls erodes over time, the “hot money”
flows into China with great amount, which becomes one of the important reasons why
the foreign exchange reserve increases so fast. The empirical work of us indicates that
the effect of shocks on China’s output through international finance channel (as
represented by US interest rate shocks) exceed that through international trade
channel (as represented by RMB real exchange rate shocks), suggesting it is important
for the Chinese authorities to handle the capital inflow problem correctly. The inflows
of “hot money” in recent years mainly response to the expectations of RMB
appreciation and that one of the important reasons of persisting existence of the
expectations is the undervaluation of RMB. Therefore, allowing RMB to appreciate at
faster speed so as to restore the equilibrium level of RMB exchange rate will lessen

13
   If appreciations (depreciations) are expansionary (contractionary), the Swan Diagram is less
insightful about the combination of policy instruments to fulfill simultaneously both internal and
external balances. Because it is difficult in this case to decide where and how the internal and
external balance schedules intercross. See, for example, Frankel (2005).

                                                 27
the expectations of RMB appreciation, thus relax the pressure of the fast increase in
foreign exchange reserve on the Chinese authorities.




References


Berument, H. And Pasaogullari, M., 2003, “Effects of the Real Exchange Rate on
Output and Inflation: Evidence from Turkey”, The Developing Economies, XLI-4,
401–35.
Caves, R.E., Frankel, J.A., and Jones, R.W., 2002, World Trade and Payments: An
Introduction, Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishers.
Branson W.H., 1986, “Stabilization, stagflation, and investment incentives: The case
of Kenya, 1979-1980” In Edwards, S. and Ahamed, L. (Eds), Economic Adjustment
and exchange rates in developing countries. Chicago: Chicago UP, 267-293.
Bruno, M., 1979, “Stabilization and stagflation in a semi-industrialized economy”
In: Dornbusch, R. and Frenkel, J. A. (Eds), International Economic Policy: Theory
and Evidence. Baltimore: John Hopkins UP, 270-289.
Cochrane J. H., 2005, Time Series for Macroeconomics and Finance, Manuscript,
University of Chicago.
Cooper, R. N., 1971, “Currency devaluation in developing countries”, in Ranis, G.
(Ed.), Government and Economic Development, New Haven: Yale UP.
Coudert, V. and Couharde, C., 2005, “Real Equilibrium Exchange Rate in China”,
CEPII working paper No 2005 – 01.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. F., 1963, “A note on the impact of devaluation and the
redistributive effects”, Journal of Political Economy, 71, 577–580.
Edwards, S., 1986, “Are devaluations contractionary?”, The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 68, 501-508.
Engle, R.F. and Granger, C.W.J., 1987, “Co-integration and error correction
representation, estimation, and testing”, Econometrica 55: 251 -- 276.
Goldstein, M., 2004, “Adjusting China’s Exchange Rate Policies”, Revised version of
                                          28
the paper presented at the International Monetary Fund's seminar on China's Foreign
Exchange System, Dalian, China, May 26-27, 2004.
Gylfason, T. and Radetzki, M., 1991, “Does Devaluation Make Sense in the Least
Developed Countries?”, Economic Development and Cultural Change, October, 40
(1), 1–25.
Frankel, J. A., 2004, “On the Yuan: The Choice between Adjustment under a Fixed
Exchange Rate and Adjustment under a Flexible Rate” Paper presented at an IMF
seminar on China’s foreign exchange system, Dalian, China, May 26–27.
Frankel, J. A., 2005, “Mundell-Fleming Lecture Contractionary Currency Crashes in
Developing Countries”, IMF Staff Papers, vol. 52, No 2, pp. 149-192.
Hirschman, A. O., 1949, “Devaluation and the Trade Balance A Note”, The Review
of Economics and Statistics, Vol 31, pp. 50-53.
Hoffmaister, A. W. and Carlos A. V., 1996, “Disinflation and the
Recession-Now-Versus- Recession-Later Hypothesis: Evidence from Uruguay”, IMF
Staff Papers, vol. 43, pp. 355-394.
Johansen S., 1995, Likelihood-Based Inference in Cointegrated Vector Autoregressive
Models, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kamin, S. B. and John H. R., 2000, “Output and the Real Exchange Rate in
Developing Countries: An Application to Mexico”, Journal of Development
Economics 61, no. 1: 85–109.
Krugman, P. and Taylor, L., 1978, “Contractionary effects of devaluation”, Journal of
International Economics, 8, 445–456.
Lizondo, S. and Montiel, P. J., 1989, “Contractionary devaluation in developing
countries: an analytical overview”, IMF Staff Papers, 36, 182–227.
Moreno, R., 1999, “Depreciations and Recessions in East Asia”, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Economic Review, 3, 27–40.
Obstfeld, M. and Rogoff, K., 1995, “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux”, The Journal
of Political Economy, 103 (3), 624-660.
Shi, J., 2006, “Adjustment of Global Imbalances and Its Impact on China’s Economy”,
China and World Economy, Vol. 14, no.3, 71-85.
                                           29
Shi, J. and Yu, H., 2005, “Renminbi Equilibrium Exchange Rate and China’s
Exchange Rate Misalignment: 1991-2004”, Economic Research Journal (Jingji
Yanjiu), Vol. 40, no. 4, 34-45.
Sims, C., 1980, “Macroeconomics and reality”, Econometrica 48, 1–48.
Sims, C., Stock, J. and Watson, M., 1990, “Inference in Linear Time Series Models
with Some Unit Roots” Econometrica 58, no.1: 113–44.
Van Wijnbergen S. V., 1986, “Exchange rate management and stabilization policies
in developing countries”, Journal of Development Economics, 23, 227-247.




                                         30
   9.000
   8.500
   8.000
   7.500
   7.000
   6.500
   6.000
   5.500
   5.000
   4.500
   4.000




       5
       6
       0
       1
       2
       3
       4
       5
       6
       7
       8
       9
       0
       1
       2
       3
       4
     -0
     -0
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -9
     -0
     -0
     -0
     -0
     -0


   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
   03
       Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics.




             Figure 2   RMB Real Exchange Rate and Real GDP

       4.9                                                                   6

       4.8                                                                   4


       4.7                                                                   2

       4.6                                                                   0


       4.5                                                                   -2

       4.4                                                                   -4

       4.3                                                                   -6
                1992    1994    1996     1998     2000     2002    2004

                               REER(left)         GDP(right)


Note: 1. REER stands for RMB real exchange rate index with a rise indicating an
appreciation; 2. GDP stands for detrended real gross domestic product. See section 3 for the
definition and explanation of the variables.



                                          31
Figure 3: Impulse Responses of GDP to Cholesky One S.D. shocks ± 2 S.E.
                          Response to GDPF                                      Response to INFL                                     Response to REER                                               Response to GDP
            1.0                                                 1.0                                                   1.0                                                   1.0



            0.5                                                 0.5                                                   0.5                                                   0.5
 Model_1


            0.0                                                 0.0                                                   0.0                                                   0.0



           -0.5                                                 -0.5                                                  -0.5                                                  -0.5



           -1.0                                                 -1.0                                                  -1.0                                                  -1.0
                  2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20


                          Response to GDPF                                      Response to INFL                                     Response to REER                                               Response to GDP                                                             Response to GOV
            1.2                                                  1.2                                                   1.2                                                   1.2                                                                        1.2


            0.8                                                  0.8                                                   0.8                                                   0.8                                                                        0.8


            0.4                                                                                                        0.4                                                   0.4                                                                        0.4
 Model_2




                                                                 0.4

            0.0                                                  0.0                                                   0.0                                                   0.0                                                                        0.0


           -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                  -0.4                                                  -0.4                                                                        -0.4


           -0.8                                                 -0.8                                                  -0.8                                                  -0.8                                                                        -0.8


           -1.2                                                 -1.2                                                  -1.2                                                  -1.2                                                                        -1.2
                  2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20            2       4       6        8       10    12    14    16    18    20

                                                                                Response to INFL                                     Response to REER                                                   Response to GDP                                                                 Response to M2
                          Response to GDPF
                                                                                                                       1.2                                                    1.2                                                                         1.2
            1.2                                                  1.2

                                                                                                                       0.8                                                    0.8                                                                         0.8
            0.8                                                  0.8

                                                                                                                       0.4                                                    0.4                                                                         0.4
            0.4                                                  0.4
  Model_3




                                                                                                                       0.0                                                    0.0                                                                         0.0
            0.0                                                  0.0

                                                                                                                      -0.4                                                   -0.4                                                                        -0.4
           -0.4                                                 -0.4

                                                                                                                      -0.8                                                   -0.8                                                                        -0.8
           -0.8                                                 -0.8

                                                                -1.2                                                  -1.2                                                   -1.2                                                                        -1.2
           -1.2
                                                                                                                             2   4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20               2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20               2       4       6        8    10    12    14    16    18    20
                  2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20



                          Response to GDPF                                      Response to INFL                                     Response to REER                                                   Response to GDP                                                             Response to RUS
            0.8                                                   0.8                                                 0.8                                                     0.8                                                                         0.8



            0.4                                                   0.4                                                 0.4                                                     0.4                                                                         0.4
  Model_4




            0.0                                                   0.0                                                 0.0                                                     0.0                                                                         0.0



           -0.4                                                  -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                   -0.4                                                                        -0.4



           -0.8                                                  -0.8                                                 -0.8                                                   -0.8                                                                        -0.8



           -1.2                                                  -1.2                                                 -1.2                                                   -1.2                                                                        -1.2
                  2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20               2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20               2       4       6        8    10    12    14    16    18    20




                                                                                                                                          32
Figure 4: Impulse Responses of REER to Cholesky One S.D. shocks ± 2 S.E.
                                  Response to GDPF                                                           Response to INFL                                                                 Response to REER                                                                                                 Response to GDP
           .06                                                                      .06                                                                          .06                                                                                                      .06

           .04                                                                      .04                                                                          .04                                                                                                      .04

           .02                                                                      .02                                                                          .02                                                                                                      .02
 Model_1


           .00                                                                      .00                                                                          .00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .00

      -.02                                                                          -.02                                                                         -.02                                                                                                 -.02

      -.04                                                                          -.04                                                                         -.04                                                                                                 -.04

      -.06                                                                          -.06                                                                         -.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.06
                  2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18   20            2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20                 2       4       6       8       10        12        14        16        18        20                     2           4           6           8           10    12        14        16        18        20


                                  Response to GDPF                                                           Response to INFL                                                                 Response to REER                                                                                                 Response to GDP                                                                                             Response to GOV
                                                                                      .06                                                                         .06                                                                                                     .06                                                                                                                      .06
           .06

                                                                                      .04                                                                         .04                                                                                                     .04                                                                                                                      .04
           .04

                                                                                                                                                                  .02                                                                                                     .02                                                                                                                      .02
 Model_2




           .02                                                                        .02

                                                                                      .00                                                                         .00                                                                                                     .00                                                                                                                      .00
           .00

                                                                                                                                                                 -.02                                                                                                     -.02                                                                                                                     -.02
      -.02                                                                           -.02

                                                                                     -.04                                                                        -.04                                                                                                     -.04                                                                                                                     -.04
      -.04

                                                                                     -.06                                                                        -.06                                                                                                     -.06                                                                                                                     -.06
      -.06

                                                                                     -.08                                                                        -.08                                                                                                     -.08                                                                                                                     -.08
      -.08
                                                                                                 2       4       6       8   10    12    14    16    18    20                 2       4       6       8       10        12        14        16        18        20                     2           4           6           8           10        12        14        16        18        20                2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20
                  2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Response to GDP                                                                                             Response to M2
                                  Response to GDPF                                                               Response to INFL                                                                 Response to REER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .06                                                                                                                     .06
           .06                                                                        .06                                                                           .06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .04                                                                                                                     .04
           .04                                                                        .04                                                                           .04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .02                                                                                                                     .02
                                                                                      .02                                                                           .02
 Model_3




           .02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .00                                                                                                                     .00
           .00                                                                        .00                                                                           .00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.02                                                                                                                    -.02
           -.02                                                                      -.02                                                                          -.02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.04                                                                                                                    -.04
           -.04                                                                      -.04                                                                          -.04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.06                                                                                                                    -.06
           -.06                                                                      -.06                                                                          -.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2           4           6           8        10        12        14        16        18        20               2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20
                  2       4        6      8       10    12    14    16    18   20                2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20                    2       4       6       8        10        12        14        16        18        20


                                  Response to GDPF                                                               Response to INFL                                                                 Response to REER                                                                                                 Response to GDP                                                                                             Response to RUS
            .06                                                                        .06                                                                              .06                                                                                                      .06                                                                                                                 .06


            .04                                                                        .04                                                                              .04                                                                                                      .04                                                                                                                 .04


                                                                                       .02                                                                                                                                                                                       .02                                                                                                                 .02
  Model_4




            .02                                                                                                                                                         .02

            .00                                                                        .00                                                                              .00                                                                                                      .00                                                                                                                 .00


           -.02                                                                       -.02                                                                          -.02                                                                                                        -.02                                                                                                                -.02


           -.04                                                                       -.04                                                                          -.04                                                                                                        -.04                                                                                                                -.04


           -.06                                                                       -.06                                                                          -.06                                                                                                        -.06                                                                                                                -.06
                      2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16   18   20                2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20                    2       4       6       8        10        12        14        16        18        20                        2           4           6           8        10        12        14        16        18        20               2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                          33
Figure 5: Impulse Responses of GDP from VARs with different ordering
                         Response to GDPF                                 Response to REER                                            Response to INFL                                                          Response to GDP
           1.0                                              1.0                                             1.0                                                                        1.0



           0.5                                              0.5                                             0.5                                                                        0.5
 Model_1


           0.0                                              0.0                                             0.0                                                                        0.0



       -0.5                                                -0.5                                             -0.5                                                                      -0.5



       -1.0                                                -1.0                                            -1.0                                                                       -1.0
                 2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20      2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20         2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20          2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20


                         Response to GDPF                                 Response to REER                                            Response to INFL                                                          Response to GDP                                                   Response to GOV
           1.2                                             1.2                                               1.2                                                                       1.2                                                                          1.2


           0.8                                             0.8                                               0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                          0.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
 Model_2




           0.4                                             0.4                                               0.4                                                                       0.4


           0.0                                             0.0                                               0.0                                                                       0.0                                                                          0.0


       -0.4                                               -0.4                                              -0.4                                                                      -0.4                                                                         -0.4


       -0.8                                               -0.8                                              -0.8                                                                      -0.8                                                                         -0.8


       -1.2                                               -1.2                                              -1.2                                                                      -1.2                                                                         -1.2
                 2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20      2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20         2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20          2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20


                         Response to GDPF                                 Response to REER                                            Response to INFL                                                          Response to GDP                                                   Response to M2
           1.2                                              1.2                                                 1.2                                                                    1.2                                                                         1.2

           0.8                                              0.8                                                 0.8                                                                    0.8                                                                         0.8

                                                            0.4                                                 0.4                                                                    0.4                                                                         0.4
 Model_3




           0.4

           0.0                                              0.0                                                 0.0                                                                    0.0                                                                         0.0

       -0.4                                                -0.4                                              -0.4                                                                     -0.4                                                                         -0.4

       -0.8                                                -0.8                                              -0.8                                                                     -0.8                                                                         -0.8

       -1.2                                                -1.2                                              -1.2                                                                     -1.2                                                                         -1.2

       -1.6                                                -1.6                                              -1.6                                                                     -1.6                                                                         -1.6
                 2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20      2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20             2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20         2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20


                         Response to GDPF                                 Response to REER                                                Response to INFL                                                      Response to GDP                                                   Response to RUS
           0.8                                                                                                  0.8                                                                       0.8                                                                      0.8
                                                            0.8


           0.4                                              0.4                                                 0.4                                                                       0.4                                                                      0.4
  Model_4




           0.0                                              0.0                                                 0.0                                                                       0.0                                                                      0.0


       -0.4                                                -0.4                                              -0.4                                                                      -0.4                                                                        -0.4


       -0.8                                                                                                  -0.8                                                                      -0.8                                                                        -0.8
                                                           -0.8


       -1.2                                                                                                  -1.2                                                                      -1.2                                                                        -1.2
                                                           -1.2
                 2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20      2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20             2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20             2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20         2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20




                                                                                                                                                  34
Figure 6: Impulse Responses of GDP from VEC Models

                          Response to GDPF                                      Response to INFL                                                      Response to REER                                                                                                   Response to GDP
            .8                                                     .8                                                  .8                                                                                                                 .8



            .4                                                     .4                                                  .4                                                                                                                 .4
  VECM_1



            .0                                                     .0                                                  .0                                                                                                                 .0



           -.4                                                    -.4                                                 -.4                                                                                                             -.4



           -.8                                                    -.8                                                 -.8                                                                                                             -.8
                  2   4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2           4           6           8           10        12        14        16        18        20               2           4           6           8           10        12        14        16        18        20



                          Response to GDPF                                      Response to INFL                                                      Response to REER                                                                                                   Response to GDP                                                                                   Response to GOV
           1.2                                                   1.2                                                  1.2                                                                                                                 1.2                                                                                                                1.2


           0.8                                                   0.8                                                  0.8                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                                                                0.8


           0.4                                                   0.4                                                  0.4                                                                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                0.4
  VECM_2




           0.0                                                   0.0                                                  0.0                                                                                                                 0.0                                                                                                                0.0


       -0.4                                                      -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                                                                            -0.4                                                                                                               -0.4


       -0.8                                                      -0.8                                                 -0.8                                                                                                            -0.8                                                                                                               -0.8


       -1.2                                                      -1.2                                                 -1.2                                                                                                            -1.2                                                                                                               -1.2
                  2   4   6    8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20           2           4            6          8           10        12        14        16        18        20                   2           4           6           8        10        12        14        16        18        20             2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20


                          Response to GDPF                                      Response to INFL                                                      Response to REER                                                                                                   Response to GDP                                                                                   Response to M2
           1.2                                                    1.2                                                  1.2                                                                                                                1.2                                                                                                                1.2

           0.8                                                    0.8                                                  0.8                                                                                                                0.8                                                                                                                0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
  VECM_3




           0.4                                                    0.4                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4


           0.0                                                    0.0                                                  0.0                                                                                                                0.0                                                                                                                0.0


           -0.4                                                  -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                                                                            -0.4                                                                                                               -0.4

           -0.8                                                  -0.8                                                 -0.8                                                                                                            -0.8                                                                                                               -0.8


           -1.2                                                  -1.2                                                 -1.2                                                                                                            -1.2                                                                                                               -1.2
                  2   4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20               2           4           6           8        10        12        14        16        18        20                  2           4           6           8        10        12        14        16        18        20             2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20


                          Response to GDPF                                      Response to INFL                                                          Response to REER                                                                                                   Response to GDP                                                                               Response to RUS
           0.5                                                    0.5                                                   0.5                                                                                                                0.5                                                                                                               0.5



           0.0                                                    0.0                                                   0.0                                                                                                                0.0                                                                                                               0.0
  VECM_4




           -0.5                                                  -0.5                                                  -0.5                                                                                                               -0.5                                                                                                           -0.5



           -1.0                                                  -1.0                                                  -1.0                                                                                                               -1.0                                                                                                           -1.0



           -1.5                                                  -1.5                                                  -1.5                                                                                                               -1.5                                                                                                           -1.5
                  2   4    6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20                   2           4           6           8        10        12        14        16        18        20                  2           4           6           8        10        12        14        16        18        20         2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20




Note: impulse response standard errors are not available for VEC model in EViews soft-package
that we used in this study.




                                                                                                                                                                      35
Figure 7: Impulse Responses of GDP from VARs with RUS substituting for GDPF
                          Response to RUS                                      Response to INFL                                             Response to REER                                                            Response to GDP
            0.8                                                  0.8                                                 0.8                                                                    0.8


            0.4                                                  0.4                                                 0.4                                                                    0.4


 Model_1    0.0                                                  0.0                                                 0.0                                                                    0.0


           -0.4                                                 -0.4                                             -0.4                                                                      -0.4


           -0.8                                                 -0.8                                             -0.8                                                                      -0.8


           -1.2                                                 -1.2                                             -1.2                                                                      -1.2
                  2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20            2       4       6       8       10        12        14        16        18        20

                          Response to RUS                                      Response to INFL                                             Response to REER                                                            Response to GDP                                                                         Response to GOV
           0.8                                                   0.8                                                 0.8                                                                    0.8                                                                                                  0.8


           0.4                                                   0.4                                                 0.4                                                                    0.4                                                                                                  0.4
 Model_2




           0.0                                                   0.0                                                 0.0                                                                    0.0                                                                                                  0.0


           -0.4                                                 -0.4                                             -0.4                                                                       -0.4                                                                                                -0.4


           -0.8                                                 -0.8                                             -0.8                                                                       -0.8                                                                                                -0.8


           -1.2                                                 -1.2                                             -1.2                                                                       -1.2                                                                                                -1.2
                  2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2       4       6       8       10    12    14    16    18    20            2       4       6       8       10        12        14        16        18        20            2   4   6     8   10   12   14   16   18   20


                          Response to RUS                                      Response to INFL                                             Response to REER                                                                Response to GDP                                                                         Response to M2
            0.8                                                 0.8                                                   0.8                                                                         0.8                                                                                             0.8


            0.4                                                 0.4                                                   0.4                                                                         0.4                                                                                             0.4
 Model_3




            0.0                                                 0.0                                                   0.0                                                                         0.0                                                                                             0.0


           -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                 -0.4                                                                       -0.4                                                                                             -0.4


           -0.8                                                 -0.8                                                 -0.8                                                                       -0.8                                                                                             -0.8


           -1.2                                                 -1.2                                                 -1.2                                                                       -1.2                                                                                             -1.2
                  2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20          2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20              2       4       6       8    10    12    14    16    18    20               2       4       6       8        10        12        14        16        18        20       2   4   6     8   10   12   14   16   18   20




                                                                                                                                                    36
                         Table 1 Pairwise Granger Causality Tests
                                 Sample: 1991Q1--2005Q3
       Null Hypothesis:                             Obs  F-Statistic                 Probability
       GDP does not Granger Cause REER              55      2.65                        0.04
       REER does not Granger Cause GDP                      2.85                        0.03
                               Subsample: 1991Q1--1999Q4
       Null Hypothesis:                             Obs  F-Statistic                 Probability
       GDP does not Granger Cause REER              32      3.69                        0.02
       REER does not Granger Cause GDP                      9.38                        0.00
                               Subsample: 2000Q1--2005Q3
       Null Hypothesis:                             Obs  F-Statistic                 Probability
       GDP does not Granger Cause REER              23      0.86                        0.51
       REER does not Granger Cause GDP                      0.52                        0.72




                                    Table 2 Unit Root Tests
                                      Level                                 First Difference
                     ADF Test             Phillips-Perron Test   ADF Test            Phillips-Perron Test
GDP                  -1.53*               -1.45*                 -1.88*              -9.26**
REER                 -1.27*               -1.37*                 -5.56**             -5.69**
INFL                 -1.24*               -1.89*                 -12.00**            -11.38**
GDPF                 -2.26*               -2.64***               -7.00**             -7.02**
GOV                  1.12*                1.21*                  -6.10**             -10.10**
M2                   0.20*                -0.44*                 -3.91**             -6.01**
RUS                  -1.61*               -1.87*                 -6.42**             -6.44**
* denotes that the hypothesis that the variable contain unit root can not be rejected at the 10 per
cent level of significance.
*** denotes that the hypothesis that the variable contain unit root can not be rejected at the 5 per
cent level of significance.
** denotes the rejection of the hypothesis that the variable contain unit root at the 1 per cent level
of significance.




                                                   37
Table 3 Cointegration Tests for Alternative Specifications
   Hypothesized    Eigenvalue     -Trace Statistics   -Max Statistics
   No. of CE(s)
                Model 1: Series: GDPF INFL REER GDP
       None           0.68             94.67*            62.30*
    At most 1         0.26             32.38*             16.73
    At most 2         0.19             15.65*             11.54
    At most 3         0.07              4.11*             4.11*
           Model 2: Series: GDPF INFL GOV REER GDP
       None           0.70             149.45*           65.79*
    At most 1         0.56             83.66*            45.72*
    At most 2         0.35             37.95*            23.93*
    At most 3         0.17              14.01             10.02
    At most 4         0.07              4.00*             4.00*
              Model 3: Series: GDPF M2 INFL REER GDP
       None           0.69             137.91*           63.97*
    At most 1         0.62             73.94*            52.53*
    At most 2         0.25              21.42             15.68
    At most 3         0.10              5.73               5.70
    At most 4         0.00              0.03               0.03
            Model 4: Series: RUS GDPF INFL REER GDP
       None           0.70             154.51*           66.46*
    At most 1         0.67             88.04*            60.79*
    At most 2         0.27              27.25             17.00
    At most 3         0.15              10.25              8.79
    At most 4         0.03              1.47               1.47
* denotes rejection of the hypothesis at the 0.05 level of significance.
Note: Lags interval (in first differences): 1 to 3




                                  38
    Table 4      Variance Decompositions of GDP and REER from VAR Models
                                        Model_1
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP
   1    0.9   0.6   4.6    0.8    2.4   1.4        30.7   97.8   62.3   0.0
   2    1.2   0.7   3.3    1.0    2.9   5.1        33.0   93.4   60.8   0.5
   3    1.5   0.7   4.9    1.8    2.6   6.1        40.3   89.9   52.2   2.2
   4    1.6   0.7   7.1    1.5    2.5   8.6        44.5   83.1   45.9   6.8
   8    1.8   1.3   5.0    2.0    3.0   14.8       63.4   65.8   28.5   17.4
   12   1.8   1.6   4.4    2.0    4.9   16.5       68.1   53.8   22.6   27.7
   20   1.9   1.8   3.9    1.7    8.2   15.2       63.2   49.4   24.8   33.8
                                        Model_2
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP           GOV
   1    1.0   0.6   8.4    0.8    0.0   0.2        36.7   96.0   47.5   0.0    7.3        3.1
   2    1.3   0.6   6. 7   1.0    0.2   1.3        43.2   96.3   43.1   0.0    6.9        1.4
   3    1.5   0.7   11.0   2.0    0.3   2.0        50.6   94.3   32.9   0.0    5.1        1.8
   4    1.7   0.8   16.0   2.0    0.3   3.2        51.4   91.7   26.7   0.9    5.7        2.4
   8    1.8   1.2   16.0   2.1    0.7   6.6        68.0   85.9   12.3   2.6    3.5        2.7
   12   1.9   1.4   14.0   4.0    1.7   8.4        72.4   78.8   8.1    6.2    3.9        2.6
   20   2.1   1.8   13.0   15.6   3.5   5.2        70.2   68.6   8.4    6.0    5.3        4.7
                                        Model_3
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP               M2
   1    1.0   0.0   5.8    0.5    1.6   1.4        29.4   96.3   48.2   0.0    15.0       1.8
   2    1.3   0.0   3.9    0.3    2.1   6.8        30.7   88.0   37.3   0.3    25.9       4.5
   3    1.5   0.0   5.3    0.4    1.8   7.9        36.4   82.3   27.6   0.7    28.9       8.8
   4    1.7   0.0   7.3    0.3    1.9   8.7        37.9   78.6   22.5   2.1    30.4   10.2
   8    1.8   0.0   6.1    0.5    4.8   12.0       51.5   72.5   9.9    4.3    27.7   10.7
   12   1.9   0.1   4.6    3.1    7.5   12.1       54.8   66.8   7.3    6.4    25.8   11.6
   20   2.1   0.1   6.5    5.5    9.0   8.9        52.3   59.9   7.8    4.0    24.4   21.6
                                        Model_4
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP           RUS
   1    0.5   1.0   13.2   2.6    0.7   8.2        12.4   85.3   61.9   0.0    11.8       3.9
   2    0.8   1.2   10.5   3.4    0.5   13.3       10.7   77.1   53.5   1.5    24.7       4.7
   3    0.9   1.5   14.8   5.5    0.8   12.2       11.2   70.7   42.8   3.7    30.4       7.9
   4    1.0   1.7   18.5   4.7    1.1   13.1       9.5    63.9   35.1   6.3    35.8   12.0
   8    1.2   1.8   14.8   6.3    0.6   15.1       9.3    54.6   16.3   8.6    58.9   15.4
   12   1.4   1.9   10.2   5.6    2.2   16.5       7.8    52.6   11.3   12.1   68.5   13.1
   20   1.7   2.0   12.0   4.1    4.1   13.5       6.6    40.4   12.8   11.6   64.6   30.4
Note: 1. The two columns below a variable give the fraction of the forecast error variance for
GDP and REER that is attributable to shocks to the variable at the given forecast horizon,
with the black column in left indicating the fraction for GDP.
2. The columns below “S.E.” contain the forecast error of GDP and REER at the given
forecast horizon.


                                              39
    Table 5      Variance Decompositions of GDP and REER from VEC Models
                                        Model_1
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP
   1    1.0   0.6   2.7    0.2    3.1   2.8        30.4   97.1   63.8   0.0
   2    1.5   0.7   1.7    0.1    4.2   8.4        29.9   91.0   64.2   0.6
   3    2.0   0.7   2.0    0.2    4.0   11.1       35.2   86.6   58.8   2.2
   4    2.5   0.8   2.8    0.1    4.5   14.6       39.0   79.4   53.8   5.9
   8    3.3   1.9   1.6    0.0    3.7   22.7       59.9   67.6   34.8   9.7
   12   4.0   2.8   1.1    0.1    3.3   24.9       70.1   63.8   25.4   11.2
   20   5.1   4.2   0.8    0.1    2.8   26.2       78.6   61.6   17.8   12.1
                                        Model_2
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP           GOV
   1    1.0   0.6   8.3    0.5    0.1   0.4        37.8   95.3   45.9   0.0    7.8        3.8
   2    1.4   0.6   6.7    0.8    0.2   1.7        45.6   95.7   40.6   0.0    6.9        1.8
   3    1.8   0.7   11.9   2.0    0.3   2.3        53.2   94.2   29.7   0.0    5.0        1.5
   4    2.0   0.7   18.4   2.1    0.3   3.0        53.6   92.7   22.6   0.4    5.1        1.8
   8    2.4   1.3   23.0   6.0    0.1   3.1        67.0   88.8   7.6    0.6    2.2        1.5
   12   2.7   1.5   27.2   10.0   0.1   2.6        67.3   84.9   3.5    1.0    2.0        1.6
   20   3.8   1.6   33.0   11.3   0.1   2.4        63.2   82.9   1.6    1.2    2.2        2.1
                                        Model_3
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP               M2
   1    1.0   0.0   4.4    0.7    2.3   1.8        29.9   94.8   46.4   0.0    17.0       2.7
   2    1.5   0.0   3.0    0.4    2.9   7.0        32.1   86.2   33.9   0.2    28.1       6.3
   3    2.0   0.0   3.3    0.4    2.9   8.2        39.1   79.6   23.2   0.3    31.5   11.5
   4    2.5   0.0   4.5    0.3    3.1   8.9        42.0   76.3   17.4   1.0    32.9   13.5
   8    3.3   0.0   5.0    0.3    4.1   9.8        55.8   70.5   5.6    0.7    29.5   18.8
   12   4.1   0.1   5.2    0.3    4.6   10.3       58.6   68.1   2.6    0.6    29.0   20.7
   20   5.5   0.1   5.6    0.9    4.8   10.6       58.6   66.8   1.3    0.7    29.6   21.0
                                        Model_4
   T      S.E.        GDPF          INFL             REER          GDP           RUS
   1    0.5   1.0   13.6   1.5    1.0   10.4       12.0   81.5   58.9   0.0    14.6       6.6
   2    0.7   1.5   10.4   1.4    0.7   17.1       10.3   71.1   47.8   1.4    30.8       9.0
   3    1.1   2.0   14.9   2.0    0.6   17.0       11.3   63.6   34.1   2.9    39.2   14.5
   4    1.3   2.5   19.4   1.3    0.6   18.4       9.7    55.8   24.7   4.1    45.7   20.4
   8    2.0   3.5   17.1   0.5    0.3   22.6       12.4   43.5   7.1    2.9    63.2   30.5
   12   2.4   4.4   12.3   0.9    1.2   26.3       13.9   39.6   2.9    2.4    69.7   30.8
   20   2.9   5.6   8.1    2.2    2.7   31.3       14.3   37.9   1.2    2.0    73.7   26.6
Note: 1. The two columns below a variable give the fraction of the forecast error variance for
GDP and REER that is attributable to shocks to the variable at the given forecast horizon,
with the black column in left indicating the fraction for GDP.
2. The columns below “S.E.” contain the forecast error of GDP and REER at the given
forecast horizon.



                                              40
 Table 6    Variance Decompositions of GDP from VAR Models with RUS
                                   Model_1
               T    S.E.   RUS    INFL REER         GDP
                1    0.5    6.8     0.1     24.4    68.8
                2    0.8   10.1     3.7     23.4    62.8
                3    0.9   13.7     6.0     26.2    54.18
                4    1.0   18.2     6.4     25.8    49.6
                8    1.2   46.9     2.7     26.9    23.6
               12    1.4   58.0     2.3     23.4    16.2
               20    1.7   55.7     4.7     20.1    19.6
                                   Model_2
               T    S.E.   RUS    INFL REER         GDP     GOV
                1    0.6    8.0     0.0     26.6    63.1     2.3
                2    0.8    9.8     5.9     23.9    58.7     1.7
                3    0.9   13.0    10.3     25.2    49.9     1.5
                4    1.0   16.5    11.4     24.3    44.4     3.4
                8    1.2   42.8     7.0     23.4    23.7     3.1
               12    1.3   59.1     4.7     17.6    16.2     2.4
               20    1.6   54.9     7.6     16.5    19.0     2.1
                                    Model_3
               T    S.E.   RUS    INFL REER         GDP      M2
                1    0.5    7.8     0.1     22.3    59.6     10.2
                2    0.8    8.6     0.8     18.3    48.4     23.9
                3    0.9   11.7     2.2     18.9    39.9     27.3
                4    1.0   14.5     2.5     18.3    36.3     28.4
                8    1.1   42.9     1.6     16.7    20.1     18.7
               12    1.3   60.6     1.1     11.7    13.6     13.0
               20    1.6   57.9     1.9     12.1    14.3     13.9
Note: 1. The column below a variable gives the fraction of the forecast error variance for
GDP that is attributable to shocks to the variable at the given forecast horizon.
2. The column below “S.E.” contains the forecast error of GDP at the given forecast
horizon.




                                       41
