NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED STOCK RETURNS
Dmitry Livdan
Horacio Sapriza
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 12555
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12555

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

We acknowledge helpful suggestions from Joao Gomes, Leonid Kogan, Martin Schneider (AFA discussant),
Amir Yaron, and participants at the American Finance Association Annual Meetings for 2005 in Philadelphia.
Most of this work was completed while Lu Zhang was on the faculty of University of Rochester's
Simon School of Business, whose support is gratefully acknowledged. This paper supersedes our working
paper previously circulated under the title "A neoclassical model of financially constrained stock returns.''
All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Dmitry Livdan, Horacio Sapriza, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Financially Constrained Stock Returns
Dmitry Livdan, Horacio Sapriza, and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 12555
October 2006
JEL No. G12,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
More financially constrained firms are riskier and earn higher expected returns than less financially
constrained firms, although this effect can be subsumed by size and book-to-market. Further, because
the stochastic discount factor makes capital investment more procyclical, financial constraints are
more binding in economic booms. These insights arise from two dynamic models. In Model 1, firms
face dividend nonnegativity constraints without any access to external funds. In Model 2, firms can
retain earnings, raise debt and equity, but face collateral constraints on debt capacity. Despite their
diverse structures, the two models share largely similar predictions.
Dmitry Livdan
Mays School of Business
Texas A&M University
351-J Wehner Hall
College Station, TX 77843-4218
DLivdan@mays.tamu.edu
Horacio Sapriza
Department of Finance and Economics
Rutgers Business School - Newark
and New Brunswick
111 Washington Street
MEC Building, Room 122
Neward NJ 07102
hsapriza@andromeda.rutgers.edu

Lu Zhang
Associate Professor of Finance
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street, ER 7605 Bus Ad
Ann Arbor MI, 48109-1234
and NBER
zhanglu@bus.umich.edu

1

Introduction

Corporate finance and macroeconomics have studied in depth the effects of financial constraints on
firm value, capital investment, and business cycles.1 A small but growing asset pricing literature
asks how these constraints affect risk and expected returns. Using the Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
index of financial constraints, Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001) report a puzzling finding that
more constrained firms earn lower average returns than less constrained firms. However, using an
alternative index estimated from investment Euler equation, Whited and Wu (2006) find that more
constrained firms earn higher average returns than less constrained firms, although the difference
is insignificant. Finally, Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang (2006) find that financial constraints provide
a common factor for the cross section of returns, but somewhat surprisingly, the shadow price of
external funds is procyclical, so that financial constraints are more binding in economic booms.
We use neoclassical economics to study the structural relations between financial constraints,
stock returns, and economic fluctuations. Conflicting evidence and competing interpretations are
difficult to evaluate without models that tie the characteristics in question to risk and expected
returns. We try to fill this gap using two dynamic models. In Model 1, firms face dividend nonnegativity constraints without access to external equity or debt. Model 2 is more realistic as firms can
retain earnings, raise debt and equity, but face collateral constraints that limit their debt capacity.
Despite their diverse structures, these two models share largely similar predictions. Small firms,
less profitable firms, and firms already in debt are more likely to be constrained. More important,
more constrained firms are riskier and earn higher expected returns than less constrained firms.
However, this effect can largely be subsumed quantitatively by market capitalization and book-tomarket equity. Further, financial constraints are more binding in economic booms, a pattern driven
by the stochastic discount factor that makes capital investment more sensitive to aggregate shocks.
1
An incomplete list of this voluminous literature includes Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), Bernanke and
Gertler (1989), Whited (1992), Bond and Meghir (1994), Gertler and Gilchrist (1994), Kaplan and Zingales (1997),
Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), Gomes (2001), Hennessy (2004), Moyen (2004),
Almeida and Campello (2005), and Henessy and Whited (2006).

2

Our explicitly-solved models provide rich insights on the precise economic mechanisms driving
the model predictions. Intuitively, the shadow price of new funds for a given firm is determined
by its financial gap, the difference between its investment demand and internal funds. The higher
the gap, the more financially constrained the firm will be. For small firms with small scale of
production, internal funds are low, but investment demands are high because of decreasing return to
scale. Moreover, all else equal, firms with more debt have less internal funds available for investment
because of debt payments. Accordingly, small firms and firms already in debt are more constrained.
Aggregate and firm-specific productivity shocks have two offsetting effects on the financial gap.
A positive shock raises internal funds, but it also raises investment demands because the shock
increases the conditional mean of productivity. For firm-specific shocks, the effect on internal funds
dominates, therefore more profitable firms are less constrained. For aggregate shocks, the effect on
investment demands dominates, therefore firms are more constrained in economic booms.
Our first contribution concerns the role of the stochastic discount factor in driving the procyclical shadow price of external funds. Unlike firm-specific shocks, aggregate shocks can affect the
stochastic discount factor, which provides a discount-rate channel through which aggregate shocks
can impact capital investment. Specifically, when a positive aggregate shock hits a firm, its real
investment increases because its capital stock becomes more productive (the cash-flow channel).
But the positive aggregate shock also causes the aggregate discount rate to fall, which in turn
causes the net present value of an additional unit of investment to go up, stimulating investment
even further (the discount-rate channel). The increase in investment demands exceeds the increase
in internal funds, generating a higher financial gap after the positive aggregate shock.
Our analysis explains why traditional, partial equilibrium investment models cannot generate
procyclical financial constraints. These models typically assume constant discount factors. Aggregate and firm-specific shocks affect investment symmetrically, therefore firms are more constrained
in bad times for the same reason why less profitable firms are more constrained. Our analysis
also suggests that procyclical financial constraints should appear in general equilibrium models
3

with stochastic discount factors. Indeed, Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang (2003) show that the implied
shadow price of new funds is procyclical in several well-known general equilibrium models (e.g.,
Bernanke and Gertler 1989; Carlstrom and Fuerst 1997; Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist 1999).
Our second contribution concerns the relation between financial constraints and expected returns. In our models, the shadow price of external funds is determined jointly with risk and expected
returns by underlying state variables. In equilibrium, small firms, less profitable firms, and firms
in debt are riskier and earn higher expected returns. But these firms are also more financially constrained, suggesting that more constrained firms are riskier and earn higher expected returns than
less constrained firms. This prediction arises because the shadow price contains information on the
underlying state variables that drive risk and expected returns. However, market capitalization
and book-to-market contain similar information. Using computational experiments, we find that
sorting on the shadow price alone generates significant average-return spreads, but the shadow price
largely loses its explanatory power once we control for market capitalization and book-to-market.
We also use our explicitly-solved models as laboratories to study quantitatively the empirical
determinants of the shadow price of external funds. Consistent with the evidence in Kaplan and
Zingales (1997) and Whited and Wu (2006), our quantitative results show that firms will be more
constrained financially if they have lower cash flow to assets, higher debt to assets, lower sales and
sales growth, lower dividends to assets, lower liquid assets or cash to assets, and higher Tobin’s Q.
More interesting, we run a horse race between the Kaplan-Zingales index and the Whited-Wu index
on our simulated data to evaluate their relative quality as empirical proxies for the shadow price
of external funds. We find that, although both indexes are positively correlated with the shadow
price, the Whited-Wu index appears more powerful than the Kaplan-Zingales index.
Our paper provides a comprehensive, theoretical analysis of the structural relation between
financial constraints and stock returns, facilitating the interpretation of the evidence in Lamont,
Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001), Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang (2006), and Whited and Wu (2006). Our
modeling of debt dynamics is heavily influenced by Hennessy and Whited (2005, 2006), but we add
4

aggregate shocks and asset pricing dynamics. More generally, our work belongs to the literature
that connects the cross section of returns to corporate policies and the real economy (e.g., Cochrane
1991, 1996; Berk, Green, and Naik 1999).2 We contribute to this literature by studying the impact
of financial constraints and debt dynamics on risk and expected returns.
The rest of the itinerary is as follows. Section 2 constructs the dynamic models. Sections 3 and
4 present qualitative and quantitative analyses of the models, respectively. Section 5 concludes.

2

The Dynamic Models

We present two dynamic models of financial constraints. In Model 1, firms have no access to external
equity markets, and cannot retain earnings or borrow debts. Although simplistic, this framework
has been used in much of the related literature, thereby providing a natural benchmark to start our
analysis. In Model 2, we allow firms to issue costly external equity, retain earnings, and borrow at
a risk-free rate. When borrowing, firms face collateral constraints that limit their debt capacity.

2.1

The Common Environment

We first present the environment common to both Models 1 and 2.
Technology
The production function is given by:
α
yjt = ext +zjt kjt

(1)

where yjt and kjt are the output and capital stock of firm j at period t, respectively. 0 < α < 1, so
the production technology exhibits decreasing returns to scale. Production is subject to both an
aggregate shock, xt , and a firm-specific shock, zjt .
The aggregate productivity shock has a stationary and monotone Markov transition function,
2
An incomplete list of other examples includes Berk (1995), Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003), Carlson, Fisher, and
Giammarino (2004, 2006), Kogan (2004), Pástor and Veronesi (2005), Zhang (2005), Cooper (2006), and Gala (2006).

5

denoted Qx (xt+1 |xt ), as follows:
xt+1 = x (1 − ρx ) + ρx xt + σ x εxt+1

(2)

where εxt+1 is an i.i.d. standard normal shock. In our models, the aggregate shock is the driving
force of economic fluctuations and systematic risk.
The firm-specific productivity shocks, denoted zjt , are uncorrelated across firms, indexed by j,
and have a common stationary and monotone Markov transition function, denoted Qz (zjt+1 |zjt ):
zjt+1 = ρz zjt + σ z εzjt+1

(3)

where εzjt+1 is an i.i.d. standard normal shock. εzjt+1 and εzit+1 are uncorrelated with each other
for any pair (i, j) with i 6= j. Moreover, εxt+1 is independent of εzjt+1 for all j. In our models, the
firm-specific shock is the ultimate driving force of firm heterogeneity.
Stochastic Discount Factor
Following Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), we use partial equilibrium models to focus on the link
between corporate policies and expected returns. The omission of consumer behavior can hopefully
be compensated by firm dynamics often absent from consumption-based asset pricing models.
Specifically, we parameterize the stochastic discount factor as follows:
log mt+1 = log η + γ t (xt − xt+1 )

(4)

γ t = γ 0 + γ 1 (xt − x)

(5)

where mt+1 denotes the stochastic discount factor from time t to t+1. 1 > η > 0, γ 0 > 0, and γ 1 < 0
are constant parameters. Equation (4) can be motivated as a reduced-form representation of the
intertemporal rate of substitution for a fictitious representative consumer. Following Zhang (2005),
we assume in equation (5) that γ t decreases in xt − x̄ to capture time-varying price of risk.3
3

We remain agnostic about the precise economic sources driving the countercyclical price of risk. Potential sources
include time-varying risk aversion in Campbell and Cochrane (1999), loss aversion in Barberis, Huang, and Santos

6

The Operating-Profit Function
The operating-profit function for firm j with capital stock kjt , idiosyncratic productivity zjt , and
aggregate productivity xt is:
α
π(kjt , zjt , xt ) = ext +zjt kjt
−f

(6)

where f > 0 is nonnegative fixed costs of production, which must be paid every period.
The Investment-Cost Function
When investing, firms incur purchase costs and capital adjustment costs. The total investment-cost
function, φ(ijt , kjt ), is assumed to be asymmetric and quadratic:
φ(ijt , kjt ) ≡ ijt +

aP 1ijt + aN (1 − 1ijt )
2



ijt
kjt

2

kjt

(7)

where 1ijt ≡ 1{ijt ≥0} with 1{·} being the indicator function that equals one if the event described
in {·} is true and zero otherwise. We assume aN > aP > 0 to capture costly reversibility (e.g., Abel
and Eberly 1994, 1996; Hall 2001); intuitively, firms face higher costs per unit of adjustment in
cutting than expanding their capital stocks. Zhang (2005) uses asymmetric adjustment costs to
address the value premium, the stylized fact that value firms with high book-to-market ratios earn
higher returns on average than growth firms with low book-to-market ratios. We instead use the
neoclassical framework to address the relation between financial constraints and expected returns.

2.2

Model 1: Dividend Nonnegativity Constraints

Model 1 captures financial constraints by shutting down the external equity markets.
Dividend Nonnegativity Constraints
We first model financial constraints parsimoniously as follows:
djt ≡ π(kjt , zjt , xt ) − φ(ijt , kjt ) ≥ 0
(2001), and time-varying economic uncertainty in Bansal and Yaron (2004).

7

(8)

Because negative dividends are equivalent to costless external equity, equation (8) basically denies
firms access to external equity. We also assume that firms cannot borrow or retain earnings.
Although simplistic, the dividend constraints are standard in the literature (e.g., Whited 1992,
Bond and Meghir 1994, Cooper and Ejarque 2003, Moyen 2004, Whited and Wu 2006, and Gomes,
Yaron, and Zhang 2006). We therefore use equation (8) as a natural benchmark to start our analysis.
Dynamic Value Maximization
Let v(kjt , zjt , xt ) denote the market value of firm j. Using Bellman’s Principle of Optimality, we
can state firm j’s dynamic value-maximization problem as:
v(kjt , zjt , xt ) =

max

{kjt+1 ,ijt }

{π(kjt , zjt , xt ) − φ(ijt , kjt ) + Et [mt+1 v(kjt+1 , zjt+1 , xt+1 )]}

(9)

subject to the equation of capital accumulation:
kjt+1 = ijt + (1 − δ)kjt

(10)

and the dividend nonnegativity constraint (8). The first two terms on the right-hand side of (9)
reflect current dividends that equal profits minus total investment costs.
The Shadow Price of New Equity
Let µjt ≡ µ(kjt , zjt , xt ) be the Lagrange multiplier associated with the dividend nonnegativity constraint in equation (8). The multiplier can be interpreted as the shadow price of external equity;
the higher µjt is, the more financially constrained firm j will be.
We show in Appendix A that:
µjt =

vk (kjt , zjt , xt )
−1
dk (kjt , ijt , zjt , xt )

(11)

where vk and dk denote the first-order derivatives of firm value and dividend, respectively, with
respect to capital stock, kjt . The interpretation of equation (11) is straightforward. All else equal,
firms with higher vk are more likely to be constrained. Intuitively, firms with higher marginal value
8

of capital will have higher investment demands, and therefore higher demands for external equity.
Moreover, firms in which an additional unit of capital can generate more dividend or dk is higher
are less financially constrained. This effect is again intuitive because higher internal funds alleviate
the demands for external equity.
Risk and Expected Excess Return
Evaluating the value function in equation (9) at the optimum yields:
vjt = djt + Et [mt+1 vjt+1 ]
which is equivalent to 1 = Et [mt+1 rjt+1 ], where the stock return rjt+1 ≡ vjt+1 /(vjt − djt ). Note that
vjt is the cum-dividend firm value because it is measured before the dividend is paid out. We can
further rewrite 1 = Et [mt+1 rjt+1 ] as the beta-pricing form (e.g., Cochrane 2001, p. 19):
Et [rjt+1 ] − rf t = β jt ζ mt

(12)

where rf t ≡ 1/Et [mt+1 ] is the real interest rate from period t to t+1, risk is defined by:
β jt ≡

−Covt [rjt+1 , mt+1 ]
Vart [mt+1 ]

(13)

and the price of risk is given by ζ mt ≡ Vart [mt+1 ]/Et [mt+1 ].

2.3

Model 2: Collateral Constraints

Although useful as a first stab at dynamic modeling of financial constraints, Model 1 has several
unrealistic features. In particular, firms cannot issue equity, borrow debt, or retain earnings. We
now introduce a more realistic but more complex model in which the unpalatable assumptions
in Model 1 are relaxed. In this alternative model, financial constraints are captured as collateral
constraints on the maximum amount of debt that firms can borrow.

9

The Collateral Constraints
For tractability, we follow Hennessy and Whited (2005) and model only single-period debt. Let
bjt+1 represent the face value of one-period debt chosen by firm j at beginning of period t with
payment due at the beginning of period t+1. Positive values of bjt+1 imply that the firm is borrowing
and negative values of bjt+1 imply that the firm is saving or retaining earnings.
When borrowing, firms face collateral constraints which require that the liquidation value of
capital net of depreciation is at least as high as the promised debt payment:
bjt+1 ≤ s(1 − δ)kjt+1

(14)

where 0 < s < 1 is a constant parameter. Effectively, we assume that in the event of liquidation,
capital can only be sold at a depressed price, s < 1. The portion (1− s) of capital is lost in the
liquidation process due to, for example, bankruptcy costs.
Because the collateral constraints guarantee that lenders always get repaid in full, all corporate
debts are riskless and their interest rates equal to the risk-free rate rf t . Accordingly, by committing
to repay bjt+1 at the beginning of t + 1, firm j obtains cash inflow bjt+1 /rf t at the beginning of
period t. For tractability, we do not model defaultable bonds.
Retained Earnings
Because of the collateral constraints, firms are not indifferent between savings and cash distributions. If a firm distributes a dollar to the shareholders today, this dollar invested on the Treasury
bills will be worth rf t next period. But the cost of distributing this dollar equals the cost of borrowing this dollar, rf t , plus the shadow price of an additional dollar of borrowing when the collateral
constraints are binding. Firms thus strictly prefer savings to distributions. If the interest rate
earned by corporate savings, denoted rst , equals the risk-free borrowing rate, rf t , firms will save
all the free cash flow and never distribute.
In practice, firms do distribute cash to shareholders because there are costs associated with
10

holding cash. Graham (2000) report that cash retentions are tax-disadvantaged because tax rates
generally exceed tax rates on interest income for bondholders. To capture this effect, we follow Hennessy, Levy, and Whited (2005) and assume that the saving rate is strictly less than the borrowing
rate, i.e., rst < rf t . Specifically:
rst = rf t − κ

(15)

where κ > 0 is a constant wedge between borrowing and saving rates. Cooley and Quadrini (2001)
provide further justification for rst < rf t . Suppose the two interest rates are equal, then in the
economy with financial frictions, firms would strictly prefer to reinvest profits. Doing so would
generate an excessive supply of loanable funds and the subsequent reduction in the saving rate, rst .
For notational simplicity, let 1bjt+1 ≡ 1{bjt+1 ≥0} be the indicator function that equals one if firm
j borrows new debt at time t and zero otherwise. Because bjt+1 is a choice variable, 1bjt+1 is known
at the beginning of time t. Further, we let
ιjt ≡ 1bjt+1 rf t + (1 − 1bjt+1 )rst

(16)

denote the interest rate applicable to firm j from time t to time t+1, known at the beginning of time t.
Costly External Equity
When the sum of the investment costs, φ(ijt , kjt ), and promised debt repayment, bjt , exceeds the
sum of internal funds, π jt , and cash inflows from issuing new debt, bjt+1 /ιjt , the firm can raise new
equity capital, ejt , to compensate for the financial slack:


bjt+1
ejt ≡ max φ(ijt , kjt ) + bjt − π(kjt , zjt , xt ) −
,0
ιjt

(17)

Motivated by empirical evidence (e.g., Smith 1977, Lee, Lochhead, Ritter, and Zhao 1996, and
Altinkilic and Hansen 2000), we assume that there are costs of issuing external equity. We specify

11

the total cost of issuing equity as:
λ(ejt , kjt ) =

λ0 1ejt

λ1
+
2



ejt
kjt

2

kjt

(18)

where λ0 , λ1 > 0 and 1ejt ≡ 1{ejt >0} is the indicator function that equals one if firm j issues external
equity and zero otherwise. The first term in the right hand side of equation (18) captures the fixed
costs of issuing equity and the second term captures the convex, variable costs.
On the other hand, when the sum of investment costs and debt repayments is lower than the
sum of internal funds and cash inflows from new debt, firms distribute the difference back to shareholders. We assume that firms do not incur any costs when distributing cash. We do not model
specific forms of the payout, cash dividends or open market share repurchases; the model only pins
down the total amount of payout.
Market Value of Equity, Risk, and Expected Returns
Define the effective dividend accrued to the shareholders as:
ojt ≡ π(kjt , zjt , xt ) +

bjt+1
− φ(ijt , kjt ) − bjt − λ(ejt , kjt )
ιjt

(19)

ojt can be negative because the new equity ejt from equation (17) can be positive.
Let v(kjt , bjt , zjt , xt ) denote the market value of equity for firm j. Using Bellman’s Principle of
Optimality, we can formulate its dynamic value-maximization problem as:
v(kjt , bjt , zjt , xt ) =

max

{ijt ,kjt+1 ,bjt+1 }

{ojt + Et [mt+1 v(kjt+1 , bjt+1 , zjt+1 , xt+1 )]}

(20)

subject to the collateral-constraint equation (14) and the capital-accumulation equation (10).
The definition of risk and expected excess return in Model 2 is similar to that in Model 1. Evaluating the value function in equation (20) at the optimum yields vjt = ojt + Et [mt+1 vjt+1 ] or equivalently, 1 = Et [mt+1 rjt+1 ], where the stock return rjt+1 ≡ vjt+1 /(vjt − ojt ). With rjt+1 defined, expected excess returns and risk can be defined in a similar way as equations (12) and (13) in Model 1.
12

The Shadow Price of New Debt
Let ν jt ≡ ν(kjt , bjt , zjt , xt ) be the Lagrange multiplier associated with the collateral constraint in
equation (14), or the shadow price of new debt. The higher ν jt is, the more financially constrained
firms will be. As shown in Appendix A, the first-order condition with respect to bjt+1 implies that:
ν jt =

1
λe (ejt , kjt )1ejt − Et [mt+1 λe (ejt+1 , kjt+1 )1ejt+1 ]
rf t

(21)

where λe (ejt , kjt ) is the first derivative of λ with respect to ejt when ejt > 0.
The interpretation of equation (21) is straightforward. Because debt and equity are two sources
of external funds, the shadow price of new debt depends on the tradeoff between debt and equity
finance. On the one hand, one additional unit of debt saves firm j an amount that equals the
marginal cost of equity finance, λe (ejt , kjt )1ejt . This marginal benefit of new debt must be discounted by rf t because the firm only raises 1/rf t dollar at the beginning of time t by agreeing to
pay one additional unit of debt, bjt+1 , at the beginning of period t+1. On the other hand, there are
costs associated with borrowing one additional unit of debt because it must be repaid. Having to
repay the debt at the beginning of period t+1 means that the firm must pay the marginal cost of
equity finance λe (ejt+1 , kjt+1 )1ejt+1 . This (stochastic) cost of borrowing must be discounted back
to the beginning of time t, as shown in the second term in equation (21).

3

Qualitative Analysis

Section 3.1 calibrates the model parameters and discusses briefly the numerical issues involved in
solving the models. Section 3.2 and 3.3 then provide qualitative analysis on the solutions to Models
1 and 2, respectively. Appendix B details the numerical algorithms.

3.1

Calibration

We calibrate all model parameters at the monthly frequency to be consistent with the empirical
literature. Table 1 reports the parameters. Following Gomes (2001) and Zhang (2005), we set the

13

capital share α to be 0.30 and the monthly rate of depreciation δ to be 0.01, which implies an annual
rate of 12%. The persistence of aggregate productivity process, ρx , is set to be 0.951/3 = 0.983, and
its conditional volatility, σ x , 0.007/3 = 0.0023. With the first-order autoregressive specification for
xt in equation (2), these monthly values correspond to 0.95 and 0.007 at the quarterly frequency,
respectively, consistent with Cooley and Prescott (1995).
Following Zhang (2005), we pin down the three parameters governing the stochastic discount factor, η, γ 0 , and γ 1 to match three aggregate return moments: the average Sharpe ratio; the average
real interest rate; and the volatility of real interest rate.4 This procedure yields η = 0.994, γ 0 = 50,
and γ 1 = −1000, which generate an average Sharpe ratio of 0.41, an average annual real interest
rate of 2.2%, and an annual volatility of real interest rate of 2.9%, similar to those in the data.
The adjustment-cost parameters, aP and aN , can be interpreted as the periods required to
expanding and cutting the capital stock, respectively, given one unit of change in the marginal q.
We set aP = 15 and aN = 150 months, respectively, close to the average estimates in the empirical investment literature. To calibrate the persistence ρz and the conditional volatility σ z for the
firm-specific productivity in equation (3), we set ρz = 0.96 and σ z = 0.10. These values are chosen
to obtain an average annual cross-sectional volatility of individual stock returns around 27%. The
fixed cost of production f is set to be 0.0275.
There are also three parameters specific to Model 2, including the liquidation cost parameter s,
the fixed floatation-cost parameter λ0 , and the flow floatation-cost parameter λ1 . We let s = 0.85
which implies proportional liquidation costs of 15%, largely consistent with available evidence. For
example, Altman (1984) estimates the average bankruptcy costs to be 12% of the firm value three
years prior to the petition date and 16.7% at the petition date. Andrade and Kaplan (1998) estimate direct and indirect financial distress costs to be between 10–20% of firms value. And Hennessy
and Whited (2006) estimate bankrupt costs to be 10.4% of the value of assets with a p-value of
4

From equations (4) and (5), the real interest rate rf t and the q
maximum Sharpe ratio St can be written
2
1 2
2
2
eσm (eσm − 1)/eσm /2 , respectively, where

as rf t = 1/Et [mt+1 ] = η1 e−µm − 2 σm and St = σ t [mt+1 ]/Et [mt+1 ] =
µm ≡ [γ 0 + γ 1 (xt − x̄)](1 − ρx )(xt − x̄) and σm ≡ σx [γ 0 + γ 1 (xt − x̄)].

14

6%. For the equity financing costs, we calibrate the fixed floatation cost λ0 to be 0.08 and the flow
floatation cost λ1 to be 0.025. These parameter values are the same as those in Gomes (2001), who
estimate these parameters based on Smith (1977).
Armed with these parameter values, we use value function iteration techniques to solve the
models. It is worthwhile pointing out that solving the models, especially Model 2, is technically
challenging. (The solution algorithm for Model 2 coded in MATLAB takes about 30 days to run on
a Dell workstation with dual Xeon 2Ghz CPUs and 1.00 GB of RAM.) The reason is that Model 2
is subject to the “curse of dimensionality” (e.g., Judd 1998, p. 430). In an effort to be reasonably
realistic, Model 2 has in total four state variables including capital stock kjt , current-period debt
bjt , firm-specific productivity zjt , and aggregate productivity xt . Further complicating the solution
algorithm are the two control variables, next-period capital kjt+1 and next-period debt bjt+1 .
By way of contrast, Hennessy and Whited (2005) have two controls and three states, and Hennessy and Whited (2006) have two controls and two states. More important, Hennessy and Whited
calibrate and solve their models in annual frequency, but our asset pricing applications require that
we calibrate and solve our models in monthly frequency. The high frequency lowers the speed of
convergence of our solution algorithm by an order of magnitude relative to their algorithm. Another
informative comparison is with Zhang (2005), who solves his model with four states in monthly
frequency, but he has only one control. Despite the curse of dimensionality, we opt to use the value
function iteration algorithm because of its well-known stability and precision.

3.2

Model 1: Qualitative Analysis

Using the numerical solution to Model 1, we plot and discuss the value and policy functions, risk
and expected excess returns, and the multiplier as functions of the underlying state variables.
Because there are three state variables in Model 1 (capital stock kjt , aggregate productivity xt ,
and firm-specific productivity zjt ), Panels A and C in Figures 1 and 2 plot the variables against kjt
and zjt , while fixing xt at its long-run average level x̄. Each one of these panels has a set of curves

15

corresponding to different values of zjt , and the arrow in each panel indicates the direction along
which zjt increases. Panels B and D then plot the variables against kjt and xt only, while fixing zjt
at its long run average level z̄j = 0. Each one of these panels has a set of curves corresponding to
different values of xt , and the arrow in each panel indicates the direction along which xt increases.
From Panels A and B in Figure 1, firms with relatively small capital stocks and high firm-specific
productivity have relatively high market-to-book ratios. These predictions are largely consistent
with the empirical evidence in Fama and French (1992, 1995). Moreover, firms have relatively high
market-to-book ratios when the general economic conditions are relatively good, consistent with
the evidence on time series predictability associated with aggregate book-to-market (e.g., Kothari
and Shanken 1997, Pontiff and Schall 1999).
The optimal investment-to-capital ratio largely inherits the properties of the market-to-book
ratio. From Panels C and D in Figure 1, firms with relatively small capital stocks and firms with
relatively high firm-specific profitability invest more relative to their capital stocks and grow faster,
consistent with the evidence in Fama and French (1995). Because investment-to-capital is independent of capital stock with constant return to scale, the driving force behind our model-implied inverse relation between investment-to-capital and capital stock is therefore decreasing return to scale.
The Multiplier
The multiplier associated with the dividend nonnegativity constraint in equation (11) is at the center of our analysis. Panel A of Figure 2 shows that the multiplier decreases in capital stock, kjt , and
in firm-specific productivity, zjt , suggesting that financial constraints are more binding for small
and less profitable firms. These patterns are intuitive and are consistent with the evidence (e.g.,
Chan and Chen 1991; Gertler and Gilchrist 1994; Perez-Quiros and Timmermann 2000; Lamont,
Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001); Whited and Wu 2006). Moreover, Panel B shows that the multiplier
increases in the aggregate productivity, xt , suggesting that financial constraints are more binding
when the aggregate economic conditions are relatively good. Although somewhat surprising, this

16

pattern is consistent with the evidence in Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang (2006).
More important, why does the shadow price of new equity respond negatively to firm-specific
shocks but positively to aggregate shocks? The crux is the stochastic discount factor, mt+1 , modeled
in equation (4). Aggregate shocks affect mt+1 , but firm-specific shocks do not.
Intuitively, the multiplier for a given firm is determined by the gap between its investment
demands and internal funds. The firm is financially constrained if its investment demands exceed
internal funds. The higher the gap, the higher the shadow price of external funds, and the more
constrained the firm will be.
Productivity shocks have two offsetting effects on the financial gap. A positive shock increases
internal funds and thereby reduces the gap, but it also increases investment demands and thereby
increases the gap. For firm-specific shocks, the first effect dominates quantitatively, therefore firms
with higher firm-specific productivity are less constrained.
The two offsetting effects also apply to aggregate shocks. Most important, aggregate shocks
differ from firm-specific shocks because aggregate shocks affect the stochastic discount factor. Aggregate shocks can therefore affect investment demands through an additional, discount-rate channel. Specifically, when a positive aggregate shock hits a firm, it will increase investment demands
through the usual cash flow channel because its capital stock becomes more productive. But a
positive aggregate shock also gives rise to a higher discount factor, mt+1 , or loosely speaking, a
lower discount rate, 1/mt+1 . This discount-rate effect in turn increases the expected continuation
value, Et [mt+1 v(kjt+1 , zjt+1 , xt+1 )] in equation (9), stimulating investment demands even further.
The increase in investment demands dominates quantitatively the increase in internal funds from
the positive aggregate shock. Consequently, the financial gap increases.
As a corollary, the discount-rate channel on the multiplier should disappear without the stochastic discount factor. And the multiplier should be countercyclical when mt+1 is constant. This outcome is indeed what happens in the model. Panels C and D in Figure 2 plot the multiplier against
underlying state variables in Model 1 with a constant discount factor, γ 0 = γ 1 = 0. From Panel D,
17

the multiplier now decreases in the aggregate productivity xt . Effectively, with the constant discount factor, aggregate and firm-specific productivity shocks enter the value-maximization problem
of firms symmetrically. In the same way that firms with low firm-specific productivity are more
constrained, firms are more constrained when aggregate economic conditions are relatively bad.5
Risk and Expected Excess Return
Figure 3 plots expected excess returns and risk, defined in equations (12) and (13), respectively.
From Panels A and C, firms with small scale of production and low firm-specific productivity are
riskier and earn higher expected returns than firms with large scale of production and high firmspecific productivity. More important, as shown in Panel A of Figure 2, small and less profitable
firms are also most likely to be financially constrained. Collectively, the panels show that more
financially constrained firms are riskier and earn higher expected returns than less financially constrained firms. These predictions lend support to Chan and Chen (1991) and Perez-Quiros and
Timmermann (2000). These authors interpret their evidence as suggesting that small firms and
relatively unprofitable firms earn higher average returns because these firms are more adversely
affected by lower liquidity in tight credit market conditions.
However, market value of equity and book-to-market are determined jointly and endogenously
with the multiplier by the underlying state variables in equilibrium. To quantify the incremental
effects of the multiplier on risk and expected returns independent of size and book-to-market, we
must use computational experiments. We take up this task in Section 4.
Finally, Panels B and D in Figure 3 show that conditional betas, β jt , increase but expected excess returns decrease with the aggregate productivity, xt . These two effects can be reconciled by the
countercyclical price of risk, ζ mt , implied by the pricing kernel in equation (4). Although the amount
of risk is high in good times, the price of risk is low, giving rise to low expected excess returns.
5

In a previous version of this paper, we also report that market-to-book and investment-to-capital in the constantdiscount-factor case are much less sensitive to aggregate shocks than their counterparts in the benchmark stochasticdiscount-factor case. These results are omitted for brevity but are available upon request.

18

3.3

Model 2: Qualitative Analysis

We now ask whether our central insights on the determinants of the multiplier, risk, and expected
returns from Model 1 are robust if we relax its restrictive assumptions. The answer is largely
affirmative. To this end, we turn to Model 2 with collateral constraints.
Panels A and B of Figure 4 show that, in Model 2, the market-to-book ratio, vjt /kjt , is strictly
decreasing with the current-period debt, bjt . This result is expected because the Envelope Theorem implies that vb (kjt , bjt , zjt , xt ) = −(1 + λe (ejt , kjt )1ejt ) < 0. Further, this pattern is consistent
with the inverse relation between market-to-book and leverage ratios documented by, for example,
Smith and Watts (1992). From Panels C and D, firms with large amount of debt invest less than
firms with small amount of debt and firms with corporate liquidity, a pattern often called “debt
overhang” (e.g., Myers 1977; Hennessy 2004).6
Figure 5 reports the optimal next-period-debt-to-capital ratio, bjt+1 /kjt , as functions of the
underlying state variables. Several intuitive patterns arise. First, firms with relatively small scale
of production, kjt , and low firm-specific profitability, zjt , borrow more (Panel A). Second, firms also
borrow more in good times (Panel B). Third, the debt-to-capital ratio is persistent because firms
with more debt in the current period are likely to borrow more, and firms with more corporate
savings are likely to save more (Panels C and D). Fourth, given capital stock, more profitable firms
save more and borrow less (Panels A and C). Finally, depending on their current debt levels, firms
tend to save more and borrow more in economic booms (Panel D). Although optimal debt policy
is not the focus of our study, we notice that these predictions are largely consistent with empirical
evidence on debt (e.g., Titman and Wessels 1988; Smith and Watts 1992; Rajan and Zingales 1995).
The Multiplier
The properties of the multiplier in Model 2 are largely similar to those in Model 1. From Panels
A and B of Figure 6, the shadow price of new debt, ν jt , is decreasing with capital stock, kjt , and
6

We also find that, in Model 2, both market-to-book and investment-to-capital are decreasing and convex in
capital stock, and are both increasing in aggregate and firm-specific productivity. These results are similar to those
from Model 1, and are omitted to avoid redundancy with Figure 1. Details are available upon request.

19

weakly decreasing firm-specific productivity, zjt . Panels B and D show that the multiplier ν jt is
weakly increasing in aggregate productivity xt , suggesting that firms are again more constrained
in good times. From Panels C and D, firms with positive corporate liquidity (and low current debt
levels) are unconstrained financially, and firms with high current debt levels are more constrained.
Moreover, the behavior of new-equity-to-capital, ejt /kjt , is very similar to that of the multiplier.
Firms with small capital stock and large debt overhang issue more equity, but the new equity is
much less sensitive to either aggregate or firm-specific productivity shocks.7
More important, although the multipliers from Models 1 and 2 share similar properties, comparing Figures 2 and 6 shows that the multiplier in Model 2 appears much less sensitive quantitatively
to changes in aggregate and firm-specific productivity shocks. This pattern is noteworthy because,
as shown in Table 1, 12 out of 16 parameters in Model 2 are directly from Model 1. The remaining
four parameters are specific to the structure in Model 2. The differences in quantitative magnitude
are therefore more likely to be driven by structural differences, not different parameters across the
models. Intuitively, the collateral constraints in Model 2 restrict only debt financing; firms can still
finance investments with new equity. In contrast, the dividend nonnegativity constraints in Model 1
are much more restrictive, effectively ruling out all new funds, debt or equity. It is therefore natural
that the multiplier from Model 1 is more sensitive to shocks than the multiplier from Model 2.
Debt, Liquidity, Risk, and Expected Excess Returns
In Model 2, the structural relations between risk and expected excess returns on the one side, and
capital stock and productivity shocks on the other, are similar to those in Model 1. Specifically,
firms with small capital stocks and low firm-specific productivity are riskier and earn higher expected excess returns than firms with large capital stocks and high firm-specific productivity.8 As
shown in Figure 6, small and less profitable firms in Model 2 are also more constrained financially.
Therefore, as in Model 1, Model 2 also predicts that more constrained firms are riskier and earn
7
8

The details are omitted to avoid redundancy with Figure 6, but are available upon request.
The details are omitted to avoid redundancy with Figure 3, but are available upon request.

20

higher expected returns than less constrained firms.
More interesting, Model 2 allows us to study how current-period debt, bjt , affects risk and
expected returns. From all panels in Figure 7, all else equal, firms with high current debt are riskier
and earn higher expected returns than firms with low current debt and firms with corporate savings.
The positive relation between current debt and risk and expected returns is even more dramatic for
less profitable firms (Panels A and C). Further, because Figure 6 shows that firms with high current
debt and low profitability are more constrained financially, Figure 7 reinforces our conclusion that
more constrained firms are riskier and earn higher expected returns than less constrained firms.

4

Quantitative Implications

We now study quantitative implications of our models. We continue to focus on two key issues, the
relation between financial constraints and stock returns and the cyclicality of financial constraints.
Our experiment design follows that of Kydland and Prescott (1982) and Berk, Green, and Naik
(1999). We simulate 100 artificial panels, each of which has 3000 firms and 480 months. The sample
size is similar to that used in empirical studies based on the CRSP-COMPUSTATE merged dataset.
We implement a variety of empirical procedures on each artificial panel and report the acrosssimulation averaged results. Whenever possible, we compare model moments with those in the data.

4.1

Financial Constraints and Stock Returns

We first look at the quantitative relations between the multipliers and average returns. Using the
Fama and French (1993) portfolio approach, we construct portfolios by sorting on the multipliers,
with and without controlling for size and book-to-market. Because the multipliers are the precise measures of financial constraints in our models, our results can help interpret the evidence in
Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001) and Whited and Wu (2006).

21

One-Way Sort
Table 2 reports the average monthly stock returns for ten portfolios sorted annually on the multipliers in simulated panels. Besides Models 1 and 2 reported in Panels A and B, we also report
results from two alternative calibrations of Model 2. Panel C considers the high-liquidation-cost
case for Model 2, in which the liquidation value per unit of capital, s, is reset to be 0.70, lower
than its benchmark calibration of 0.85. We consider this case because Hennessy and Whited (2005)
estimate the parameter s to be 0.59, albeit with a high p-value of 0.35. Panel D considers the
low-fixed-floatation-cost case for Model 2, in which the fixed floatation cost parameter, λ0 , is reset
to be 0.02. Between the benchmark and the two alternative cases of Model 2, we cover a broad
range of empirically plausible parameter values for s and λ0 .9
From Panel A of Table 2, the one-way sort on the multiplier, µjt , in Model 1 generates a
positive relation between the multiplier and average returns. The average value-weighted return
increases monotonically from 0.65% per month for the low-multiplier (least constrained) portfolio
to 1.24% per month for the high-multiplier (most constrained) portfolio. And the average-return
difference between the two extreme deciles is 0.59% with a significant t-statistic of 5.11. Using
equally-weighted returns yields a similar return spread of 0.57 (t-statistic = 5.13).
As shown in Panel B of Table 2, sorting on the multiplier, ν jt , from Model 2 also produces a
positive, monotonic relation between the multiplier and average returns. However, the averagereturn spread between the two extremes is only 0.30% per month (t-statistic = 4.42) in the
benchmark case of Model 2, only about one half of the return spread in Model 1. This quantitative
result is consistent with our earlier observation that the multiplier is less sensitive to shocks in Model
2 than that in Model 1. The reason is that firms in Model 2 have multiple sources of external finance,
and are more flexible financially than firms in Model 1. Finally, from Panels C and D, raising the
liquidation-cost parameter and lowering the fixed-floatation-cost parameter both serve to increase
9
We have also tried comparative statics for the cases with symmetric adjustment cost, aP = aN = 15, low fixed
cost of production, f = 0.025, high fixed cost of production, f = 0.030, low conditional volatility of firm-specific shock,
σ z = 0.075, and high conditional volatility of firm-specific shock, σz = 0.125. Our results are basically unchanged.

22

somewhat the average-return spread between the most-constrained and the least-constrained
portfolios. And our basic conclusion regarding the positive multiplier-return relation is unchanged.
Controlling for Size and Book-to-Market
Using their respective measures of financial constraints, Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001)
and Whited and Wu (2006) document that, after controlling for market capitalization, the averagereturn spread between the most constrained and the least constrained firms is statistically indistinguishable from zero. We now ask whether our models are consistent with this finding.
Specifically, we conduct on artificial panels two-way sorts on the multiplier—µjt from Model 1
and ν jt from Model 2—and the market capitalization, measured as the ex-dividend market value
of equity—vjt −djt in Model 1 and vjt −ojt in Model 2. Following Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo
(2001) and Whited and Wu (2006), we define small-cap firms (S), mid-cap firms (M), and large-cap
firms (L) as firms in the bottom 40%, the middle 20%, and the top 40% of the sample sorted on the
market capitalization, respectively. Similarly, low-, middle-, and high-multiplier portfolios contain
firms in the bottom 40% (L), the middle 20% (M), and the top 40% (H) of the sample sorted on
the multiplier, respectively. We then define the average high-multiplier portfolio as HIGHFC =
(BH + MH + SH)/3, and the average low-multiplier portfolio as LOWFC = (BL + ML + SL)/3,
and the financial constraints factor as FC = HIGHFC − LOWFC.
Table 3 reports the model-implied average returns of the two-way sorted portfolios in excess of
the risk-free rate, rf t , and compares the model moments with the data moments. From the last two
columns of the table, Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001) and Whited and Wu (2006) estimate
the average return of FC to be −0.13% per month (t-statistic = −1.17) and 0.18% (t-statistic =
0.95), respectively. (The t-statistic for the average FC-return from Lamont et al. is calculated by
the authors based on the information reported in their Table 5.) The average FC return in Model
1 is 0.42% per month (t-statistic = 2.05). And Model 2 appears to do a better job in matching
the data moments; its implied average FC return is 0.19% (t-statistic = 0.76) in the benchmark

23

parametrization. Changing the liquidation-cost parameter and the fixed-floatation-cost parameter
does not materially affect our quantitative results on the financial constraints factor.
A natural question arises: Why does the relation between financial constraints and average
returns appear significant in the one-way sort but largely insignificant in the two-way sort? The
reason is that risk and expected returns are determined jointly with other endogenous variables
such as size, book-to-market, and the multipliers by the underlying state variables. In Model 1,
firms differ in capital stock kjt and firm-specific productivity zjt . In Model 2, firms also differ in
current debt, bjt . The cross section of risk and expected returns is ultimately determined by these
firm-specific state variables, and the cross section also varies over time, depending on aggregate
productivity, xt (see Figures 3 and 7). The multipliers are correlated with risk and expected returns
because they contain information about the state variables that determine risk and expected returns. More important, the information in the multipliers is not all independent of the information
in size and book-to-market because of their joint determination.
Table 4 shows that size and book-to-market in our models largely subsume the effects of financial constraints on risk and expected returns. Using simulated data, the table reports the
Fama-MacBeth (1973) monthly cross-sectional regressions of stock returns, rjt+1 , from the beginning of time t to the beginning of time t+1, onto the multiplier, size, and book-to-market equity, all
measured at the beginning of time t. Size is measured as the logarithm of the market value of equity,
and book-to-market equity is measured as ln[kjt /(vjt − djt )] in Model 1 and ln[(kjt − bjt )/(vjt − ojt)]
in Model 2. The tables reports that the slopes of the multipliers are all positive and significant in
univariate regressions, but become insignificant and even slightly negative in multiple regressions
once we control for size and book-to-market equity.

4.2

Financial Constraints, Firm Characteristics, and Business Cycles

Because the shadow price of new funds is unobservable in the data, researchers are forced to use
observable firm characteristics to serve as proxies for financial constraints. In the model simula-

24

tions, however, we can calculate the Lagrange multipliers associated with financial constraints as
precise measures of the shadow prices of new funds. It is therefore interesting to ask, using our
theoretical models as natural laboratories, how well the characteristics commonly used in practice
can proxy for financial constraints. The answer is fairly positive.
The first set of characteristics we study is motivated from Whited and Wu (2006), who use
cash flow to assets (CFjt , measured as π jt /kjt in both models); debt to assets (T LT Djt , measured
as bjt 1bjt /kjt in Model 2, undefined in Model 1); the logarithm of assets (LN T Ajt , measured as
log(kjt )); sales growth (SGjt , measured as yjt /yjt−1 ); and a dividend dummy (DIV P OSjt , which
takes the value of one if djt > 0 in Model 1 and if ojt > 0 in Model 2). Whited and Wu estimate
the Lagrange multiplier on a dividend nonnegativity constraint in a framework similar to Model 1,
and define the estimated multiplier as the Whited-Wu (W W ) index of financial constraints:10
W Wjt = −0.091 CFjt − 0.062 DIV P OSjt + 0.021 T LT Djt − 0.044 LN T Ajt − 0.035 SGjt

(22)

Panel A of Table 5 reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of the Lagrange
multipliers onto contemporaneous firm characteristics motivated from Whited and Wu (2006). Consistent with their evidence, our simulations show that firms are more constrained financially if they
have lower ratios of cash flow to assets, higher ratios of debt to assets, lower sales, lower contemporaneous sales growth, and zero rather than positive dividend payments. Moreover, the slope
coefficients of these characteristics are reasonably close to those reported in the data.
We also consider a set of firm characteristics used by Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001)
to proxy for financial constraints, characteristics in turn motivated from Kaplan and Zingales
(1997). The list includes cash flow to assets (CFjt ), debt to assets (T LT Djt ), dividends to assets
(T DIVjt , measured as djt /kjt in Model 1, and ojt (1 − 1ejt )/kjt in Model 2), liquid assets or cash to
10

Whited and Wu (2006) also use industry sales growth in their financial constraints index. We do not use this
variable in our simulations because our one-sector models provide no cross-sectional variations in industry sales
growth. If we include this term in the estimation, it will simply be absorbed into the intercept term. Our models
can equivalently be interpreted as multi-sector models by treating firm-specific shocks as industry shocks. But then
industry sales growth coincides with firm-level sales growth, SGjt .

25

assets, (CASHjt , measured as −bjt (1 − 1bjt )/kjt in Model 2, undefined in Model 1), and Tobin’s Q
measured as (vjt − djt )/kjt in Model 1 and (vjt − ojt + bjt )/kjt in Model 2. Kaplan and Zingales
classify firms on a scale from one to four on financial constraints, and perform an ordered logit of
the scale onto the above characteristics. Lamont et al. then use these logit coefficients to construct
an index of financial constraints, called the Kaplan-Zingales (KZ) index, as:
KZjt = −1.002 CFjt + 3.139 T LT Djt − 39.368 T DIVjt − 1.315 CASHjt + 0.283 Qjt

(23)

Panel B of Table 5 reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions of the multipliers
onto contemporaneous firm characteristics motivated from Kaplan and Zingales (1997). Consistent
with their evidence, our simulations show that firms are more constrained financially if they have
lower cash flow relative to assets, higher debt relative to assets, lower ratios of dividends to assets,
lower liquid assets or cash relative to total assets, and higher Tobin’s Q. It is tempting to compare
quantitatively the slopes from the models to those reported in Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo
(2001). However, doing so is inappropriate because the slopes in the data are from ordered logit
regressions. We opt to use more precise OLS regressions in simulations because we can calculate
precisely the multipliers using simulated data.
More interesting, armed with the effectively observable multipliers in model simulations, we can
use Model 2 as a laboratory to evaluate the relative quality of the KZ index and the W W index as
measures of financial constraints. Model 1 is unfit for this task because debt to assets and cash to
assets are not defined in that model. Specifically, we perform Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional
regressions of the multiplier, ν jt , onto the indexes, KZjt and W Wjt, both separately and jointly.
And we use the relative magnitudes of the slopes and the average cross-sectional R2 s as measures of
relative quality for the indexes. To make the magnitudes of their slopes comparable, we standardize
both indexes by dividing their demeaned values with their respective standard deviations before
using them in the cross-sectional regressions.
From Table 6, both the KZ index and the W W index are positively correlated with the true
26

multiplier. More important, the W W index appears to do a much better job than the KZ index
as a proxy for the multiplier. From Panel A, in Model 2 with the benchmark parametrization, the
average cross-sectional R2 from regressing the multiplier onto the W W index alone is 33.10%, almost
three times higher than the R2 from using the KZ index as the regressor, which is only 12.87%.
The slope of the W W index in the joint regression with both indexes is 0.0576, more than eight
times of the magnitude for the KZ slope, 0.0070. The two alternative parameterizations of Model 2
yield quantitatively similar, if not stronger, results. In the joint regression in Panel C with low fixed
floatation costs, the slope of the W W index is 0.15 with a significant t-statistic of 6.94. In contrast,
the slope of the KZ index is now negative, −0.0161, albeit insignificant. To sum up, the KZ index
largely looses its explanatory power for financial constraints in the presence of the W W index.
Finally, there also exists some evidence on the cyclical properties of financial constraints. Using
data on cross-sectional returns, Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang (2006) report that the shadow price of
new equity is procyclical. In untabulated results, we find that the population, time-series correlations between the multiplier averaged across firms and aggregate productivity are 0.63 in Model 1,
0.60 in the benchmark parametrization of Model 2, and 0.59 and 0.69 in the high-liquidation-cost
and low-fixed-floatation-cost cases of Model 2, respectively. These quantitative results are consistent with our earlier analysis based on Figures 2 and 6. Replacing aggregate productivity by
aggregate investment-to-capital, measured as

P3000
j=1

P
ijt / 3000
j=1 kjt in simulations, lowers the corre-

sponding correlations to 0.39, 0.36, 0.31, and 0.31, respectively. The correlations are lower because
the aggregate investment-to-capital is an imperfect proxy for aggregate productivity. Our models
thus provide a microfoundation for the interpretation in Gomes et al. that financial constraints are
more binding when aggregate economic conditions are relatively good.

5

Conclusion

We construct two dynamic, neoclassical models to study the structural relations between financial
constraints, stock returns, and business cycles. In Model 1, firms face dividend nonnegativity con-

27

straints in a simple setting without debt or retained earnings. Model 2 is more realistic because
firms can retained earnings, raise debt and equity, and face collateral constraints on debt capacity.
The models predict that small firms, less profitable firms, and firms in debt are more likely to be
financially constrained. These firms are also riskier and earn higher expected returns, although
the effects of financial constraints on risk and expected returns can largely be subsumed quantitatively by market capitalization and book-to-market equity. Finally, because the stochastic discount
factor makes capital investment more sensitive to aggregate shocks, financial constraints are more
important when aggregate economic conditions are relatively good.

28

References
Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly, 1994, A unified model of investment under uncertainty,
American Economic Review 84, 1369–1384.
Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly, 1996, Optimal investment with costly reversibility, Review
of Economic Studies 63, 581–593.
Almeida, Heitor, and Murillo Campello, 2005, Financial constraints, asset tangibility, and
corporate investment, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.
Andrade, Gregor, and Steven N. Kaplan, 1998, How costly is financial (not economic) distress?
Evidence from highly leveraged transactions that became distressed, Journal of Finance 53,
1443–1494.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles, Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481–1509.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Jesus Santos, 2001, Prospect theory and asset prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 141 (1), 1–53.
Berk, Jonathan B., 1995, A critique of size related anomalies, Review of Financial Studies 8,
275–286.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options
and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1153–1607.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 2004, Valuation and return dynamics of
new ventures, Review of Financial Studies 17 (1), 1–35.
Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, 1989, Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations,
American Economic Review 79 (1), 14–31.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1999, The financial accelerator in a
quantitative business cycle framework, in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Edited by Michael
Woodford and John Taylor, North Holland.
Bond, Stephen and Costas Meghir, 1994, Dynamic investment models and the firm’s financial
policy, Review of Economic Studies 61, 197–222
Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset price
dynamics: Implications for the cross section of returns, Journal of Finance 59 (6), 2577–2603.
Carlson, Murray, Adlai, Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2006, Corporate investment and asset
price dynamics: Implications for SEO event studies and long-run performance, forthcoming,
Journal of Finance
Carlstrom, Charles T., and Timothy S. Fuerst, 1997, Agency costs, net worth, and business
fluctuations: A computable general equilibrium analysis, American Economic Review 87 (5),
893–910.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.
29

Chan, K. C., and Nai-fu Chen, 1991, Structural and return characteristics of small and large firms,
Journal of Finance 46, 1467–1484.
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Jonas D. M. Fisher, 2000, Algorithms for solving dynamic models
with occasionally binding constraints, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 1179–
1232.
Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 46 (1), 209–237.
Cochrane, John H., 1996, A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model,
Journal of Political Economy 104, 572–621.
Cochrane, John H., 2001, Asset pricing, Princeton University Press.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Edward C. Prescott, 1995, Economic growth and business cycles, in
Thomas F. Cooley, ed: Frontiers of Business Cycle Research (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ).
Cooley, Thomas F., and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2001, Financial markets and firm dynamics, American
Economic Review 91 (5), 1286–1310.
Cooper, Ilan, 2006, Asset pricing implications of non-convex adjustment costs and irreversibility
of investment, Journal of Finance 61 (1), 139–170.
Cooper, Russell, and João Ejarque, 2003, Financial frictions and investment: requiem in Q, Review
of Economic Dynamics 6, 710–728.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
Journal of Finance XLVII, 427–465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and
returns, Journal of Finance 50, 131–155.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk return and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
Journal of Political Economy 71, 607–636.
Fazzari, Stephen, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Peterson, 1988, Financing constraint and
corporate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141–195.
Gala, Vito D., 2006, Investment and returns, working paper, University of Chicago.
Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist, 1994, Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior of
small manufacturing firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics CIX (2), 309–340.
Gomes, Joao F., 2001, Financing investment, American Economic Review 90, 1263-1285.
Gomes, Joao F., Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang, 2003, Equilibrium cross section of returns, Journal
of Political Economy 111, 693–732.
Gomes, Joao F., Amir Yaron, and Lu Zhang, 2003, Asset prices and business cycles with costly
external finance, Review of Economic Dynamics 6 (4), 767–788.
30

Gomes, Joao F., Amir Yaron, and Lu Zhang, 2006, Asset pricing implications of firms’ financing
constraints, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.
Graham, John R., 2000, How big are the tax benefits of debt? Journal of Finance 55, 1901–1941.
Hall, Robert E., 2001, The stock market and capital accumulation, American Economic Review
91, 1185–1202.
Hennessy, Christopher A., 2004, Tobin’s Q, debt overhang, and investment, Journal of Finance
LIX (4), 1717–1742.
Hennessy, Christopher A., Amnon Levy, and Toni M. Whited, 2005, Testing Q theory of financing
frictions, forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Hennessy, Christopher A., and Toni M. Whited, 2005, Debt dynamics, Journal of Finance 60 (3),
1129–1165.
Hennessy, Christopher A., and Toni M. Whited, 2006, How costly is external financing? Evidence
from a structural estimation, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Judd, Kenneth L., 1998, Numerical methods in economics, the MIT press, Cambridge MA.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful
measures of financing constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 169–215.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy, 105 (2),
211–248.
Kogan, Leonid, 2004, Asset prices and real investment, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 411431.
Kothari, S. P., and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, dividend yield, and expected market
returns: A time-series analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 169–203.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, 1982, Time to build and aggregate fluctuations,
Econometrica 50, 1345–1370.
Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk and Jesús Saá-Requejo, 2001, Financial constraints and stock
returns, Review of Financial Studies 14 (2), 529–554.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston, and Jerry R. Green, 1995, Microeconomy theory, Oxford University Press.
McGrattan, Ellen R., 1999, Application of weighted residual methods to dynamic economic models, in Ramon Marimon and Andrew Scott, eds.: Computational Methods for the Study of
Dynamic Economies (Oxford University Press, Oxford).
Moyen, Nathalie, 2004, Investment-cash flow sensitivities: Constrained versus unconstrained firms,
Journal of Finance 59 (5), 2061–2092.
Pástor, L̆ubos̆, and Pietro Veronesi, 2005, Rational IPO waves, Journal of Finance 60 (4), 1713–
1757.
Perez-Quiros, Gabriel, and Allan Timmermann, 2000, Firm size and cyclical variations in stock
returns, Journal of Finance 55, 1229–1262.
31

Pontiff, Jeffrey, and Lawrence Schall, 1999, Book-to-market as a predictor of market returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 141–160.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1995, What do we know about capital structure? Some
evidence from international data, Journal of Finance 50 (5), 1421–1460.
Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1995, Asset pricing implications of equilibrium business cycle models,
in Thomas Cooley, ed.: Frontiers of Business Cycle Research (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, New Jersey).
Smith, Clifford W. Jr., 1977, Alternative methods for raising capital: rights versus underwritten
offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 5 (3), 273–307.
Smith, Clifford W. Jr., and Ross L. Watts, 1992, The investment opportunity set and corporate
financing, dividend, and compensation policies, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 263–292.
Stokey, Nancy L. and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. with Edward C. Prescott, 1989, Recursive methods in
economic dynamics, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Titman, Sheridan, and Roberto Wessels, 1988, The determinants of capital structure choice, Journal of Finance 43, 1–20.
Whited, Toni M., 1992, Debt, liquidity constraints, and corporate investment: Evidence from
panel data, Journal of Finance, 47 (4), 1425–1460.
Whited, Toni M., and Guojun Wu, 2006, Financial constraints risk, Review of Financial Studies
19 (2), 531–559.
Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60 (1), 67–103.

32

A

Derivations of the Lagrange Multipliers

To derive equation (11), we combine the dividend nonnegativity constraint in equation (8) with the
value function in equation (9). The resultant Lagrangian formulation of the value function, when
evaluated at optimum, can be written as:
v(kjt , zjt , xt ) = (1 + µjt )d(kjt , ijt , zjt , xt ) + Et [mt+1 v(kjt+1 , zjt+1 , xt+1 )]
Since d(kjt , ijt , zjt , xt ) is continuously differentiable with respect to kjt , v(kjt , zjt , xt ) is also differentiable with respect to kjt (see, for example, Theorem 9.10 in Stokey and Lucas with Prescott
1989). Equation (11) follows by differentiating both sides with respect to kjt and using the Envelope
Theorem (see, for example, Theorem M.L.1 in Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green 1995).
To characterize the multiplier given in equation (21) for Model 2, we first write down the
infinite-horizon, Lagrangian formulation of the value function, denoted L, as follows:
Ljt = · · · + π(kjt , zjt , xt ) +

bjt+1
− φ(ijt , kjt ) − bjt − λ(ejt , kjt ) − ν jt (bjt+1 − s(1 − δ)kjt+1 ) +
ιjt




bjt+2
Et mt+1 π(kjt+1 , zjt+1 , xt+1 ) +
− φ(ijt+1 , kjt+1 ) − bjt+1 − λ(ejt+1 , kjt+1 ) − ν jt+1 (bjt+2 − s(1 − δ)kjt+2 ) + · · ·
ιjt+1
Note that Ljt is differentiable almost everywhere except when π(kjt , zjt , xt )+bjt+1 /ιjt −φ(ijt , kjt )−
bjt = 0. Thus, we can characterize ν jt analytically only in the case when ejt is strictly positive.
When ejt > 0, differentiating Ljt with respect to bjt+1 and recognizing
ejt = φ(ijt , kjt ) + bjt − π(kjt , zjt , xt ) −

bjt+1
ιjt

we obtain
∂Ljt
1
1
=
+ λe (ejt , kjt )1ejt − ν jt − Et [mt+1 (1 + λe (ejt+1 , kjt+1 )1ejt+1 )] = 0
∂bjt+1
ιjt ιjt
Solving for ν jt gives us:
ν jt =

1
[1 + λe (ejt , kjt )1ejt ] − Et [mt+1 (1 + λe (ejt+1 , kjt+1 )1ejt+1 )]
ιjt

(A1)

We can simplify equation (A1) further by noting that the collateral constraint binds (ν jt > 0) when
bjt+1 > 0 and ιjt = rf t = 1/Et [mt+1 ]. Equation (A1) then becomes:
ν jt =

B

1
λe (ejt , kjt )1ejt − Et [mt+1 λe (ejt+1 , kjt+1 )1ejt+1 ]
rf t

(A2)

Computation

We use the discrete-state value function iteration technique to solve the dynamic valuemaximization problems of firms in both Models 1 and 2. Piecewise linear interpolation is used
extensively to obtain firm value and policy functions which do not lie directly on the grid points.
The Matlab programs used to solve the dynamic programming problems and the C++ programs
used to simulate the models in this paper are available upon request.
33

B.1

Model 1: Dividend Nonnegativity Constraints

For Model 1, the value function and the optimal investment policy are solved on a grid in a discrete
state space. We specify a grid with 50 points for the capital stock with an upper bound k (large
enough to be nonbinding at all times). Following McGrattan (1999), we construct the grid for
capital stock recursively, i.e., ki = ki−1 + ck1 exp (ck2 (i − 2)), where i = 1, . . . , 50 is the index of grid
points, and ck1 and ck2 are two constants chosen to provide the desired number of grid points and
k, given a pre-specified lower bound k. The advantage of this recursive construction is that more
grid points are assigned around k, where the value function has most of its curvature.
The state variables x and z are defined on continuous state spaces that can be transformed into
discrete state spaces using the Rouwenhorst (1995) methods. We use three grid points for the x
process and five points for the z process. In all cases our results are robust to finer grids. Once the
discrete state space is available, the conditional expectation operator can be carried out as a matrix
multiplication. The expected return Et [rjt+1 ] = Et [vjt+1 ]/(vjt −djt ) can be calculated in a similar
way. Piecewise linear interpolation is used extensively to obtain firm value, optimal investment, and
expected return, which do not lie directly on the grid points. Finally, to solve for the Lagrange multiplier on the grid according to equation (11), we use numerical differentiation to calculate the first order derivative vk with quadratic accuracy (e.g., Judd 1998, p.281). dk can be calculated analytically.

B.2

Model 2: Collateral Constraints

Model 2 is substantially more challenging to solve than Model 1.
The capital stock in each period is constrained to be an element of the linear finite time-invariant
set K = {k1 , ..., kNK }, with total of NK = 50 elements (grid points). For any optimal capital stock
on the grid, the finer grid used for the interpolation consists of 1000 evenly spaced points. The
face value of one-period debt, b, in each period is constrained to be an element of the linear finite
time-invariant set B = {b1 , ..., bNB }, centered around zero with total of NB = 2NK + 1 = 101
elements (grid points). The boundaries of the set, {b1 , bNB } are the same for any ki ∈ K are chosen
to satisfy a weaker form of the collateral constraints:
{b1 , bNB } = ±s(1 − δ)kNK
For any optimal debt on the grid chosen from a first-pass optimization, the finer grid used for
the interpolation consists of 1001 evenly spaced points. The state variables x ∈ X and z ∈ Z are
defined on continuous state spaces. We again transform the state spaces into discrete ones using the
Rouwenhorst (1995) methods. We use nine points for the z process and five points for the x process.
We can formulate the dynamic value-maximization problem on the grid as follows:
v n (ki , bj , zl , xm ) =
+

9 X
5
X

max

{k ′ ,b′ }∈K′ ×B′

{π(ki , zl , xm ) +

b′
− bj − φ(k′ , ki ) − λ(e(ki , bj , zl , xm , k′ , b′ ), kj )+
ι(xm )

′

ηe(γ 0 +γ 1 (xm −x))(xm −x ) ven−1 (k′ , b′ , zl′ , xm′ )Qz (zl′ |zl )Qx (xm′ |xm )

l=1 m=1

where ve incorporates the collateral constraint as follows:

ven = v n 1{b′ ≤s(1−δ)k′ } − 1010 (1 − 1{b′ ≤s(1−δ)k′ } )
34

(A3)

and n indicates the number of value iterations. v n : K × B × X × Z is a list of 227,250 values as
compared to 8,250 values used for Model 1.
The algorithm can be described as follows:
• Make a guess for v n−1 (k, b, z, x) on the right hand side of (A3). It will be an 25 × 51 × 9 × 5
object.
• For each {k, b, z, x} ∈ K × B × X × Z point use local linear interpolation to construct
v n−1 (k′ , b′ , z, x). In Matlab, reshape the v n−1 into a traditional K × B matrix and again
reshape after the interpolation to form a three-dimensional object v n−1 (k′ , b′ , z, x). Since
K × B is not a square matrix, it requires to perform interpolation along each dimension
separately. The order is not important.
• On the K′ × B ′ grid construct 1{b′ ≤s(1−δ)k′ } which is a three-dimensional object of zeros and
ones and use it to construct ven−1 (k′ , b′ , z, x).
• For each {k, b, z, x} ∈ K × B × X × Z solve for optimal {k∗ (k, b, z, x), b∗ (k, b, z, x)} ∈ K′ × B ′
from
{k′ (k, b, z, x), b′ (k, b, z, x)} =

arg max {
{k ′ ,b′ }∈K′ ×B′

+

9 X
5
X

b′
− φ(k′ , ki ) − λ(e(ki , bj , zl , xm , k′ , b′ ), kj )+
ι(xm )
′

ηe(γ 0 +γ 1 (xm −x))(xm −x ) Qz (zl′ |zl )Qx (xm′ |xm )e
v n−1 (k′ , b′ , zl′ , xm′ )}

l=1 m=1

by doing a simple grid search along k′ holding b′ fixed and then along b′ for each k∗ .
• Construct v n (k, b, z, x) from equation (A3).
• Check for conversion using maximum error algorithm
max v n (k, b, z, x) − v n−1 (k, b, z, x) < ǫ = 10−5 .
• If the conversion criteria is not satisfied set v n (k, b, z, x) as a new guess and repeat all of the
above steps.

35

Table 1 : Benchmark Parameter Values
This table lists the benchmark parameter values used to solve and simulate Model 1 with the dividend nonnegativity constraints and Model 2 with the collateral
constraints. Panel A reports the parameters common to both models, and Panel B reports the parameters specific to Model 2.

Notation

Parameter Value

Description

Panel A: Parameters Common to Both Models 1 and 2

36

α
δ
ρx
σx
η
γ0
γ1
aP
aN
ρz
σz
f

0.30
0.01
0.951/3
0.007/3
0.994
50
−1000
15
150
0.96
0.10
0.0275

Capital share in production
Monthly rate of capital depreciation
Persistence coefficient of aggregate productivity
Conditional volatility of aggregate productivity
Time-preference coefficient
Constant price of risk parameter
Time-varying price of risk parameter
Adjustment-cost parameter when investment is positive
Adjustment-cost parameter when investment is negative
Persistence coefficient of firm-specific productivity
Conditional volatility of firm-specific productivity
Fixed cost of production
Panel B: Parameters Specific to Model 2

s
λ0
λ1
κ

0.85
0.08
0.025
0.50%/12

Liquation value per unit of capital net of bankruptcy cost
Fixed floatation cost parameter
Proportional floatation cost parameter
Monthly wedge between the borrowing and saving rates of interest

Table 2 : Monthly Stock Returns of Portfolios Based on One-Way Sorts on the Multiplier in Model Simulations
This table reports descriptive statistics for ten value-weighted and ten equal-weighted portfolios from one-way sorts on the Lagrange multiplier from Models 1 and
2. We report average returns in percent per month for each portfolio as well as the average high-minus-low portfolios and its t-statistics. We sort all firms based
on their Lagrange multipliers at the beginning of each year and then hold the portfolios for the whole year. For each model, we simulate 100 artificial panels,
each of which has 3000 firms and 480 monthly observations, and we then report the across-simulation averaged results. Panel A reports the quantitative results
from Model 1, in which all firms face the dividend nonnegativity constraints without corporate saving and borrowing. Panel B reports the results from Model
2, in which all firms can save but face the collateral constraints on borrowing. And Panel B reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark
parameters reported in Table 1. Panel C reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that the liquidation value per unit
of capital net of liquidation costs, s, is set to be 0.70. Finally, Panel D reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that
the fixed cost of equity financing, λ0 , is set to be 0.02.

37

Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

FC

tFC

0.85
0.80

0.87
0.82

0.98
0.93

1.24
1.18

0.59
0.57

(5.11)
(5.13)

0.78
0.67

0.84
0.73

0.30
0.31

(4.42)
(3.76)

0.60
0.51

0.71
0.62

0.38
0.35

(4.87)
(4.08)

0.89
0.77

1.03
0.91

0.53
0.53

(5.44)
(4.87)

Panel A: Model 1
Value-weighted
Equally-weighted

0.65
0.61

0.68
0.63

0.72
0.67

0.74
0.70

0.79
0.73

0.83
0.79

Panel B: Model 2 (the Benchmark Parametrization)
Value-weighted
Equally-weighted

0.54
0.42

0.61
0.49

0.64
0.52

0.67
0.55

0.68
0.56

0.70
0.59

0.74
0.62

0.76
0.65

Panel C: Model 2 (High Liquidation Cost, s = 0.70)
Value-weighted
Equally-weighted

0.33
0.27

0.37
0.31

0.39
0.33

0.44
0.37

0.48
0.39

0.49
0.39

0.55
0.44

0.57
0.47

Panel D: Model 2 (Low Floatation Cost, λ0 = 0.02)
Value-weighted
Equally-weighted

0.50
0.38

0.60
0.47

0.64
0.52

0.71
0.59

0.74
0.62

0.74
0.62

0.79
0.68

0.83
0.71

Table 3 : Average Monthly Percentage Returns for Portfolios Sorted on the Multiplier and Market Capitalization in Model
Simulations
This table reports average returns in monthly percent for nine value-weighted portfolios sorted on the market capitalization and the Lagrange multiplier in model
simulations. The rankings are performed annually and independently such that each portfolio contains firms both in a given size category and a given financial
constraints category. Following Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001) and Whited and Wu (2006), we define small-cap firms (S) as firms that are in the bottom
40% of the sample sorted on market capitalization, mid-cap firms (M) are firms in the middle 20% of the sample, and large-cap firms (B) are firms in the top 40%
of the sample. Similarly, low-, middle-, and high-multiplier are firms in the bottom 40% (L), the middle 20% (M), and the top 40% (H) of the sample sorted on
the multiplier, respectively. We also define the average high-FC portfolio as HIGHFC = (BH + MH + SH)/3, and the average low-FC portfolio as LOWFC =
(BL + ML + SL)/3, and the financial constraints factor as FC = HIGHFC − LOWFC. For each model, we simulate 100 artificial panels, each of which has 3000
firms and 480 monthly observations, and we then report the across-simulation averaged results. The third column reports the quantitative results from Model
1, in which all firms face the dividend nonnegativity constraints. The fourth column reports the results from Model 2, in which all firms can save but face the
collateral constraints on borrowing. This column reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters reported in Table 1. The fifth
column reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that the liquidation value per unit of capital net of liquidation costs,
s, is set to be 0.70. And the sixth column reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that the fixed floatation cost of
equity, λ0 , is set to be 0.02. The last two columns report those from Table I of Lamont et al. and from Table 4 of Whited and Wu (2006).

38

Category

Model 1

Model 2
(Benchmark)

Model 2
(s = 0.70)

Model 2
(λ0 = 0.02)

Lamont et al.
(2001)

Whited and Wu
(2005)

Small-cap firms
Low FC
Middle FC
High FC

SL
SM
SH

1.32
1.62
2.40

0.81
0.85
0.91

0.12
0.32
0.55

0.86
0.95
1.05

0.45
0.67
0.38

0.89
0.66
0.83

Mid-cap firms
Low FC
Middle FC
High FC

ML
MM
MH

1.03
1.27
0.97

0.69
0.70
0.72

0.07
0.19
0.09

0.70
0.73
0.79

0.37
0.56
0.26

0.65
0.81
0.74

Large-cap firms
Low FC
Middle FC
High FC

BL
BM
BH

0.86
0.89
1.11

0.35
0.56
0.79

0.04
0.06
0.10

0.50
0.56
0.63

0.47
0.53
0.25

0.71
0.96
1.23

1.49
1.07

0.81
0.62

0.25
0.08

0.82
0.69

0.30
0.43

0.93
0.75

0.42
(2.05)

0.19
(0.76)

0.17
(0.81)

0.13
(0.50)

HIGHFC
LOWFC
FC
t-statistics of FC

−0.13
(−1.17)

0.18
(0.95)

Table 4 : Fama-MacBeth (1973) Monthly Cross-Sectional Regressions of Percentage Stock Returns onto Lagrange Multiplier,
Size, and Book-to-Market in Model Simulations
This table reports the Fama-MacBeth (1973) monthly cross-sectional regressions of stock returns, rjt+1 , onto the Lagrange multiplier, size, and book-to-market,
all measured at the beginning of month t. µjt denotes the multiplier in Model 1, and ν jt denotes the multiplier in Model 2. ln(ME) is the logarithm of the
total market value of equity, measured as ln(vjt − djt ) in Model 1 and ln(vjt − ojt ) in Model 2. ln(BE/ME) is the logarithm of the book-to-market equity ratio,
measured as ln(kjt /(vjt − djt )) in Model 1 and ln((kjt − bjt )/(vjt − ojt )) in Model 2. For each model, we simulate 100 artificial panels, each of which has 3000 firms
and 480 monthly observations, and then report the across-simulation averaged Fama-MacBeth slopes and t-statistics. Panel A reports the quantitative results
from Model 1, in which all firms face the dividend nonnegativity constraints without corporate saving and borrowing. Panel B reports the results from Model 2,
in which all firms can save but face the collateral constraints on borrowing. Panel B reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters
reported in Table 1. Panel C reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that the liquidation value per unit of capital
net of liquidation costs, s, is set to be 0.70. Finally, Panel D reports the simulation results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that the fixed
floatation cost, λ0 , is set to be 0.02.

39
Panel A: Model 1
µjt

ln(ME)

Panel B: Model 2 (The Benchmark Parametrization)
ln(BE/ME)

1.39
(2.98)
0.99
(1.81)

−15.93
(−2.46)

12.78
(2.53)

Panel C: Model 2 (High Liquidation Cost, s = 0.70)
ν jt

ln(ME)

ln(BM)

2.56
(2.83)
1.20
(1.16)

ν jt

ln(ME)

ln(BE/ME)

−2.99
(−2.51)

0.42
(2.60)

6.23
(2.79)
2.60
(0.65)

Panel D: Model 2 (Low Fixed Floatation Cost, λ0 = 0.02)
ν jt

ln(ME)

ln(BM)

−3.10
(−2.36)

0.24
(1.61)

5.15
(3.22)
−1.54
(−2.21)

0.76
(1.92)

−0.11
(−0.14)

Table 5 : Cross-Sectional Determinants of the Lagrange Multipliers in Model Simulations
This table reports Fama-MacBeth (1973) monthly cross-sectional regressions of the multipliers. Panel A reports the regression similar to that reported in column
4 of Table I in Whited and Wu (2006): µjt (or ν jt ) = b0 + b1 CF jt + b2 T LT Djt + b3 LN T Ajt + b4 SGjt + b5 DIV P OS jt + ǫjt , where µjt is the multiplier in Model
(Mod) 1 and ν jt is the multiplier in Model 2 for firm j during month t. CFjt is the cash flow-to-asset ratio, T LT Djt is the total debt-to-assets ratio, LN T Ajt
is the logarithm of the total assets, SGjt is the firm-level sales growth, and DIV P OSjt is a dummy variable that equals one if firm j has paid dividends during
month t, and equals zero otherwise. Panel B reports the regression similar to that reported in Table 9 in Lamont, Polk, and Saá-Requejo (2001), the regression
which is in turn based on Kaplan and Zingales (1997): µjt (or ν jt ) = b0 + b1 CF jt + b2 T LT Djt + b3 T DIV jt + b4 CASH jt + b5 Qjt + ǫjt , where CFjt is the cash
flow-to-asset ratio, T LT Djt is the total debt-to-assets ratio, T DIVjt is the dividend-to-assets ratio, CASHjt is the ratio of total amount of liquid assets or cash
divided by assets, and Qjt is Tobin’s Q. The t-statistics are shown in parentheses. We report quantitative results for Model 1, in which all firms face the dividend
nonnegativity constraints, and three parameterizations of Model 2, in which all firms can save but face the collateral constraints on borrowing. These three cases
include the benchmark parametrization reported in Table 1; the high-liquidation-cost case with the liquidation value per unit of capital net of liquidation costs,
s, being 0.70; and the low fixed-floatation-cost case with the fixed floatation cost of equity, λ0 , being 0.02. For each case, we simulate 100 artificial panels, each of
which has 3000 firms and 480 months, and we then report the across-simulation averaged results. We also compare our simulated results to those from Lamont
et al. and Whited and Wu (reported in the “Data” column).

40

Panel A: µjt (or ν jt ) = b0 + b1 CF jt + b2 T LT Djt + b3 LN T Ajt + b4 SGjt + b5 DIV P OS jt + ǫjt , motivated from Whited and Wu (2006)
Cash Flow/Assets, CF
Data

Total Debt/Assets, T LT D

Mod 1

Mod 2

Data

Mod 1

Mod 2

−0.09
−0.13
(−2.94) (−8.77)

−0.14
(−8.02)

0.02
(1.91)

−
−

0.01
(3.66)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)
−0.02
(−4.17)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)
0.03
(3.84)

−0.20
(−3.91)

log(Sales), LN T A
Mod 1

Mod 2

−0.04
−0.15
(−1.91) (−8.89)

Data

−0.03
(−7.39)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)

0.03
(2.40)

−0.03
(−6.11)

Sales Growth, SG
Mod 1

Mod 2

−0.04
−0.18
(−1.52) (−5.28)

Data

−0.00
(−2.15)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)

−0.03
(−3.20)

−0.00
(−3.58)

Dividend Dummy, DIV P OS
Mod 1

Mod 2

−0.06
−0.00
(−2.14) (−1.73)

Data

−0.05
(−2.69)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)

−0.00
(−2.05)

−0.02
(−2.10)

−0.09
(−2.09)

Panel B: µjt (or ν jt ) = b0 + b1 CF jt + b2 T LT Djt + b3 T DIV jt + b4 CASH jt + b5 Qjt + ǫjt , motivated from Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
Cash Flow/Assets, CF
Data

Total Debt/Assets, T LT D

Mod 1

Mod 2

Data

Mod 1

Mod 2

−1.00
−2.88
(−4.28) (−6.66)

−1.06
(−4.67)

3.14
(6.99)

−
−

1.78
(3.79)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)
−0.73
(−4.61)

−2.22
(−6.75)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)
1.84
(7.36)

0.93
(3.38)

Dividends/Assets, T DIV
Data

Cash/Assets, CASH

Tobin’s Q, Q

Mod 1

Mod 2

Data

Mod 1

Mod 2

Data

Mod 1

Mod 2

−39.37 −17.34
(−6.46) (−6.91)

−6.28
(−8.99)

−1.32
(−4.55)

−
−

−0.86
(−2.11)

0.28
(3.63)

1.27
(6.04)

0.37
(5.28)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)
−6.33
(−5.10)

−6.49
(−8.64)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)
−1.01
(−5.68)

−0.56
(−3.05)

Mod 2 (s = 0.70) (λ0 = 0.02)
0.77
(6.20)

0.52
(5.92)

Table 6 : Fama-MacBeth (1973) Cross-Sectional Regressions of the Lagrange Multiplier onto the Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
Index and the Whited and Wu (2006) Index of Financial Constraints, Model 2 with the Collateral Constraints
Using simulated panels from Model 2 with collateral constraints, this table reports the Fama-MacBeth (1973) monthly cross-sectional regressions of the Lagrange
multiplier, ν jt , onto the Kaplan and Zingles (1997, KZ) index and the Whited and Wu (2006, W W ) index of financial constraints, both separately and jointly.
We simulate 100 artificial panels, each of which has 3000 firms and 480 monthly observations, and then report the across-simulation averaged Fama-MacBeth
slopes, heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation-consistent t-statistics (in parentheses), and average cross-sectional R2 s. We also report the average cross-sectional
correlation between the KZ index and the W W index. Panel A reports the quantitative results from the benchmark parametrization of Model 2 with the
parameter values in Table 1. Panel B reports the results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that the liquidation value per unit of capital net
of liquidation costs, s, is set to be 0.70. Finally, Panel C reports the results from Model 2 using the benchmark parameters except that the fixed floatation cost,
λ0 , is set to be 0.02.

41

Panel A: Model 2 (the Benchmark Case)
2

KZ

R

0.0269
(13.13)

12.87%

WW

R2

KZ

WW

R2

Corr(KZ, W W )

0.0579
(10.52)

33.10%

0.0070
(3.54)

0.0576
(8.65)

36.88%

0.50

Panel B: Model 2 (the High-Liquidation-Cost Case)
2

KZ

R

0.0241
(14.57)

21.44%

WW

R2

KZ

WW

R2

Corr(KZ, W W )

0.0748
(13.30)

55.41%

0.0027
(2.88)

0.0735
(11.75)

56.52%

0.56

Panel C: Model 2 (the Low-Floatation-Cost Case)
2

KZ

R

0.0287
(2.16)

7.04%

WW

R2

KZ

WW

R2

Corr(KZ, W W )

0.1413
(7.35)

46.01%

−0.0161
(−1.13)

0.1548
(6.94)

49.04%

0.47

Figure 1 : The Value and Investment-Policy Functions Against Underlying State Variables,
Model 1 with the Dividend Nonnegativity Constraint
This figure plots for Model 1 the market-to-book ratio (vjt /kjt , Panels A and B) and the investment-to-capital ratio
(ijt /kjt , Panels C and D) as functions of the state variables. Panels A and C plot the variables as functions of capital
stock kjt and firm-specific productivity zjt , while fixing the aggregate productivity xt at its long run average level
x̄. Both Panels A and C have a class of curves corresponding to different values of zjt , and the arrow in each panel
indicates the direction along which zjt increases. Panels B and D plot the variables as functions of capital stock kjt
and the aggregate productivity xt , while fixing the firm-specific productivity zjt at its long run average level z̄j = 0.
Panels B and D have a class of curves corresponding to different values of xt , and the arrows indicate the direction
along which x increases.

Panel A: vjt (kjt , zjt , x̄)/kjt

Panel B: vjt (kjt , z̄j , xt )/kjt

60

90
80

50
70
60

V/K

V/K

40

30

50
40

Z

X
20

30
20

10
10
0
0

5

10

15

20

0
0

25

5

10

K

15

20

25

20

25

K

Panel C: ijt (kjt , zjt , x̄)/kjt

Panel D: ijt (kjt , z̄j , xt )/kjt

0.2

0.12
0.1

0.15
0.08
0.06
I/K

I/K

0.1

0.05

X

0.04
0.02

Z

0
0
−0.02
−0.05
0

5

10

15

20

25

K

−0.04
0

5

10

15
K

42

Figure 2 : The Multiplier Against Underlying State Variables: Model 1 with the Dividend
Nonnegativity Constraint, the Benchmark Case and the Constant-Discount-Factor Case
For Model 1 under the benchmark parametrization with stochastic discount factor (γ 0 = 50, γ 1 = −1000), Panels
A and B plot the multiplier, µjt , against underlying state variables. Panels C and D do the same but for Model
1 with constant discount factor (γ 0 = γ 1 = 0). Panels A and C plot the variables as functions of capital stock kjt
and firm-specific productivity zjt , while fixing the aggregate productivity xt at its long run average level x̄. Both
Panels A and C have a set of curves corresponding to different values of zjt , and the arrow in each panel indicates
the direction along which zjt increases. Panels B and D plot the variables as functions of capital stock kjt and the
aggregate productivity xt , while fixing the firm-specific productivity zjt at its long run average level z̄j = 0. Panels
B and D have a class of curves corresponding to different values of xt , and the arrows indicate the direction along
which xt increases.

Panel A: µjt (kjt , zjt , x̄), Stochastic-Discount-Factor

Panel B: µjt (kjt , z̄j , xt ), Stochastic-Discount-Factor

1

0.7

0.9
0.6
0.8
0.5

0.6

Multiplier

Multiplier

0.7

0.5
0.4
0.3

0.4
0.3
0.2

Z

X

0.2
0.1
0.1
0
0

5

10
K

15

Panel C: µjt (kjt , zjt , x̄), Constant-Discount-Factor

0.7

1.2

0.6

1

0.5

0.8

0.4

0.6

5

10
K

15

20

Panel D: µjt (kjt , z̄j , xt ), Constant-Discount-Factor

1.4

Multiplier

Multiplier

0
0

20

Z

0.3
X

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.1

0
0

5

10
K

15

20

43

0
0

5

10
K

15

20

Figure 3 : Risk and Expected Excess Return Against Underlying State Variables: Model 1
with the Dividend Nonnegativity Constraint
This figure plots for Model 1 risk (β jt , Panels A and B) and expected excess return (Et [rjt+1 ] − rf t , Panels C and
D) as functions of the underlying state variables. Panels A and C plot the variables as functions of capital stock kjt
and firm-specific productivity zjt , fixing the aggregate productivity xt at its long run average level x̄. Panels A and
C report a class of curves corresponding to different values of zjt , and the arrow in each panel indicates the direction
along which zjt increases. Panels B and D plot the variables as functions of capital stock kjt and the aggregate
productivity xt , fixing the firm-specific productivity zjt at its long run average level z̄j = 0. Panels B and D report
a class of curves corresponding to different values of xt , and the arrow in each panel indicates the direction along
which xt increases.
Panel A: β jt (kjt , zjt , x̄)

Panel B: β jt (kjt , z̄j , xt )

0.9

1.1

0.85

1

0.8

0.9

0.75

Z

X

0.8

β

β

0.7

0.7

0.65

0.6
0.6

0.5

0.55

0.4

0.5
0.45
0

5

10

15

20

25

0.3
0

5

10

15

20

25

K

K

Panel C: Et [rjt+1 − rf t ](kjt , zjt , x̄)

Panel D: Et [rjt+1 − rf t ](kjt , z̄j , xt )

−3

11.5

x 10

0.016

11
0.014

10.5
Z

X

10
0.012
t+1

E [Re ]

9

0.01

t

e

Et[Rt+1]

9.5

8.5
0.008

8
7.5

0.006

7
6.5
0

5

10

15

20

25

K

0.004
0

5

10

15
K

44

20

25

Figure 4 : The Value and Investment-Policy Functions Against Underlying State Variables,
Model 2 with the Collateral Constraint
This figure plots for Model 2 the ratio of market value of equity to capital (vjt /kjt , Panels A and B) and the optimal
investment-to-capital ratio (ijt /kjt , Panels C and D) as functions of underlying state variables. Panels A and C plot
the variables as functions of current-period debt, bjt , and firm-specific productivity, zjt , while fixing the aggregate
productivity xt and capital stock kjt at their respective long run average levels, x̄ and k̄ (k̄ is determined in model
simulations). Panels A and C have a class of curves, corresponding to different values of zjt , and the arrow in each
panel indicates the direction along which zjt increases. Panels B and D plot the variables as functions of currentperiod debt, bjt , and the aggregate productivity xt , fixing the firm-specific productivity zjt and capital stock kjt at
their long run average levels. Panels B and D have a class of curves corresponding to different values of xt , and the
arrows indicate the direction along which xt increases.

Panel A: vjt (k̄, bjt , zjt , x̄)/kjt

Panel B: vjt (k̄, bjt , z̄j , xt )/kjt

25

30

25

20

x

20

z

v/k

v/k

15
15

10
10
5

0
−3

5

−2

−1

0

1
b

2

3

4

0
−3

5

Panel C: ijt (k̄, bjt , zjt , x̄)/kjt

−2

−1

0
b

1

2

3

2

3

Panel D: ijt (k̄, bjt , z̄j , xt )/kjt
0.06

0.05
0.045

0.05

0.04
x

0.04
z

i/k

i/k

0.035
0.03
0.025

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01
0.015
0.01
−3

−2

−1

0

1
b

2

3

4

5

45

0
−3

−2

−1

0
b

1

Figure 5 : The Optimal Debt-Policy Function Against Underlying State Variables, Model 2
with the Collateral Constraint
This figure plots for Model 2 the optimal next-period-debt-to-capital ratio, bjt+1 /kjt , as functions of underlying state
variables. Panel A plots the debt-policy function against capital stock kjt and firm-specific productivity zjt , while
fixing aggregate productivity xt and current-period debt bjt at their respective long run average levels, x̄ and b̄ (b̄
is determined in model simulations). Panel B plots the optimal debt-policy function against capital stock kjt and
aggregate productivity xt , while fixing zjt and bjt at their respective long run average levels, z̄j = 0 and b̄. Panel C
plots the debt-policy function against current-period debt bjt and firm-specific productivity zjt , while fixing aggregate
productivity xt and capital stock kjt at their respective long run average levels, x̄ and k̄ (k̄ is determined in model
simulations). Finally, Panel D plots the debt-policy function against bjt and xt , while fixing zjt and kjt at their
respective long run average levels. Panels A and C have a class of curves, corresponding to different values of zjt ,
and the arrow in each panel indicates the direction along which zjt increases. Panels B and D have a class of curves
corresponding to different values of xt , and the arrows indicate the direction along which xt increases.

Panel B: bjt+1 (kjt , b̄, z̄j , xt )/kjt

0.2

0.4

0.15

0.35

0.1

0.3

0.05

0.25
b /k

0

*

*

b /k

Panel A: bjt+1 (kjt , b̄, zjt , x̄)/kjt

0.2

z

−0.05

0.15

−0.1

0.1

−0.15

0.05

x

−0.2
0

2

4

6

8

0
0

10

2

4

6

8

10

k

k

Panel C: bjt+1 (k̄, bjt , zjt , x̄)/kjt

Panel D: bjt+1 (k̄, bjt , z̄j , xt )/kjt

0.8

1
x

0.6
0.5

0.4
0.2

z

b*/k

*

b /k

0
0
−0.2
−0.5
−0.4
x

−0.6

−1

−0.8
z

−1
−3

−2

−1

0

1
b

2

3

4

5

46

−1.5
−3

−2

−1

0
b

1

2

3

Figure 6 : The Multiplier Against Underlying State Variables, Model 2 with the Collateral
Constraint
This figure plots for Model 2 the multiplier, ν jt , associated with the collateral constraints as functions of underlying
state variables. Panel A plots the multiplier against capital stock kjt and firm-specific productivity zjt , while fixing
aggregate productivity xt and current-period debt bjt at their respective long run average levels, x̄ and b̄ (b̄ is
determined in model simulations). Panel B plots the multiplier against capital stock kjt and aggregate productivity
xt , while fixing zjt and bjt at their respective long run average levels, z̄j = 0 and b̄. Panel C plots the multiplier
against current-period debt bjt and firm-specific productivity zjt , while fixing aggregate productivity xt and capital
stock kjt at their respective long run average levels, x̄ and k̄ (k̄ is determined in model simulations). And Panel D
plots the multiplier against bjt and xt , while fixing zjt and kjt at their respective long run average levels. Panels
A and C have a class of curves, corresponding to different values of zjt , and the arrow in each panel indicates the
direction along which zjt increases. Panels B and D have a class of curves corresponding to different values of xt ,
and the arrows indicate the direction along which xt increases.

Panel B: ν jt (kjt , b̄, z̄j , xt )
0.4

0.35

0.35

0.3

0.3

0.25

0.25

0.2

0.2

ν

ν

Panel A: ν jt (kjt , b̄, zjt , x̄)
0.4

0.15

x

0.15

0.1

0.1

z

0.05

0.05

0
0

2

4

6

8

0
0

10

2

4

k

6

8

10

k

Panel C: ν jt (k̄, bjt , zjt , x̄)

Panel D: ν jt (k̄, bjt , z̄j , xt )

0.12

0.06

0.1

0.05

0.08

0.04

0.06

ν

ν

z

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.01

0
−3

−2

−1

0

1
b

2

3

4

5

47

x

0.03

0
−3

−2

−1

0
b

1

2

3

Figure 7 : Risk and Expected Excess Return Against Underlying State Variables, Model 2
with the Collateral Constraint
This figure plots for Model 2 risk, β jt , in Panels A and B, and expected excess return, Et [rjt+1 ]−rf t in Panels C and
D against underlying state variables. Panels A and C plot the variables against current debt, bjt , and firm-specific
productivity, zjt , while fixing aggregate productivity, xt , and capital stock, kjt , at their respective long run average
levels, x̄ and k̄ (k̄ is determined in model simulations). In Panels A and C, we plot a class of curves, corresponding
to different values of zjt , and the arrow in each panel indicates the direction along which zjt increases. Panels B and
D plot the variables against current debt, bjt , and aggregate productivity, xt , while fixing firm-specific productivity,
zjt , and capital stock, kjt , at their respective long run average levels, z̄j = 0 and k̄. In Panels B and D, we report a
class of curves corresponding to different values of xt , and the arrows indicate the direction along which xt increases.

Panel A: β jt (k̄, bjt , zjt , x̄)

Panel B: β jt (k̄, bjt , z̄j , xt )

6

1.3
1.2

5
1.1
1

4

x

3

β

β

0.9
0.8
0.7

z

2
0.6
0.5

1

0.4

0
−3

−2

−1

0

1
b

2

3

4

5

0.3
−3

Panel C: Et [rjt+1 − rf t ](k̄, bjt , zjt , x̄)

−2

−1

0
b

1

2

3

2

3

Panel D: Et [rjt+1 − rf t ](k̄, bjt , z̄j , xt )
−3

14

0.08
0.07

x 10

12

0.06

10
E[rt+1−rft]

E[rt+1−rft]

0.05
0.04

8

z

0.03

6
x

0.02

4
0.01
0
−3

−2

−1

0

1
b

2

3

4

5

48

2
−3

−2

−1

0
b

1

