NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEDERAL TAX POLICY TOWARDS ENERGY
Gilbert E. Metcalf
Working Paper 12568
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12568

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

This paper was prepared for the Tax Policy and the Economy conference to be held on September
14, 2006 in Washington, DC. I thank Tom Barthold, Alex Brill, John Navratil, Nicolas Osouf, John
Parsons, Jim Poterba, and participants in the MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global
Change EPPA Seminar for helpful discussions. I am grateful for support from the MIT Joint Program
on the Science and Policy of Global Change which I was visiting while writing this paper. Contact
information: gmetcalf@tufts.edu The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Federal Tax Policy Towards Energy
Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 12568
October 2006
JEL No. H20,Q48
ABSTRACT
On Aug. 8, 2005, President Bush signed the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (PL 109-58). This was the
first major piece of energy legislation enacted since 1992 following five years of Congressional efforts
to pass energy legislation. Among other things, the law contains tax incentives worth over $14 billion
between 2005 and 2015. These incentives represent both pre-existing initiatives that the law extends
as well as new initiatives. In this paper I survey federal tax energy policy focusing both on programs
that affect energy supply and demand. I briefly discuss the distributional and incentive impacts of
many of these incentives. In particular, I make a rough calculation of the impact of tax incentives
for domestic oil production on world oil supply and prices and find that the incentives for domestic
production have negligible impact on world supply or prices despite the United States being the third
largest oil producing country in the world. Finally, I present results from a model of electricity pricing
to assess the impact of the federal tax incentives directed at electricity generation. I find that nuclear
power and renewable electricity sources benefit substantially from accelerated depreciation and that
the production and investment tax credits make clean coal technologies cost competitive with pulverized
coal and wind and biomass cost competitive with natural gas.
Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu

I.

Introduction
On Aug. 8, 2005, President Bush signed the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (PL 109-

58). This was the first major piece of energy legislation since 1992 and culminated five
years of efforts to pass energy legislation by the Bush Administration. Among other
things, the law contains tax incentives worth over $14 billion between 2005 and 2015.
These incentives represent both pre-existing initiatives that the law extends as well as
new initiatives. In this paper I review federal tax energy policy focusing both on
programs that affect energy supply and demand.
In the next section, I discuss an economic rationale for energy tax incentives.
Next, I review current energy taxes in section III. In the following section, I summarize
the various energy incentives in the tax code.1 These include accelerated depreciation of
various types as well as production and investment tax credits. In addition, special
incentives are targeted towards electric utilities and the transportation sector. In section
V, I briefly discuss the distributional and incentive impacts of many of these tax
incentives. I also conduct a levelized cost analysis of various electricity generation
technologies to assess the impact of the production and investment tax incentives directed
at electricity generation.
In summary, the energy taxes or tax incentives currently in effect are difficult to
justify on the basis of economic theory. Energy taxes totaled $36.1 billion in fiscal year
2004 with the vast bulk of the revenues coming from motor vehicle fuel taxes. The most
1

The list is naturally incomplete given the complexity of the tax code. In particular I do not focus on how
the tax treatment of foreign income earned by multinational corporations bears on energy production. This
is potentially a major issue. For example, prior to the nationalization of oil production in the major oil
producing countries, the major U.S. oil producers paid taxes to host countries that were termed income
taxes but were in reality excise taxes. Standard tax treatment would provide for a deduction on the U.S.
corporate income tax for those foreign tax payments. Instead, the U.S. companies were allowed a foreign
tax credit for the "income" taxes paid to host countries, a preference lobbied for by – among others – the
State Department. See Adelman (1995), pp. 50 – 55 for more on this point.

pressing case for taxation – externalities – suggests direct pollution or driving charges
rather than a gasoline tax. The other motor vehicle related tax, the Gas Guzzler Tax,
suffers from the defect of excluding light trucks and Sport Utility Vehicles (SUVs) from
the tax. These make up the majority of motor vehicles currently sold.
With the passage of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPACT), energy tax
preferences are worth roughly $6.7 billion in fiscal year 2006. The production and
investment tax credits have been effective at making certain renewable energy sources
(mainly wind and biomass) competitive with natural gas in electricity generation. I note,
however, that tax credits are a socially costly way of making these renewable sources
competitive with fossil fuel sources.
Finally, while fossil fuel and nuclear power continue to receive the majority of
benefits from tax incentives, the tilt towards these fuels is not as large as it once was.
Percentage depletion and expensing of intangible drilling costs, for example, have been
scaled back relative to the situation in the 1950s and 1960s. And the investment tax
credits for solar generated electricity combined with generous depreciation tax treatment
contribute to negative effective tax rates on solar generated electricity.
II.

Rationale for Government Energy Tax Incentives
Why should the federal government have an energy policy? More particularly,

why should the tax code be used as an instrument of an energy policy? To help evaluate
the various provisions of the tax code that affect energy supply and demand, I briefly
review four major arguments for government intervention in energy markets: energy
externalities, national security, market failures and barriers in energy conservation

2

markets, and rent expropriation. For a more in-depth review, see Newbery (2005) or
Lazzari (2005).
A broad array of externalities are associated with our consumption of energy.
Burning fossil fuels contributes to air pollution (sulfur dioxides, nitrogen oxides,
particulates) and generates greenhouse gases. In addition, our use of petroleum in
transportation contributes to roadway congestion, accident externalities, and other traffic
related market failures (see Parry and Small (2005) for a fuller discussion of driving
related externalities). Economic theory suggests that we should tax externalities directly
rather than a proxy for the externality (here, motor vehicle fuels). Road congestion
suggests the use of congestion or time-of-day pricing on highways. Tailpipe emissions
from vehicles call for emissions pricing if technologically feasible.2 Accident
externalities call for changes in automobile insurance pricing. None of these externalities
suggest a policy of taxing motor vehicle fuels directly. The one externality that might
suggest a motor fuels tax is global warming arising from burning fossil fuels given the
tight relationship between petroleum consumed and carbon emitted.3 But even here a
stronger case could be made for a comprehensive tax on the carbon content of all energy
sources rather than a specific tax on motor vehicle fuels.4
Positive spill-overs from research and development are frequently cited as an
argument for tax incentives for particular technologies. Supporters of production tax

2

See Feng et al. (2005) for a discussion and evaluation of feasible alternatives to direct emission taxes for
motor vehicles.
3
Two-thirds of petroleum is used in the transportation sector (U.S. Energy Information Administration
(2005)).
4
Partial policies can raise the cost of carbon emission reductions considerably. Pizer et al. (2006) present
model results showing that focusing climate change policies only on the transportation and electricity
sectors doubles the cost of a given carbon emissions reduction. Note too that the motor vehicle fuels tax is
sometimes justified as a use charge for highways. To the extent this is true, the motor vehicle fuels tax is
even less effective as a proxy tax for externalities.

3

credits for renewable fuels, for example, argue that experience in the marketplace and
learning by doing will bring about cost savings that support the initial subsidies. The
difficulty with such an argument, of course, is that all research and development
spending has elements of non-appropriability leading to a policy prescription of support
for general R&D rather than sector or technology specific R&D support.
A second broad rationale for government intervention in energy markets is
national security concerns. Here the argument is that our dependence on imported
energy, oil in particular, makes us vulnerable to economic coercion from foreign owners
of energy resources. In 2004, the United States imported over 60 percent of the 20.5
million barrels per day of petroleum that it consumed (Energy Information
Administration (2005)). The need to protect a stable source of energy imports, it is
argued, requires increased spending on defense and national security and has made the
country more vulnerable to unstable governments in the Middle East and other oil rich
regions. Oil import tariffs are a proposed solution to this problem. By reducing our
dependence on foreign oil, it is argued, the United States reduces its vulnerability to
political and economic instability elsewhere. The difficulty with this argument is that oil
is a commodity priced on world markets. Even if the United States were to produce all
the oil it consumes, it would still be vulnerable to oil price fluctuations. A supply
reduction in the Middle East would raise prices of domestic oil just as readily as it raises
prices of imported oil.5

5

That the source of the oil the United States consumes is irrelevant for oil price stability should be made
clear by the fact that the United States is the third largest oil producer in the world, with production only
exceeded by the Russian Federation and Saudi Arabia. The United States produced 8.5 percent of the
world's oil in 2004. It is also the second largest producer of natural gas after the Russian Federation with a
world production share of 19 percent. See BP (2006) for data.

4

A third argument for government intervention in energy markets is the existence
of market barriers to energy efficient capital investment. A long-standing "energy
paradox" claims that consumers need very high rates of return on energy efficient capital
(appliances, housing improvements, lighting, etc.) and a variety of market barriers have
been proposed to explain this paradox and to motivate market interventions. I critique
the market barriers literature elsewhere (Metcalf (2006)) and simply note two relevant
issues here that support possible market interventions. First, many have argued that
consumers are poorly informed about the potential for energy savings (as well as the
value of the savings) associated with new more expensive technologies. This is a
reasonable point given the public good nature of information acquisition and suggests the
value of government information programs. Programs such as energy efficiency labeling
on new appliances can help overcome information failures at low cost. Second,
principal-agent problems may deter energy efficient investments. A good example is the
provision of energy efficient appliances and housing in rental housing. Tenants may
desire more energy efficient housing and appliances but landlords may be reluctant to
make the investments out of concern that they may be unable to recoup their incremental
investment through higher rents. In addition, many apartment buildings are not easily
converted to allow for tenant control over and payment for energy consumption
(especially heating services) in individual units. This removes incentives for tenants to
conserve energy. Landlords, meanwhile, may be reluctant to invest in energy
conservation capital if the effectiveness of the investment depends on tenant use
characteristics (installing additional insulation is likely not cost-effective if tenants open
windows during the winter when apartments become overheated). The appropriate policy

5

response in this situation is to provide a subsidy to tenants (or landlords) for investments
in energy conservation capital.
Finally, a number of authors (Newbery (1976), Bergstrom (1982), Karp and
Newbery (1991)) have noted that an oil import tariff can expropriate some portion of the
Hotelling rents associated with oil. The intuition is straightforward if all consuming
countries could act in collusion. Since potential oil supply from known oil fields is fixed,
a tax that doesn't alter the relative scarcity rents of oil over time will not affect the time
profile of extraction. Thus, we can collapse the analysis to that of a tax on an
inelastically supplied product. Since the entire burden of such a tax is on the supplier, the
result follows.6 Newbery (2005) estimates that the optimal oil import tariff for the EU
and the United States ranges between $3.10 and $15.60 per barrel in 2002.
Summing up, we shall see that the arguments for using the tax code to affect
energy supply and demand are poorly related to existing energy tax policy. The most
compelling case can be made for energy taxes related to carbon emissions and for an oil
import fee to transfer some of the Hotelling rents from oil suppliers to the United States.
I turn next to an discussion of current energy tax provisions at the federal level.
III.

Federal Energy Taxes
Table 1 lists federal taxes that are specifically linked to energy production or

consumption. By far the largest are the excise taxes on gasoline and diesel fuels that are
dedicated to the Highway Trust Fund accounting for over 95 percent of federal energy
excise tax collections in FY 2004. The federal excise tax rate on gasoline is 18.4¢ per
gallon. Of that, 0.1¢ is dedicated to the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund
6

Karp and Newbery (1991) provide a more sophisticated analysis to resolve a dynamic inconsistency
problem with simple oil tariff expropriation stories. But the basic result holds.

6

and the remaining 18.3¢ to the Highway Trust Fund.7 Of that 18.3¢ per gallon, 2.86¢ is
dedicated to the Mass Transit Account and the remaining 15.44¢ to the Highway
Account. In fiscal year 2004, this tax raised $35.1 billion. In comparison, total outlays
for grants to state and local governments from the highway and urban mass transit
programs in fiscal year 2004 were $30.0 billion. Non-trust fund aid to sub-federal
governments for highways and urban mass transit totaled an additional $7.8 billion with
nearly all of that designated to urban mass transit.
Because the federal motor fuels gas tax is an excise tax, its ad valorem equivalent
rate fluctuates with gas prices. Figure 1 shows how the rate has changed between 1978
and 2005. With the decline of gasoline prices in the late 1980s, the tax peaked at 27
percent of the refiner price of finished motor gasoline to end users in 1998 and has fallen
since then to 10 percent in 2005.
The United States has the lowest tax rate on unleaded gasoline among all the
OECD countries (see Figure 2). Its tax rate per litre ($.104) in the fourth quarter of 2005
was less than half that of the next closest country and compares to an OECD average rate
of $.789 per litre. Returning to the importance of motor fuels taxes in total energy tax
collections, consider the United Kingdom. Its tax on gasoline is the third highest among
OECD countries (see Figure 2). Yet the UK tax on hydrocarbons is only 90 percent of its
total energy tax collections.8

7

The tax was most recently raised to 18.3¢ per gallon for gasoline on Oct. 1, 1993. See Jackson (2006) for
a history of changes to this tax.
8
In fiscal year 2004, the UK collected £832 million in its Climate Change Levy, approximately £1,614
million in VAT on energy related sales, and £22,786 in its hydrocarbons tax. Data are from excise tax
sheets published by HM Revenue & Customs and available at http://www.uktradeinfo.com.

7

The Gas Guzzler Tax was enacted as part of the Energy Tax Act of 1978. It
levies a tax on automobiles that obtain fuel mileage below 22.5 miles per gallon.9 Tax
rates range from $1,000 to $7,700 per vehicle. In 2004 the tax collected $141 million.
The gas guzzler tax explicitly excludes sport utility vehicles, minivans, and pickup
trucks, which represent 54 percent of the new vehicle sales in 2004 (U.S. Census Bureau
(2006), Table 1027). The light truck category (comprising SUVs, minivans, and pickup
trucks) is the fastest growing segment of the new vehicle market, growing at an annual
rate of 5.5 percent between 1990 and 2004. In contrast, new car sales are falling at an
annual rate of 1.6 percent. Unofficial Congressional estimates suggest that phasing out
the SUV loophole over four years would raise roughly $700 million annually once the
phase-out was complete.

9

The mileage rating is calculated approximately as 55 percent of the EPA city mileage rating and 45
percent of the highway rating.

8

Table 1. Federal Energy Excise Taxes
Tax
Highway Trust Fund Revenues
Gas Guzzler Tax
Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund
Leaking Underground Storage Tank Tax

Coal Excise Tax

Aquatic Resources Trust Fund Tax on
Motorboat Gasoline and Other Fuels
Inland Waterway Fuels Tax
*

Tax Rate
18.3¢ per gallon of
gasoline*
$1,000 - $7,700 per
vehicle depending
on mileage
5¢ per barrel
0.1¢ per gallon of
motor fuels
lower of 4.4 percent
of sale price and
$1.10 per ton ($.55
per ton for surface
mined coal)
motorboat gasoline
proceeds from
Highway Trust
Fund revenues
$.224 per gallon for
commercial vessels
Total

Revenue
Projection for
FY2004
($millions)
$34,711
141
189

566

416
91
$36,114

Diesel fuel is taxed at the federal level at 24.3¢ per gallon. State level taxes on gasoline and diesel fuel
averaged 18.1¢ as of April 2006. According to the American Petroleum Institute (2006), taking into
account all taxes on gasoline (diesel) including the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Tax, the average
tax rate is 46.5¢ (53.02¢) per gallon.
Source: Budget of the United States, Historic Tables, Table 2.4. Gas Guzzler tax revenue from SOI
Historic Tables, Table 21.

The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPACT) resurrected the Oil Spill Liability Trust
Fund tax at the original rate of 5¢ per barrel. This tax had previously been in effect from
1990 through 1994. The Joint Committee on Taxation estimates that this tax will raise
$1.25 billion between 2005 and 2010. The tax is imposed on crude oil received at U.S.
refineries as well as imported petroleum products. Domestic crude oil for export is also
subject to the tax if the tax had not been previously paid.

9

The coal excise tax funds the Black Lung Disability Fund. It is levied on coal
mined in the United States at a rate of 4.4 percent of the sales price up to a limit of $1.10
per ton of underground coal and $.55 per ton of surface mined coal. This tax raised $566
million in 2004.
Gasoline sold for sport motorboats is taxed at the same rate as highway gasoline
and diesel fuel and the funds allocated to the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund (subject to an
annual cap on transfers that effectively reduces the share of tax on motorboat fuels shifted
to this trust fund). Finally the Inland Waterways Fuels Tax levies a tax of 22.4¢ per
gallon of fuel sold to commercial vessels using the Inland Waterway System (barges for
the most part).
IV.

Energy Incentives in the Corporate and Personal Income Tax
The President's FY2007 Budget Submission lists over $20 billion of tax

expenditures (for the fiscal years 2007-2011) associated with energy.10 Table 2 lists these
tax expenditures sorted from highest to lowest cost (over the five year budget window).
Both the number of tax provisions and the revenue cost have increased as a result of
2005's energy legislation. The General Accounting Office (2005) listed nine income tax
preferences totaling $4.2 billion in revenue loss in fiscal year 2003.11 In fiscal year 2006,
the Administration's budget lists 29 preferences totaling $6.7 billion for that year.
The single largest tax expenditure is associated with alcohol fuels. Most of this
revenue loss arises from the reduction in motor vehicle fuel tax revenues ($12,500
million) with the remainder arising from the $.51 per gallon income tax credit for this
10

I have not included tax expenditures associated with transportation (e.g. exclusion from income for
employer reimbursed parking). Nor do I consider state or local energy tax incentives in this paper.
11
As GAO points out, one cannot simply add tax expenditures given the interactions among different
provisions of the tax code. But the summation indicates the relative importance of the provisions when
making comparisons across time.

10

fuel.12 After alcohol fuels is the tax expenditure for investment and production tax
credits for new energy technologies. Investment tax credits range from 20 to 30 percent
depending on the technology and production tax credits exist, primarily for electricity
produced from renewable energy sources.
Before turning to a discussion of the current code, it may be useful to provide
some historical perspective on the federal tax treatment of energy.13 Prior to the first oil
embargo in 1973 the federal government's tax policy was designed to encourage fossil
fuel exploration and production. Expensing of intangible drilling costs was introduced in
1916 and percentage depletion in 1926. Percentage depletion for oil and gas was
particularly generous with a rate of 27.5 percent (relative to the current rate of 15 percent)
for oil and gas and was available to all companies, not simply independent producers as
at present.
During the 1970s the sharp increase in the price of oil combined with growing
environmental concerns associated with oil and gas drilling as well as a rising federal
budget deficit led to a curtailment of the preferential treatment for fossil fuels. The
percentage depletion rate, for example, was reduced to 15 percent for oil and gas and
restricted to independent producers (i.e. producers without refining or retailing
operations). The Energy Tax Act of 1978 introduced the Gas Guzzler Tax, tax subsidies
for gasohol, and investment tax credits for conservation and renewable energy
production. This was followed by the Windfall Profits Tax which, in addition to its
efforts to tax profits on old oil, enacted the section 29 production tax credits for nonconventional oil.
12

It is unclear whether this tax expenditure has any incentive effect now that ethanol use is mandated in
motor fuels by the Energy Policy Act of 2005. I thank John McLelland for pointing this out.
13
This brief description draws on an excellent overview by Lazzari (2006).

11

The election of Ronald Reagan in 1980 ushered in an new era in the federal
government's tax treatment of energy. According to Lazzari (2006), Reagan brought a
free-market approach to energy policy. As such, he worked to eliminate the Windfall
Profits Tax (largely repealed in 1988) and to end federal tax credits for energy production
or investment. By 1988 all that remained of the federal tax credits for energy were the
section 48 investment tax credits for solar and geothermal power.
The post-Reagan era saw a number of changes to the tax code with the most
significant being the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (PL 102-486). This law enacted the
section 45 production tax credits for wind and closed loop biomass generated electricity.
As discussed below, this credit was gradually expanded to cover other renewable sources
and remains in effect today.14 Other laws passed during the post-Reagan era generally
extended existing production and investment tax credits and raised the gasoline tax.15
The most recent change is the Energy Policy Act of 2005 which extended and
expanded coverage of the section 45 production and section 48 investment tax credits
among a variety of other provisions. I discuss the current tax code's various provisions in
the next section.16

14

The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (PL 108-357) provided a major expansion of the production
tax credits.
15
The production tax credit for wind and biomass briefly expired in 2003. According to the American
Wind Energy Association, wind power capacity additions fell from 1,687 MW in 2003 to 389 MW
following the temporary lapse of this tax provision.
16
In general I do not discuss energy tax incentives that have expired. See Edwards et al. (1998) for some
discussion of energy tax incentives related to global warming that existed prior to 1998. This includes the
major incentives that have expired. I also generally do not provide information about sunset provisions for
the various incentives since historically sunset dates have been extended for most energy-related tax
incentives.

12

Table 2. Energy Tax Expenditures
Tax Provision
Alcohol fuel credits
New technology credit (secs. 45 & 48)
Alternative fuel production credit (sec. 29)
Expensing of exploration and development costs
Excess of percentage over cost depletion
Temporary 50% expensing for equipment used in the
refining of liquid fuels
Credit for investment in clean coal facilities
Amortize all geological and geophysical expenditures over
2 years
Natural gas distribution pipelines treated as 15–year
property
Credit for energy efficiency improvements to existing
homes
Exclusion of interest on energy facility bonds
Tax credit and deduction for clean-fuel burning vehicles
Capital gains treatment of royalties on coal
Exclusion of utility conservation subsidies
Allowance of deduction for certain energy efficient
commercial building property
Exception from passive loss limitation for working
interests in oil and gas properties
Credit for holding clean renewable energy bonds
Credit for business installation of qualified fuel cells and
stationary microturbine power plants
Credit for energy efficient appliances
Credit for construction of new energy efficient homes
Enhanced oil recovery credit
30% credit for residential purchases/installations of solar
and fuel cells
Pass through low sulfur diesel expensing to cooperative
owners
Deferral of gain from dispositions of transmission property
to implement FERC restructuring policy
Credit for production from advanced nuclear power
facilities
Alternative fuel and fuel mixture tax credit

Revenue Cost:
FY 2007-2011
($millions)
12,730
4,060
3,450
3,230
3,230
830
780
630
560
530
510
420
400
380
340
200
180
150
80
40
20
20
-30
-210
-

Source: FY2007 Budget Submission of the President, Analytical Perspectives

13

A.

Depreciation
Depreciation is the wearing out of an asset over time and is properly recognized

as a cost of doing business. Economic depreciation refers to the actual wearing out of the
asset as reflected in changes in the asset's value over time. A pure income tax would
allow a deduction for economic depreciation. Because of the difficulties involved in
measuring economic depreciation, the tax code groups assets into broad categories and
mandates depreciation schedules for assets in each category. Tax depreciation may bear
some resemblance to economic depreciation but it should be stressed that tax depreciation
is a policy tool that may be used to encourage or discourage certain types of investment at
the expense of other types. Accelerated depreciation refers to a depreciation schedule that
allows for more rapid tax depreciation than economic depreciation. The limit of
accelerated depreciation is expensing, an immediate deduction for the entire cost of the
asset.
Expensing an asset reduces the effective tax rate on this asset to zero. To see this
consider an asset worth $100 that generates additional net profits of $20 per year. In the
absence of taxation, this asset produces a net return of 20 percent. Now impose a 35
percent tax with expensing. In the first year, the firm takes a deduction for the cost of the
machine and enjoys a reduction in taxes of $35 (35% times $100). The after-tax cost of
the machine has been reduced to $65. In subsequent years, the firm obtains additional
after-tax profits of $13. The net return on this investment is still 20 percent ($13/$65).
Under the current tax code, capital assets are depreciated according to the
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) with recovery periods ranging

14

from 3 to 39 years under the General Depreciation System (GDS).17 Most capital is
depreciated using a declining balance method at either 200 percent (3, 5, 7, and 10 year
property) or 150 percent (15 and 20 year property). Table 3 shows the recovery period
for various types of energy related capital. Most electric generating capital is depreciated
over twenty years with the major exception being nuclear power plants (15 years) and
renewable energy generating capital (5 years). High voltage electricity transmission
lines received a 15 year recovery period in the Energy Policy Act of 2005. That act also
clarified the depreciation of natural gas gathering (7 years) and reduced the recovery
period of distribution pipelines from 20 to 15 years. In addition, the new law also
contains a provision allowing partial expensing for new refinery capacity placed in
service before 2012. The provision allows for 50 percent expensing with the remainder
deducted as under current law.
Below, I provide some analysis of the impact of accelerated depreciation (as well
as other tax provisions) on the cost of capital for various types of electricity generating
property and show that nuclear power and electricity generated from renewable sources
receive particularly generous tax treatment from accelerated depreciation.

17

The recovery period is the number of years over which an asset may be depreciated for tax purposes.
Certain assets must be depreciated under the Alternative Depreciation System (ADS). See U.S. Internal
Revenue Service (2006) for more information.

15

Table 3. Recovery Periods for Energy Capital
Recovery Period
Property
(years)
Electric Utility Generation and
20
Distribution Property
Electric Transmission Property (below 69
20
kV)
69 kV and Higher Electric Transmission
15
Property
Electric Utility Nuclear Power Generator
15
Industrial Electric Generation
15
Liquefied Natural Gas Plant
15
Natural Gas Distribution Pipelines
15
Pipeline Transportation (including storage
15
of integrated producers)
Coal Gasification Production Property
10
Refineries
10
Natural Gas Gathering Pipelines
7
Natural Gas Production Property
7
Electric Utility Nuclear Fuel Assemblies
5
Oil and Gas Drilling Rigs
5
Section 48 Alternative Energy Property
5
Source: U.S. Internal Revenue Service (2006)

Oil drilling receives an additional depreciation benefit from the ability to expense
dry holes. One can view dry holes as part of the cost of drilling a successful well. This
tax provision raises the effective value of the depreciation deductions for oil rigs.
Technology, however, has reduced the percentage of dry holes. In 1960, forty percent of
all wells drilled were dry holes. By 2004, that percentage had fallen to twelve percent
reducing the tax advantage of dry hole expensing.18
While not energy capital explicitly, motor vehicles have a significant impact on
energy consumption and depreciation rules treat different types of motor vehicles very
18

Exploratory wells continue to have high failure rates. In 2003, 55 percent of exploratory wells were dry
holes and 9 percent of development wells were dry holes. But less than 2,700 exploratory wells were
drilled that year compared to over 32,200 development wells. Roughly the same number of development
wells were drilled in 1960 but with a dry hole rate of 25 percent. However, 11,700 exploratory wells were
drilled with over 80 percent of them being dry holes. See tables 4.5-4.7 in U.S. Energy Information
Administration (2005).

16

differently. Clean fuel vehicles may be expensed up to limits (ranging from $50,000 for
trucks or vans with gross vehicle weight exceeding 26,000 pounds to $2,000 for motor
vehicles weighing less than 10,000 pounds). Clean fuel vehicles include vehicles that
burn natural gas, LNG, LPG, hydrogen, electricity, gasohol (if at least 85 percent
alcohol), and certain hybrid electric vehicles.
Passenger cars, SUVs, and pickup trucks used in a small business can have very
different depreciation treatment. Small businesses are allowed a section 179 deduction of
up to $100,000 per year in capital expenses (subject to phase-out rules). The section 179
deduction is limited for motor vehicles in certain ways. First, passenger vehicles and
light trucks with a gross vehicle weight of 6,000 pounds or less are treated as listed
property and subject to annual depreciation deduction limits arising from luxury
passenger car rules written in the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 (PL 98-369). These
vehicles must be depreciated over a five year period with specified annual depreciation
caps.19 The luxury vehicle limits are such that any passenger car costing more than
$13,860 and any light truck costing more than $15,360 will have a recovery period longer
than the standard five year recovery period for motor vehicles. Second, small businesses
purchasing SUVs weighing more than 6,000 pounds (but not more than 14,000 pounds)
can expense $25,000 and depreciate the balance over five years using double-declining
balance rules. Table 4 illustrates how the various depreciation rules affect the after-tax
price for a small business owner in the top personal income tax bracket choosing among
three new 2005 vehicles each costing $30,000. The passenger car must be written off

19

The caps for 2005 were $2,960 in the first year, $4,700 in the second year, $2,850 in the third year, and
$1,675 in subsequent years for passenger cars. For light trucks weighing less than 6,000 pounds (including
minivans, SUVs, and pickup trucks) the limits are $3,260 in the first year, $5,200 in the second year,
$3,150 in the third year, and $1,875 in subsequent years.

17

over 21 years as opposed to 19 years for the light SUV and 6 years for the heavy SUV.
The differences in depreciation treatment raise the price of the passenger car and light
SUV by 13 and 10 percent respectively relative to the heavy SUV.
Table 4. Depreciation Treatment for Motor Vehicles
Toyota Avalon
Ford Escape
Ford Expedition
Gross Vehicle
3,490
5,520
7,300
Weight Rating
Years to Depreciate
21
19
6
PV of Tax Shield
6,632
7,135
9,308
After-Tax Vehicle
23,368
22,865
20,692
Cost
Percentage MarkUp Over Heavy
13%
10%
-SUV

Curb weight reported for Toyota Avalon. Table assumes purchase price of $30,000 for all vehicles, tax rate
of 35 percent and a discount rate of 10 percent.

B.

Tax Treatment Specific to Fossil Fuel Production
Traditionally, fossil fuels have received preferential tax treatment. Percentage

depletion and the expensing of intangible drilling costs are the most well known. While
not as generously treated as in the past, the tax preferences for fossil fuel production are
still important.
As natural resources are extracted from booked reserves, the value of those
reserves is diminished. This is a legitimate cost of business and a Haig-Simons income
tax would allow a deduction for the value of the resource extracted. Rather than take
deductions for the value of the extracted resource, oil, gas, and coal producers have
historically been allowed a deduction based on percentage depletion. Percentage
depletion allows the firm to deduct a fraction of the revenue arising from sale of the
resource. Historic percentage depletion rates have been as high as 27.5 percent.
Currently percentage depletion is allowed for independent producers at a 15 percent rate

18

for oil and gas and 10 percent for coal.20 Percentage depletion is allowed on production
up to 1,000 barrels of average daily production of oil (or its equivalent for natural gas).
In addition, the depletion allowance cannot exceed 100 percent of taxable income from
the property (50 percent for coal) and 65 percent of taxable income from all sources.21
Despite the curtailed availability of percentage depletion, it continues to be a significant
energy tax expenditure, costing $3.2 billion over five years in the federal budget (see
Table 2).
The following example illustrates the tax benefits of percentage depletion over
cost depletion. John Doe purchases an interest in a property for $300,000 that contains
reserves of 50,000 barrels of oil. He produces 10,000 barrels of oil in the first year which
he sells for $630,000. Under cost depletion, he would be allowed to deduct $60,000 for
the reduction in reserves

10,000
x$300,000 . Percentage depletion allows him to
50,000

deduct $94,500 (.15 x $630,000). Note that percentage depletion can exceed the basis in
the asset. Continuing to assume a first purchase price of $63 per barrel, the total value of
oil extracted would be $3.15 million and the percentage depletion deduction would be
$472,500.22 Obviously the benefit of percentage depletion would be considerably higher
at the historic depletion rate of 27.5 percent.
The second major tax benefit available to oil and gas producers is the ability to
expense intangible drilling expenses (labor and material costs associated with drilling
20

Independent producers are defined as producers who do not engage in refining or retail operations.
EPACT increased the amount of oil a company could refine before it was deemed to engage in refining for
this purpose from 50,000 to 75,000 barrels per day.
21
Amounts in excess of the 65 percent rule can be carried forward to subsequent tax years. The net income
limitation has been suspended in years past but the suspension lapsed as of this year.
22
This example presumes that the net income from the first year's operation exceeds $94,500. If not, the
deduction would be reduced accordingly. For purposes of computing the net income limitation, costs are
computed without any depletion deduction considered.

19

wells). Normally the non-capital expenses associated with oil exploration and drilling
would be capitalized and the costs allocated as income is earned from the well over its
useful life. Instead firms may deduct these expenses in the first year. Corporations may
only deduct 70 percent of the costs and must depreciate the remaining 30 percent over
five years. Additionally, geological and geophysical costs associated with exploration
can be amortized over a two year period.23 As noted in Table 2, this is the third largest
energy tax expenditure in the federal budget totaling $3.2 billion over five years.
In addition to the tax preferences described above, I note two additional
significant tax preferences. First, owners of coal mining rights who lease their land for
mining receive royalties for coal extracted from their property. Owners who are
individuals may elect to treat those royalty payments as capital income in lieu of taking
percentage depletion on the property. Second, owners of working interests in oil and gas
properties are exempt from passive loss limitations for income from these properties.
C.

Production and Investment Tax Credits
The federal tax code includes a number of production and investment tax credits

on fossil, alternative, nuclear, and renewable fuels. Those credits include the following:
1.

Section 29 Non-Conventional Oil Production Credit24
The 1980 Windfall Profits Tax (PL 96-223) was a failed effort to simultaneously

capture profits on old oil as a result of oil price increases in the 1970s and encourage
exploration for and production of new oil. The law was repealed in 1988.25 One part of
that law that was retained was the section 29 Alternative Fuel Production Credit for

23

EPACT set the recovery period at two years but the Tax Increase Prevention and Reconciliation Act of
2005 (PL 109-222) extended the period to five years for the major integrated oil companies.
24
Section 29 is relabeled as section 45K by EPACT.
25
For an overview and analysis of the Windfall Profit Tax, see Lazzari (1990).

20

production of non-conventional oil (e.g. shale oil, synthetic fuel oils from coal). The
section provides for a $3.00 per barrel of oil-equivalent production tax credit (indexed in
1979 dollars and worth $6.79 in 2005). The 2005 energy act adds coke and coke gas to
the list of qualified fuels and makes the credit part of the general business credit.26 The
credit phases out for oil prices above $23.50 in 1979 dollars ($53.20 in 2005).27
The tax expenditure for this credit is estimated to be $3.4 billion between FY
2007 and 2011 and is the second largest energy tax expenditure in the federal budget.
The main beneficiary of the credit is coalbed methane, natural gas that is extracted from
tight seams in coal mines. Traditionally this gas was vented to reduce safety problems in
mines. But with higher gas prices, the credit, and advances in technology, it has become
economic to recover this gas. This is not an non-conventional fuel per se but its
extraction method might be viewed as non-conventional.
2.

Section 45 Production Tax Credits
Section 45 of the IRS code, enacted in the Energy Policy Act of 1992, provided

for a production tax credit of 1.5¢ per kWh (indexed) of electricity generated from wind
and closed-loop biomass systems.28 The tax credit has been extended and expanded over
time and currently is available for wind, closed-loop biomass, poultry waste, solar,
geothermal and other renewable sources at a current rate of 1.9¢ per kWh.29 Firms may
take the credit for ten years. Refined coal is also eligible for a section 45 production

26

Most energy tax credits were part of the general business credit. Prior to EPACT, the section 29 credits
were an exception and so any unused credits were lost. As part of the general business credit, excess
credits can be carried backward one year and forward twenty years.
27
The reference price for oil in 2005 was $50.26 and so the full credit could be taken. The credit amount
and reference price are published annually in the Federal Register. With the reference oil price currently at
$62.51 (April 2006 crude oil domestic first purchase price), it is unlikely that firms will be able to take the
full section 29 credit in 2006.
28
A closed-loop biomass is plant material grown specifically for use in a biomass generator.
29
Open-loop biomass is eligible for a 0.75¢ in 1992 dollars per kWh.

21

credit at the current rate of $5.481 per ton.30 EPACT added new hydropower and Indian
coal with the latter receiving a credit of $1.50 per ton for the first four years and $2.00
per ton for three additional years. While EPACT extended the section 45 tax credits for
two additional years (through 2007), it did not extend the credit for solar generated
electricity beyond 2005.
Finally, EPACT allowed for the issuance of $800 million in Clean Renewable
Energy Bonds (CREBs) to finance projects eligible for section 45 production tax credits
(with the exception of Indian coal). CREBs do not pay interest. Rather the holder of a
CREB on its credit allowance date is entitled to a tax credit to be determined by the
Treasury Department so that the bond may be sold at par.31
3.

Other Production Tax Credits
EPACT provided a production tax credit for electricity produced at nuclear power

plants (section 45J). Qualifying plants are eligible for a 1.8¢ per kWh production tax
credit up to an annual limit of $125 million per 1,000 megawatts of installed capacity.
This limit will be binding for a nuclear power plant with a capacity factor of 80 percent
or higher. The law places an aggregate limit of 6,000 megawatts of capacity eligible for
this credit.
The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (PL 108-357) created a production
credit (section 45I) for marginal oil and gas producers of $3.00 per barrel of oil ($.50 per
mcf of natural gas) in year 2005 dollars. The full credit is available when oil (gas) prices
fall below $15 per barrel ($1.67 per mcf) and phases out when prices reach $18 per barrel

30

Refined coal is a synthetic fuel produced from coal with lower emissions of certain pollutants.
State and local tax exempt financing is also available for qualified energy facilities. These bonds are
subject to a state's private-activity volume cap.
31

22

($2.00 per mcf).32 Marginal wells produce on average 15 or less barrels of oil (or oil
equivalent) per day.
This same law provided for small refinery expensing of 75 percent of capital costs
associated with low sulfur diesel fuel production and a 5¢ per gallon small refiner's credit
for the remaining 25 percent of qualified capital costs for the production of low sulfur
diesel fuel. The 2005 Energy Policy Act allowed a pass through of this credit to owners
of cooperatives.
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 contained a provision for a 15
percent credit (section 43) for expenditures on enhanced oil recovery tangible property
and intangible drilling and development costs and other related capital expenditures. The
credit is phased out as the section 29 reference oil price exceeds $28 in 1990 dollars
($37.44 for 2005). At current prices, producers cannot take this credit.
4.

Section 48 Investment Tax Credits
Nonrefundable investment tax credits for alternative energy were initially put in

place in the Energy Tax Act of 1978 (PL 95-618) at a rate of 10 percent for solar and
geothermal property. That law provided a number of investment tax credits including a
credit for residential energy conservation investments. This latter credit expired in 1982.
EPACT increased the investment tax credit for solar to 30 percent. In addition the 30
percent tax credit applies to fuel cells used to produce electricity while the 10 percent
credit is available for qualifying microturbine power plants.
The section 48 investment tax credits for renewable energy production were
extended by EPACT to apply to investments in certain clean coal facilities. Integrated
gasification combined cycle (IGCC) plants are eligible for a 20 percent credit (up to a
32

The section 29 reference price is used to determine eligibility for this credit.

23

maximum of $800 million in credits); other advanced coal-based projects are eligible for
a 15 percent credit (up to a maximum of $500 million in credits); and certified
gasification projects are also eligible for a 20 percent credit (maximum of $350 million in
credits). The section 45 and 48 credits combined are the single largest energy tax
expenditure in the federal budget worth $4.1 billion over a five year period.
6.

Section 40 Alcohol and Biodiesel Fuels Credit
The Energy Policy Act of 1978 included an exemption from the motor fuels

excise tax for alcohol and alcohol blended fuels, generically known as gasohol.33 The
Windfall Profits Tax allowed an immediate tax credit in lieu of the exemption.34 The
credit was set at a rate to be equivalent to the tax exemption. The alcohol fuel mixture
credit is currently $.51 per gallon of ethanol in gasohol and $.60 for other alcohol based
fuels (excluding petroleum based alcohol fuels). In addition small producers may take a
credit of $.10 per gallon. The 2005 Energy Policy Act increased the small producer
production capacity limit from 30 million to 60 million gallons per year.
The American Jobs Creation Act also added section 40A of the code to provide an
income tax credit for biodiesel fuels at a rate of $.50 per gallon of bio-diesel (other than
agri-biodiesel) and $1.00 for agri-biodiesel. Like the alcohol fuel tax credit, it is first
applied to motor fuel excise tax payments with the excess added to the general business
credit.

33

Originally, the law provided a full exemption from the then $.04 per gallon tax. As the motor fuels
excise tax was raised over time, the exemption did not keep pace with the excise tax rate. See General
Accounting Office (1997) for an early chronology of events related to this tax exemption.
34
The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 subsequently eliminated the tax exemption in favor of the tax
credit.

24

Other Issues Bearing on Production and Investment Tax Credits
Firms or individuals may not receive the full value of the production and
investment tax credits (along with other energy related tax incentives) described above
depending on the taxpayer's alternative minimum tax (AMT) status. All of these credits
are part of the general business credit. Credits included in the general business credit
may be used to the extent that they do not reduce the taxpayer's after-credit liability
below the tentative minimum tax. Note that this limitation may occur even if the
taxpayer pays no alternative minimum tax.35 According to Carlson (2005), 70 percent of
firms in the mining industry in 2002 were either in a loss or an AMT status and so unable
to avail themselves of many if not all of their tax credits.36 It is unclear how the
limitation on the use of credits under the general business credit affects investment.
D.

Tax Incentives for Electric Utilities
Many of the tax incentives that affect the electric utility industry have to do with

accelerated depreciation and are discussed above. EPACT provided for several
additional incentives. First, electric utilities are allowed to carry back net operating
losses (NOLs) for five years (as opposed to the standard two year carry back) for an NOL
occurring in tax years 2003-2005. The NOL must be used before January 1, 2009 and the
tax refund arising from the use of the NOL is limited in any year to 20 percent of the

35

This would occur if the taxpayer's regular tax liability after foreign tax credits but before other tax credits
exceeded the tentative minimum tax but its regular tax liability after tax credits was less than the tentative
minimum tax. Foreign tax credits are included in the tentative minimum tax and thus not subject to AMT
limitations.
36
In addition to the AMT's impact on tax credits, the AMT treats mining exploration and development
costs, depletion including percentage depletion (unless an independent producer), and intangible drilling
costs as AMT preferences.

25

utility's prior year investment in electric transmission equipment rated at 69 kV or higher
and specified pollution control equipment.37
Second, owners of nuclear power plants are required to make contributions to a
decommissioning fund for the plant. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 allowed those
contributions to be tax deductible at the time of contribution if those contributions were
funded as part of the cost of service to ratepayers of regulated utilities. The cost of
service rules were repealed in EPACT so that all taxpayers, including unregulated
utilities, could deduct their contributions to decommissioning funds.
Finally, EPACT extends a current provision allowing electric utilities who
dispose of certain transmission property to implement FERC restructuring policy to
recognize the gain over an eight year period rather than in the current year. Proceeds
from the sale must be reinvested in other utility property.
E.

Transportation
The Energy Policy Act of 1992 allowed a 10 percent credit (up to $4,000) for the

purchase of an electric vehicle. After 2005, the maximum credit falls to $1,000 and the
credit terminates as of the end of 2006. Hybrid clean-fuel vehicles and other clean-fuel
vehicles were allowed a $2,000 deduction. These deductions and credits were replaced
by the Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit (sec. 30B) as enacted in EPACT. Section 30B
of the tax code provides a credit for fuel cell vehicles, alternate fuel vehicles (natural gas,
LNG, LPG, hydrogen, and 85 percent methanol fuel vehicles), and hybrids. The credit
depends on different vehicle attributes depending on the type of vehicle. Table 4 lists the
credit information for different fuel types.

37

The equipment need not be placed in service in that year.

26

Table 4. Clean Vehicle Tax Credits
Maximum
Credit with gross
Credit Determining
Fuel Type
vehicle rating
Characteristics
less than 8,500
pounds
gross vehicle weight,
Fuel Cell
$12,000
fuel economy
fuel economy,
Hybrids
$3,400
lifetime fuel savings
Alternative Fuels
gross vehicle weight
$4,000
Advanced Leanfuel economy,
$3,400
Burn Diesel
lifetime fuel savings
EPACT also replaced a deduction for installing clean-fuel vehicle refueling
property with a 30 percent tax credit for property placed in service before Jan. 1, 2008.
F.

Energy Efficiency
Prior to the passage of last year's energy legislation, the only remaining tax

incentive pertaining to energy conservation was section 136 of the tax code enacted in the
Energy Policy Act of 1992. Section 136 provides an exclusion from gross income of any
subsidies provided by an electric utility for the purchase or installation of any energy
conservation measure. EPACT provided a number of new incentives. First, the law
allows a 30 percent personal income tax credit not to exceed $2,000 for photovoltaic and
solar water heating property (excluding equipment for heating swimming pools and hot
tubs) installed at residential properties. Fuel cell power plants are also eligible for the 30
percent credit not to exceed $500 per 0.5 kW of capacity. Second, the law provides a 10
percent personal income tax credit for insulation materials, energy saving windows and
doors, and energy conserving metal roofs. In addition, taxpayers may take a credit for
specific energy efficiency appliances such as advanced main air circulating fans ($50),
furnace and hot water boilers ($150), and qualifying energy efficient property (e.g.

27

designated heat pumps and air conditioners) ($300) with a maximum credit per home of
$500 no more than $200 of which may be for windows. Third, contractors may take a tax
credit of $1,000 ($2,000) for new home construction that is certified to obtain a 30
percent (50 percent) reduction in energy usage.
Fourth, commercial property energy conservation expenditures are eligible for a
deduction of costs up to $1.80 per square foot if the spending effects a 50 percent or more
reduction in energy usage. For buildings that do not achieve a 50 percent reduction, a
partial allowance is allowed based on guidelines for specific technologies to be
established by the Secretary of the Treasury. Finally, appliance manufacturers are
provided a production credit for energy-efficient dishwashers, clothes washers, and
refrigerators. The maximum credit is $100 for dishwashers, $200 for clothes washers,
and $175 for refrigerators.
V.

Incentive and Distributional Effects of Energy Tax Incentives
Who benefits from the various taxes and tax incentives described in Sections III

and IV? And what are the impacts on energy demand and supply? In this section, I
discuss the incidence and behavioral impacts of various tax provisions.
A.

Motor Fuels Excise and Gas-Guzzler Taxes
Consider first the incidence impact of the federal excise tax on motor fuels.

Doyle and Samphantharak (2006) find that roughly 80 percent of increases in state sales
taxes on gasoline are passed forward to consumers. This is consistent with other studies
and likely underestimates the shifting of federal excise taxes to consumers given statelevel competition.38 Gasoline taxes are generally viewed as regressive. This view is
38

Doyle and Samphanthark report other studies showing complete forward shifting of federal motor fuel
taxes.

28

confirmed by Poterba (1991) when households are ranked by annual income. But when
ranked by current expenditures as a proxy for lifetime income, Poterba finds that gasoline
taxes are much less regressive.
Assessing the gas guzzler tax is more difficult. Surprisingly few studies of the
gas guzzler tax have been carried out that take the light truck loophole into account.
Greene et al. (2005) undertake simulations of a gas-guzzler tax and find that removing
the exemption for light trucks increases mileage for these vehicles as manufacturers
cluster vehicles (both passenger cars and light trucks) just above the miles per gallon
cutoff for the tax. Their study hold all characteristics other than fuel economy and price
constant. Thus, the recent phenomenon of using engine improvements to obtain higher
power and performance at the expense of fuel efficiency cannot be modeled in their
analysis.
B.

Oil and Natural Gas Production Incentives
Turning to production and investment tax incentives, consider first oil and natural

gas production. The favorable treatment accorded oil producers and refiners lowers the
cost of oil and could affect prices of final petroleum products. But since oil is priced in
world markets and to a great extent is a homogenous product, it is not clear that the
domestic tax incentives would have a large impact on the price of gasoline or other
petroleum products.39 In this case, the benefits largely accrue to producers in the form of
higher wages for specialized workers in oil production and refining and higher dividends
to shareholders.

39

Oil differs in its transportation costs as well as product characteristics (sulfur content, viscosity, etc.) In
the long run, however, these cost and characteristic differences have little impact on the final product costs.

29

It may be, however, that the U.S. supply incentives have an impact on worldwide
supply and price given the magnitude of U.S. oil production. As noted in footnote 5, the
United States is the third largest producer of oil with 8.5 percent of the world's
production in 2004. A simple rough calculation suggests however that the U.S. supply
incentives are unlikely to have a large impact on world oil prices or supply. Let QS* be
the world supply of oil, and QS the U.S. supply (with analogous variables defined for oil
demand). Also let ps and p̂ s be the price received by U.S. oil suppliers and oil suppliers
in the rest of the world, respectively. Finally, let p D = pˆ s = p s − s be the worldwide
demand price and s the subsidy arising from tax incentives provided to domestic oil
suppliers. Setting world oil supply equal to demand and differentiating, we obtain the
relationship between world oil prices and the domestic subsidy:

QS
ηD
QS*

dp D
=
ds
ηS −η D

(1)

where η D and η S are the demand and supply elasticities for oil. Long-run estimates of
these elasticities are in the neighborhood of -0.5 and 0.5 respectively.40 The percentage
change in worldwide oil supply is then

(2)

QS
ηD
QS*
dQ
ds
= −η D
.
ηS −ηD p
Q
*
S
*
S

The tax incentives for oil (percentage depletion and expensing of IDCs) are most
valuable for small producers. Taking the oil industry as a group, let us say that the value

40

Cooper (2003) reviews estimates of the long run demand elasticity and Greene et al. (1998) reviews long
run demand and supply elasticities.

30

of the subsidies is worth 10 percent of the current price of oil.41 Table 5 shows the
impact on world oil production for various demand and supply elasticities:
Table 5. Percentage Change in World Oil Supply
Demand Elasticity
-0.3
-0.5
-0.7
-0.1
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1
Supply
0.1%
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
0.3
Elasticity
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
0.2%
0.5
0.1%
0.2%
0.2%
0.3%
0.7

Change arising from a subsidy to domestic production equal to 10
percent of oil price.

The supply response ranges from zero to 0.3 percent with 0.2 percent the response
associated with the central parameter value assumptions. Table 6 shows that the price
response is also small:
Table 6. Percentage Change in World Oil Price
Demand Elasticity
-0.3
-0.5
-0.7
-0.1
-0.4%
-0.2%
-0.1%
-0.1%
0.1
Supply
0.3 -0.6% -0.4% -0.3% -0.3%
Elasticity
0.5 -0.7% -0.5% -0.4% -0.4%
0.7 -0.7% -0.6% -0.5% -0.4%

Change arising from a subsidy to domestic production equal to 10
percent of oil price.

The price decline ranges from 0.1 percent to 0.7 percent with a central parameter
response of 0.4 percent.
To some extent, a similar story can be made for natural gas. Natural gas is not as
easily transportable as oil and regional price differences can persist over time.

41

This is a high estimate. The GAO estimates for FY2003 tax preferences for the section 29 and enhanced
oil recovery credits, the excess of percentage over cost depletion, expensing of IDCs, and the rules on
passive loss limitations equal just over 2 percent of the value of domestic crude oil and natural gas
production in that year.

31

Improvements in transportation and the increase in LNG shipping, however, are breaking
down these regional barriers.42
This analysis is consistent with a recent analysis of a precursor bill to the Energy
Policy Act of 2005 done by the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2004). This
report reviewed section 29 and 45 tax credits along with other production incentive tax
provisions and concluded that with the exception of the section 29 credits, the provisions
did little to increase domestic production of gas or oil. Section 29 credits would increase
domestic natural gas from non-conventional sources (coalbed methane for the most part).
Ultimately, domestic consumption would be unaffected by these provisions.
Recall the discussion of national security as a rationale for an energy tax policy.
The analysis in this section suggests that the production and investment tax credits
embodied in current law will have little effect on world production or on efforts to
stabilize domestic energy prices. Where a policy to encourage domestic production of
energy may be effective is to increase the proportion of energy that is not subject to
supply disruptions due to political upheaval. But here the rationale is a bit murky. Many
of the tax incentives encourage the production of electricity from nuclear or renewable
sources. But currently only 3 percent of oil is used for electricity production. It may well
be that concerns about natural gas disruptions motivate these policies (natural gas
accounts for 24 percent of electricity production). Natural gas however is more subject to
price spikes arising from bottlenecks in production and distribution than from political
shocks. A concern with oil supply disruptions would suggest a focus on reducing

42

Natural gas imports as a percentage of total U.S. consumption have risen from 4.7 percent in 1980 to
15.3 percent in 2004 (U.S. Energy Information Administration (2005)).

32

petroleum use in transportation, currently responsible for two-thirds of all petroleum
consumption.

C.

Electric Generation from Alternative and Renewable Fuels
The production and investment credits for renewable and alternative fuels can

have a large impact on whether various electric generation technologies are cost
competitive in the marketplace. With the shift from regulated utilities to an environment
in which electricity generation is increasingly unregulated, cost considerations become
increasingly important for firms contemplating constructing merchant power plants. In
this section, I present estimates of the levelized cost for different sources of electricity
under varying assumptions about the availability of federal tax incentives.
The levelized cost analysis is similar in spirit to the Hall-Jorgenson cost of capital
framework. It asks what price must be received for electricity sold by a generator to
cover fixed and variable costs of providing the electricity including the required return
for equity owners.43 This approach has been used in a variety of studies of electric power
generation (e.g. Deutch and Moniz (2003), Tolley and Jones (2004), and Sekar et al.
(2005)). The steps to constructing an estimate of levelized cost are:
•

Compute the present discounted value of costs in each year over life of a project.
This includes all capital and operating costs net of tax deductions.

•

Sum all costs over life of project. This is the present discounted value of the
project’s overall costs.

•

Compute the amount of constant real before-tax revenue required each year that
will equal the total present discounted value of costs over the life of the project.

•

Divide this required revenue value by total kilowatt-hours produced by plant to
obtain a cost per kWh.

43

The price is a constant real price received over the life of the plant to cover lifetime fixed and variable
costs.

33

I estimate the levelized cost for the following eight electricity generation sources:
nuclear, conventional (pulverized) coal, clean coal using an integrated gasification
combined cycle (IGCC) process, natural gas combined cycle, biomass, wind, solar
thermal, and photovoltaics. The first three technologies are generally used as baseload
generators and the latter are either shoulder or peaking generators.
Table 7 provides key parameter value choices for the eight different
technologies.44 The capacity factor describes what fraction of the time a plant is
operating. Nuclear power plants are designed to operate continuously but are shut down
for routine and unexpected maintenance. The capacity factor for nuclear power is taken
from Deutch and Moniz (2003). I've chosen capacity factors for coal and natural gas to
be comparable to nuclear. The capacity factors for the renewable resources are for the
most part taken from the Energy Information Administration's National Energy Modeling
System (NEMS).45
The overnight cost is the total capital construction cost of the plant in year 2004
dollars. Construction costs are covered with short-term debt financing until the plant
goes into service. At that point, ten year bonds are issued and equity financing raised to
cover those costs. I've assumed 60 percent debt financing on all projects except nuclear.
I assume a lower debt financing rate of 50 percent to acknowledge the greater perceived
risk of nuclear financing in the marketplace. The economic life of these assets varies and
they have a MACRS recovery period of five to fifteen years. Finally, I assume that the

44

See Appendix A for a complete listing of parameter values and additional detail about the calculations.
These parameter values should be viewed with some caution. A degree of uncertainty underlies many of
the values. The overnight cost for nuclear power, for example, is highly uncertain given the limited recent
experience with construction in the United States and the uncertainties of the regulatory process.
45
I have not adjusted the wind and solar capacity factors to account for the intermittency of these power
sources.

34

Section 45J production tax credit for nuclear power hits the $125 million cap per 1,000
MW of capacity. See the Appendix for more details on the computation of levelized
costs.

*

Table 7. Selected Parameter Values for Levelized Cost Analysis
Coal
Coal
GasSolar
Technology
Nuclear
Biomass Wind
PC
IGCC
CC
Thermal
Capacity Factor
85%
85%
85%
85%
83%
35%*
31%*
Construction
6
4
4
3
4
3
3
Time
Overnight cost
2,014
1,249 1,443
584
1,809
1,167
3,047
($/kW)
% Debt Finance
50%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
Economic Life
40
30
25
25
20
20
20
MACRS Life
15
15
15
15
5
5
5
Production Tax
125
0
0
0
0.019
0.019
0
Credit ($/kWh)
Section 48 ITC
0
0
20%
0
0
0
30%

PV
21%*
2
4,598
60%
20
5
0
30%

- I have not assumed any additional costs for capacity to account for the intermittency of these power sources.
Source: See Appendix

Table 8 reports levelized costs of electricity in cents per kWh (year 2004 dollars).
I assume that the plant will be placed in service after Jan. 1, 2006 so that solar power is
not eligible for a production tax credit but does obtain the more generous 30 percent
section 48 investment tax credit.46 The first column provides the levelized cost under
current law. Coal has the lowest levelized cost with the cost of IGCC comparable to that
of a conventional pulverized coal plant given the new investment tax incentive for IGCC
enacted in EPACT. Nuclear and natural gas are the next most expensive followed by
biomass and wind.47 Either of the solar generating plants are considerably more
expensive than other electricity sources with photovoltaics (PV) over four times the cost
of natural gas. Note that wind and solar are intermittent power sources and so require

46

I have not assumed any limitations on credits from the Alternative Minimum Tax in Table 8.
Given the cost differential between coal and nuclear, the current interest in nuclear power reflects in part
a bet that a U.S. carbon policy will eventually raise the cost of coal power plants.
47

35

stand-by generation. A recent study by The Royal Academy of Engineering (2004) found
that the requirement for stand-by power raised the cost of onshore wind power by nearly
50 percent. I have not factored such costs into this analysis.
Table 8. Real Levelized Costs of Electricity
Level
Current
No
No
Economic
No
Technology
Playing
Law
PTC ITC Depreciation
Tax
Field
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Nuclear
4.31
5.55 4.31
4.70
5.94
4.57
Conventional
Coal
3.53
3.53 3.53
3.79
3.79
3.10
Clean Coal
(IGCC)
3.55
3.55 4.06
3.80
4.37
3.53
Natural Gas
5.47
5.47 5.47
5.61
5.61
5.29
Biomass
5.34
5.56 5.34
5.74
5.95
4.96
Wind
5.70
5.91 5.70
6.42
6.64
4.95
Solar
Thermal
12.25
12.25 16.68
13.74
18.82 13.84
PV
22.99
22.99 32.60
26.34
37.39 26.64
Author's calculations. See Appendix for further detail. Cost are reported in cents per
kWh at year 2004 prices.

Comparing the first two columns, eliminating the section 45 production tax credit
only modestly raises the cost of biomass and wind (4 percent cost increase) but raises the
cost of nuclear by nearly 30 percent. Next, eliminating the section 48 investment tax
credits raises the cost of the IGCC plant by 15 percent and the cost of solar by over 35
percent.
Column 4 reports levelized costs assuming the various production and investment
tax credits but replacing the accelerated depreciation with economic depreciation
(modeled as straight-line depreciation) over the asset's life.48 Accelerated depreciation is

48

I've also modeled economic depreciation for the assets according to the depreciation rates estimated by
Fraumeni (1997) in a modified one-hoss-shay model. I assume geometric depreciation using Fraumeni's
rates over the life of the asset with all remaining basis depreciated in the final year. The levelized costs
under this approach are very similar to those calculated when economic depreciation is modeled as straightline.

36

most generous to wind and solar generated electricity. Replacing accelerated
depreciation with economic depreciation would raise the cost of wind and solar thermal
by 13 percent and PV by 15 percent. For the other fuel sources, replacing accelerated
depreciation with economic depreciation would raise the cost of nuclear by 9 percent,
biomass by 8 percent, coal by 7 percent and natural gas by 2 percent.
Column 5 reports levelized costs assuming a tax system that provides a level
playing field. This scenario assumes economic depreciation and no production or
investment tax credits. In terms of the impact on levelized cost, conventional coal and
natural gas receive the fewest tax preferences. Leveling the playing field raises the cost
of biomass by 11 percent with the bulk of the benefit arising from accelerated
depreciation (based on a comparison of columns 2 through 4 with 5). The cost of wind is
higher by 16 percent with the majority of the benefit arising from accelerated
depreciation. The cost of IGCC is higher by 23 percent with roughly two-thirds of the
benefit arising from the investment tax credit. The cost of nuclear is higher by 38 percent
with the production tax credit providing the bulk of the benefits. Finally, the cost of solar
is by over 50 to 60 percent higher with about two-thirds of the benefit arising from the
production tax credits.
In the final column, I compute levelized costs assuming zero taxes. While the
levelized cost of most technologies falls, the cost of nuclear and solar rises indicating that
these technologies face a negative effective average tax rate. Eliminating taxes raises the
cost of nuclear by 6 percent and solar by 13 to 16 percent.
From a social welfare perspective, the production and investment tax credits are
costly ways to encourage renewable electricity generation since the subsidies must be

37

financed by raising distortionary taxes. An alternative approach to encouraging
renewable electricity generation would be to place a tax on traditional fuels.49 As a final
calculation, I computed the levelized cost of biomass and wind assuming no investment
or production tax credits. In this case, the levelized costs of biomass and wind are 5.56¢
and 5.91¢ per kWh respectively. A tax on carbon dioxide of $12 per metric ton would
raise the price of natural gas sufficiently to make biomass and wind cost-competitive with
natural gas. Unlike the subsidies, however, the tax would raise revenue which could
finance reductions in other distortionary taxes.50 In units perhaps more familiar to most
readers, a carbon tax of this magnitude would raise the price of gasoline by ten cents if it
were fully passed forward to consumers.
Summing up, relative to a world with no taxes the current tax code provides net
subsidies to nuclear and solar power. Relative to a tax system with a level playing field,
conventional technologies receive very modest subsidies while subsidies for nuclear and
clean coal are substantial and the subsidies for solar very substantial. The subsidies are
most effective (in the sense of making electricity competitive from this source) for IGCC
plants which become competitive with conventional coal and for biomass and wind
which become competitive with natural gas.

49

One could also impose renewable portfolio standards as many states have done. Palmer and Burtraw
(2005) argue that portfolio standards are more cost effective at achieving given renewable shares in
electricity generation than production tax credits given the social cost of raising revenue to finance the
subsidies. Note too the different incidence of production tax credits and renewable portfolio standards.
The former are borne by taxpayers while the latter are borne by electricity consumers in the form of higher
electricity prices.
50
Metcalf (2005) discusses how a carbon tax could be used to finance corporate tax integration. The
advantage of taxes over subsidies for clean power extend beyond the distortionary cost of financing the
subsidies. The subsidies lower the cost of electricity and so encourage increased consumption.

38

D.

Energy Efficiency
The energy efficiency incentives contained in EPACT are similar in many ways to

energy tax credits contained in the Energy Tax Act of 1978, including a 15 percent tax
credit (up to $300) for residential energy conservation improvements. Analyzing a panel
of federal tax returns between 1979 and 1985 when the residential conservation credit
expired, Hassett and Metcalf (1995) found that the credit significantly raised the
probability of a household installing energy conservation capital in their home.
Somewhat surprisingly, the authors found that the credit was much more successful at
raising investment levels than a comparable energy price increase. They speculated that
the credit program may have publicity effects that spur investment that the energy price
increase does not have. The study was not able to determine to what extent credit takers
were inframarginal investors, that is homeowners who would have made conservation
investments in the absence of the tax credit.51
VI.

Conclusion
Tax incentives are a major part of the federal government's energy tax policy and

increasingly so with the passage of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. A number of points
emerge from this analysis. First, the focus of energy incentives contained in the tax code
has shifted over the years from focusing almost entirely on traditional fossil fuel
production to an increasing emphasis on alternative and renewable technologies. Second,
those incentives are difficult to rationalize on the basis of economic efficiency or
distributional goals. Production and investment tax credits, in particular, may be very
costly ways to encourage the development of renewable energy technology.
51

In the energy conservation literature, this is referred to as free-riding. See Metcalf (2006) for a
discussion of behavioral responses to energy conservation initiatives and the difficulty in assessing the
cost-effectiveness of these programs.

39

Third, incentives for the oil and natural gas industry are unlikely to have an
appreciable impact on world energy prices despite the United States being the third
largest oil producer in the world (and second largest natural gas producer). Fourth,
current tax incentives are making wind and biomass cost competitive with natural gas
electricity production. The 20 percent investment tax credit for IGCC in EPACT is likely
to make this technology cost competitive with conventional coal generated electricity.
Solar generated electricity continues to be very expensive.
Fifth, the limited evidence suggests that the energy efficiency incentives enacted
by EPACT should increase conservation investment activity. It is difficult to say,
however, how much of this investment will be new investment as opposed to investment
that would have taken place in the absence of the incentive programs. To the extent that
inframarginal investment is a significant fraction of total investment, the costeffectiveness of this incentive is driven down. But of course this is true for all of the
energy incentives described in this paper and suggests the importance of further research
on the behavioral impacts of energy tax incentives.

40

Appendix.

Calculating the Levelized Cost of Electric Power Generating Plants

The levelized cost of a electricity generating power plant is the price per kWh that
the plant must receive for electricity sold that will cover all costs of production including
a return to equity holders. I construct levelized costs for various technologies for a
hypothetical power plant with a 1,000 MW capacity.52 Table A1 provides a full list of
the plant-specific parameters used in the analysis.
Table A1. Plant Specific Parameters for Levelized Cost Analysis
Coal
Coal
GasSolar
Nuclear
PC
IGCC
CC
Biomass Wind Thermal
Capacity Factor
85%
85%
85%
85%
83%
35%
31%
Construction Time
6
4
4
3
4
3
3
Fuel Cost ($/MMbtu)
0.47
0.994
0.994
5.94
2.15
0
0
Heat rate (BTU/kWh)
10,400
8,844
8,309
7,196
8,911
10,280 10,280
fixed O&M ($/kW/yr)
61.82
25.07
35.21
11.37
48.56
27.59
51.70
variable O&M ($/kWh) 0.00045 0.00418 0.00265 0.00188 0.00313
0
0
Decommissioning
($million)
350
na
na
na
na
na
na
Capital Increment
($/kW)
18
15
15
6
0
0
0
K Increment (yrs 30+)
44
21
21
12
0
0
0
% Debt Finance
50%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
% Equity Finance
50%
40%
40%
40%
40%
40%
40%
Discount Rate
11.5%
10.8%
10.8%
10.8%
10.8% 10.8%
10.8%
Overnight cost ($/kW)
2,014
1,249
1,443
584
1,809
1,167
3,047
Economic Life
40
30
25
25
20
20
20
MACRS Life
15
15
15
15
5
5
5
In addition, I assumed an inflation rate of 3 percent, a combined federal and state tax rate
of 40 percent, a nominal bond return of 8 percent and a nominal return to equity of 15
percent.
Most plant-specific parameter values are taken from the U.S. Energy Information
Administration (2006) Annual Energy Outlook (AEO). Fuel costs are based on projected
52

Many renewable plants are built at considerably smaller capacity. The cost assumptions used here are
based on a plant of optimal size. My approach follows that of Sekar, et al. (2005).

41

PV
21%
2
0
10,280
10.64
0
na
0
0
60%
40%
10.8%
4,598
20
5

fuel costs from the AEO which assumes real growth in fuel prices over the forty year
expected life of all power plants. The debt-equity ratio for nuclear and coal is based on
assumptions in Deutch and Moniz (2003) and I assume the same ratio for renewables as
for coal. Periodic capital spending is required for all technologies for capital additions
and upgrades. AEO assumes increased capital upgrade spending in the last ten years of
the plant's life. For simplicity I treat these expenditures as operating expenditures rather
than capitalize them over the remaining life of the plant. The economic life of the
various plants is taken from The Royal Academy of Engineering (2004). I also use this
source for the capacity factor for wind based on its analysis of wind production in
Europe.
The steps required for this calculation are:
1. Compute the present discounted value of costs in each year over life of a project.
This includes all capital and operating costs net of tax deductions.
2. Sum all costs over life of project. This is the present discounted value of the
project’s costs.
3. Compute the amount of constant real before-tax revenue required each year that
will equal the total present discounted value of costs over the life of the project.
4. Divide this required revenue value by total kilowatt-hours produced by plant to
obtain a cost per kWh.
Construction time differs across the technologies. I assume construction costs
follow a sinusoidal pattern (increasing, peaking, and then declining) over the time period
with plant construction beginning in 2005. To illustrate how construction costs are
handled, consider a nuclear power plant built over six years. Table A2 provides the data
for an overnight cost of $2,014 per kW.

42

Table A2. Construction Costs for
Nuclear Power Plant
Year

Real Nominal Discounted

1
135
2
369
3
503
4
503
5
369
6
135
Total 2014

116
327
461
475
358
135
1872

203
511
643
593
400
135
2484

The overnight cost for the plant is distributed over the six year construction period with
construction costs peaking mid-way through the construction period. Spending is
converted to nominal dollars using the last year of construction as the base year.
Nominal cash flows are discounted using the firm's discount rate (column 3). These
discounted numbers enter the summation in step 2. Once the plant begins operation fixed
and operating costs (including fuel costs, maintenance, nuclear decommissioning costs,
capital increments, bond interest payments, and taxes) are summed and the discounted to
year zero values. Depreciation and bond interest costs are allowed as a tax deduction and
so reduce the costs by the value of the tax shield (tax rate times deduction).
The sum of the present discounted costs is converted to a real levelized cost that is
a constant real annual payment by the firm to cover all costs. For the nuclear power
plant, the constant real annual before-tax revenue required to match the sum of the
present discounted costs (including the value of the tax shields) over the life of the plant
is $321 million per year.
Finally in step 4 this is converted to a cost per kWh. Total annual production for
the plant is the number of hours in the year times its capacity factor. Dividing this into

43

the annual levelized cost yields a cost per kWh. Based on a capacity factor of 85 percent,
the annual $321 million cost translates to a real levelized cost of 4.31¢ per kWh.

44

Figure 1. Federal Excise Tax Rate as Share of
Before-Tax Refiner Price of Gasoline
30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Source: EIA M onthly Energy Review and Jackson (2006)

45

46

Source: IEA, Energy Prices and Taxes, Fourth Quarter 2005

0 .7 1 5
0 .7 2 0

L u x e m b o u rg
P o la n d

1 .0 1 1
1 .0 1 8

B e lg iu m
G e rm a n y

1 .2 8 7

1 .5 0 0

T u rk e y

1 .0 9 9

1 .0 0 3

F in la n d

N e th e rla n d s

0 .9 7 6

D e n m a rk

1 .0 8 4

0 .9 5 2

Sweden

U n ite d K in g d o m

0 .9 3 9

F ra n c e

1 .0 7 3

0 .9 2 8

Ita ly

N o rw a y

0 .9 0 9

0 .8 5 2
P o rtu g a l

K o re a

0 .7 6 8

0 .7 0 9

H u n g a ry

Ire la n d

0 .6 8 9

C zech R ep.

0 .7 3 9

0 .6 6 6

S w itz e rla n d

A u s tria

0 .6 3 9

0 .5 5 5

Ja p a n
S p a in

0 .5 2 3

0 .4 4 0

G re e c e

N e w Z e a la n d

0 .3 7 3

0 .2 6 5

S lo v a k R e p .

0 .1 0 4
0 .3 7 2

0 .0 0 0
A u s tra lia

C anada

U n ite d S ta te s

D o l la r s p e r l i t r e

F ig u re 2 . T a x R a te o n U n le a d e d G a so lin e
(F o u rth Q u a rte r 2 0 0 5 )

C o u n tr y

46

References
Adelman, M.A. The Genie out of the Bottle. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1995.
American Petroleum Institute. "Gasoline and Diesel Taxes," http://apiec.api.org/filelibrary/2006-gasoline-diesel-taxes-summary.pdf, 2006, Accessed on June
15, 2006.
Bergstrom, Theodore C. "On Capturing Oil Rents with a National Excise Tax."
American Economic Review, 1982, 72(2), pp. 194-201.
BP. "Statistical Review of World Energy 2006," London: BP, 2006.
Carlson, Curtis P. "The Corporate Alternative Minimum Tax Aggregate Historical
Trends," Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis, OTA Paper 93, 2005.
Cooper, John C.B. "Price Elasticity of Demand for Crude Oil: Estimates for 23
Countries." OPEC Review, 2003, 27(1), pp. 1-8.
Deutch, John and Ernest J. Moniz eds. The Future of Nuclear Power. Cambridge, MA:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003.
Doyle, Joseph J., Jr. and Krislert Samphantharak. "$2.00 Gas! Studying the Effects
of a Gas Tax Moratorium," National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working
Paper No. 12266, 2006.
Edwards, Chris; Ada Rousso; Peter Merrill and Elizabeth Wagner. "Cool Code:
Federal Tax Incentives to Mitigate Global Warming." National Tax Journal, 1998, 51(3),
pp. 465-84.
Energy Information Administration. "Annual Energy Review 2004," Energy
Information Administration, 2005.
Feng, Ye; Don Fullerton and Li Gan. "Vehicle Choices, Miles Driven, and Pollution
Policies," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 11553, 2005.
Fraumeni, Barbara M. "The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income
and Product Accounts." Survey of Current Business, 1997, 77(7), pp. 7-23.
General Accounting Office. "Effects of the Alcohol Fuels Tax Incentives," U.S. General
Accounting Office, GAO/GGD-97-41, 1997.
____. "National Energy Policy: Inventory of Major Federal Energy Programs and Status
of Policy Recommendations," U.S. General Accounting Office, GAO-05-379, 2005.

47

Greene, David L.; Donald W. Jones and Paul N. Leiby. "The Outlook for U.S. Oil
Dependence." Energy Policy, 1998, 26(1), pp. 55-69.
Greene, David L.; Philip D. Patterson; Margaret Singh and Jia Li. "Feebates,
Rebates and Gas-Guzzler Taxes: A Study of Incentives for Increased Fuel Economy."
Energy Policy, 2005, 33, pp. 757-75.
Hassett, Kevin and Gilbert E. Metcalf. "Energy Tax Credits and Residential
Conservation Investment: Evidence from Panel Data." Journal of Public Economics,
1995, 57, pp. 201-17.
Jackson, Pamela J. "The Federal Excise Tax on Gasoline and the Highway Trust Fund:
A Short History," Congressional Research Service, RL30304, 2006.
Karp, Larry and David M. Newbery. "Optimal Tariffs on Exhaustible Resources."
Journal of International Economics, 1991, 30(2), pp. 285-99.
Lazzari, Salvatore. "The Windfall Profit Tax on Crude Oil: Overview of the Issues,"
Congressional Research Service, 90-442 E, 1990.
____. "Energy Tax Policy: An Economic Analysis," Congressional Research Service,
RL30406, 2005.
____. "Energy Tax Policy," Congressional Research Service, CRS Issue Brief IB10054,
2006.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. "Tax Reform and Environmental Taxation," National Bureau of
Economic Research, NBER Working Paper No. 11665, 2005.
____. "Energy Conservation in the United States: Understanding Its Role in Climate
Policy," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 12272, 2006.
Newbery, David M. "A Paradox in Tax Theory: Optimal Tariffs on Exhaustible
Resources," Department of Economics, Stanford University, SEER Technical Paper,
1976.
____. "Why Tax Energy? Towards a More Rational Policy." The Energy Journal, 2005,
26(3), pp. 1-39.
Palmer, Karen and Dallas Burtraw. "Cost-Effectiveness of Renewable Electricity
Policies," Resources For The Future, RFF DP05-01, 2005.
Parry, Ian and Kenneth A. Small. "Does Britain or the United States Have the Right
Gasoline Tax?" American Economic Review, 2005, 95, pp. 1276-89.

48

Pizer, William; Dallas Burtraw; Winston Harrington; Richard Newell and James
Sanchirico. "Modeling Economy-Wide Vs Sectoral Climate Policies Using Combined
Aggregate-Sectoral Models." The Energy Journal, 2006, 27(3), pp. 135-68.
Poterba, James M. "Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?" Tax Policy and the Economy,
1991, 5, pp. 145-64.
Sekar, Ram C.; John E. Parsons; Howard J. Herzog and Henry D. Jacoby. "Future
Carbon Regulations and Current Investments in Alternative Coal-Fired Power Plant
Designs," MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, No. 129,
2005.
The Royal Academy of Engineering. "The Costs of Generating Electricity," The Royal
Academy of Engineering, 2004.
Tolley, George and Donald Jones. "The Economic Future of Nuclear Power,"
University of Chicago, 2004.
U.S. Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office, 2006.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. "Analysis of Five Selected Tax Provisions of
the Conference Energy Bill of 2003," Office of Integrated Analysis and Forecasting,
2004.
____. "Annual Energy Review 2004," Energy Information Administration, 2005.
____. "Assumptions to the Annual Energy Outlook 2006," Energy Information
Administration, DOE/EIA-0445(2006), 2006.
U.S. Internal Revenue Service. "How to Depreciate Property," Internal Revenue
Service, Publication 946, 2006.

49

