                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                UNDERSTANDING SOUTH AFRICA'S ECONOMIC PUZZLES

                                               Dani Rodrik

                                         Working Paper 12565
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12565


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2006




This paper was prepared for the Harvard University Center for International Development Project
on South Africa. I have greatly benefited from the guidance and insights of Trevor Manuel, Alan Hirsch,
Lesetja Kganyago, and Ismail Momoniat. I also thank Philippe Aghion, Abhijit Banerjee, Ricardo
Caballero, Johannes Fedderke, Jeffrey Frankel, Sebastian Galiani, Ricardo Hausmann, Laurence Harris,
Dave Kaplan, Robert Lawrence, Jim Levinson, James Robinson, Ben Smit, Chris Stone, Federico
Sturzenegger, and Lynne Thomas for feedback and discussion on the ideas presented here. Oeindrila
Dube and Robert Mitchell provided research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding South Africa's Economic Puzzles
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 12565
October 2006
JEL No. O11,O14

                                             ABSTRACT

South Africa has undergone a remarkable transformation since its democratic transition in 1994, but
economic growth and employment generation have been disappointing. Most worryingly, unemployment
is currently among the highest in the world. While the proximate cause of high unemployment is that
prevailing wages levels are too high, the deeper cause lies elsewhere, and is intimately connected to
the inability of the South African to generate much growth momentum in the past decade. High unemployment
and low growth are both ultimately the result of the shrinkage of the non-mineral tradable sector since
the early 1990s. The weakness in particular of export-oriented manufacturing has deprived South
Africa from growth opportunities as well as from job creation at the relatively low end of the skill
distribution. Econometric analysis identifies the decline in the relative profitability of manufacturing
in the 1990s as the most important contributor to the lack of vitality in that sector.

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                        UNDERSTANDING SOUTH AFRICA’S ECONOMIC PUZZLES

                                               Dani Rodrik
                                             September 20006

I. Introduction

        The transformation that South Africa has undergone since its democratic transition in

1994 is nothing short of remarkable. Prior to 1994, the South African economy and polity were

dominated by the white minority, and even though the Apartheid regime had begun to unravel in

the 1980s, the majority blacks remained deprived of basic political and economic freedoms.

Given the depth of the racial and income divides that prevailed, it would not have been

unreasonable to predict a cycle of redistribution and macroeconomic populism following

democratization that would wreak havoc with the economy and turn the country into a sham

democracy.

        Instead, the democratically elected governments led by the African National Congress

(ANC) have managed to create a stable, peaceful, and racially balanced political regime with an

exemplary record of civil liberties and political freedoms. Economic policy has been conducted

in an equally exemplary manner, with South Africa turning itself into one of the emerging

markets with the lowest risk spreads. While South Africa has instituted some innovative (and

expensive) social transfer programs to address long-standing disparities, it has done so in the

context of cautious fiscal and monetary policies which have kept inflation and public debt at low

levels. There were no nationalizations or large-scale asset redistributions. Moreover, the

economy was opened to international trade and capital flows.1



1
 See Hirsch (2005) for an excellent account by an insider. Other perspectives on South African growth
performance include Fedderke (2002), Hartzenberg and Stuart (2002), and du Plessis and Smit (2006). Two recent
collections, with very different perspectives on economic growth, are Nowak and Ricci (2005) and Pollin et al.
(2006).
                                                2

       If the world were fair, political restraint and economic rectitude of this magnitude would

have produced a booming South African economy operating at or near full employment.

Unfortunately, it has not turned out that way. In the decade since 1994, per-capita GDP grew at

an average rate of 1.2 percent per annum—a rate that is comparable to that of sub-Saharan Africa

(1.1 percent) and Latin America (0.8 percent), and considerably below that of South Asia (3.7

percent) and East Asia (6.2 percent). As Figure 1 shows, South Africa’s income level has yet to

catch up with its peak level attained in 1980. And investment remains low at around 17 percent

of GDP (although the bulk of the overall decline in the investment effort since 1970s is due to

the reduction in public investment).

       The most worrying aspect of this disappointing economic performance is unemployment.

South Africa’s unemployment rate today stands at 26 percent according to the narrower

definition of who is unemployed, and at 40 percent if one includes discouraged workers

(Banerjee et al., 2006). This is one of the highest rates of unemployment anywhere in the world

(see Figure 2 for some international comparisons). Furthermore, unemployment appears to have

increased particularly rapidly since the democratic transition (from a “low” of 13 percent in

1993). (The lack of labor force surveys makes it difficult to know what the comparable

unemployment rates were in the 1980s.) As would be expected, unemployment is heavily

concentrated among the young, unskilled, and the black population. This poor record on

employment represents not only an economic tragedy, it poses a significant threat to the stability

and eventual health of the South African democracy.

       The proximate cause of high unemployment is that prevailing South African wages are

too high compared to real wage levels that would clear labor markets at lower levels of

unemployment. Trade unions and wage bargaining play an important role in wage determination
                                                 3

in South Africa. The trade union confederation COSATU (Congress of South African Trade

Unions) is a partner in the governing coalition dominated by the ANC. A cursory comparison of

wages across countries would show that South African wages (in the formal sector) are quite

high by the standards of countries at similar income levels. On the other hand, real wages have

not risen much (if at all) since the transition to democracy (Leibbrandt et al. 2005), and to the

extent that unions have prevailed, it seems to have been mostly to prevent the real wages of their

members from falling (Banerjee et al. 2006). The evidence I will show later in the paper

suggests that wage-push has not been a significant factor in determining patterns of structural

change in the South African economy during the 1990s.

       The deeper cause of South African unemployment lies elsewhere, and it is intimately

connected to the inability of the South African to generate much growth momentum in the past

decade. High unemployment and low growth are both ultimately the result of the shrinkage of

the non-mineral tradable sector since the early 1990s. The weakness in particular of export-

oriented manufacturing has deprived South Africa from growth opportunities that other countries

have been able to avail themselves of. The point is perhaps best made by comparing South

Africa to a high-growth economy such as Malaysia, a country with which South Africa shared

many common features in the 1980s. As I will show in the next section, the main difference

between these two countries is that Malaysia was able to pull an increasing share of its workforce

into manufacturing—the sector with the highest labor productivity in the economy—while in

South Africa manufacturing lost ground to the tertiary sector.

       The reason that this pattern of structural change is also a key driver of unemployment is

that in South Africa non-mineral tradables (including manufacturing) are intensive in low skilled

labor compared to services. The relative shrinkage of manufacturing (along with economy-wide
                                                          4

skill upgrading) has entailed a collapse in demand for relatively unskilled workers. This need

not have turned into a growing unemployment problem among the unskilled if one or both of two

things could have happened. First, a large enough decline in real wages at the low end of the

skill distribution could have compensated for the inward shift of the labor demand schedule. But

this was an unrealistic option in view of the social expectations and political realities created by

the democratic transition. Second, the growing mass of job seekers could have been absorbed

into the informal sector (where wages and work conditions are considerably more flexible). This

second mechanism is how developing countries elsewhere have coped with similar labor market

problems. But while informal employment has grown rapidly in South Africa, its level remains

quite low by the standards of developing countries (see Table 2 below). This is no doubt one of

the legacies of the Apartheid regime—which made it first illegal and then difficult for blacks to

move to larger urban areas unless they already had a certified job. In the absence of sufficient

real wage adjustment and informal sector growth, the decline in the demand for low skilled

workers has resulted in high unemployment.2

         A key implication follows from this diagnosis: expansion of non-mineral tradables—

manufacturing in particular—will be good both for growth and employment. An export oriented

strategy that increases the relative profitability of producing tradables for world markets will

generate economic growth by pulling labor into productive activities where their marginal

product is much higher. And since tradables are relatively low-skill intensive in South Africa

compared to service activities that have been the major beneficiary of recent patterns of

structural change, such a strategy will entail shared growth rather than trickle-down growth. The

cures for low growth and high unemployment are largely one and the same.


2
 One needs to add the impact of rising female labor participation in the 1990s as well (Leibbrandt et al. 2005).
Overall labor force participation still seems low in South Africa, however, by international benchmarks.
                                                   5

          The plan of this paper is as follows. In section II, I provide a brief comparison with

Malaysia to underscore the central role played by export-oriented manufacturing in Malaysia’s

growth performance. In section III, I turn to employment and examine the patterns of structural

change that account for the decline in the demand for labor (especially low skill labor). In section

IV, I provide an econometric analysis of the patterns of structural change to better pinpoint their

sources. The econometrics identifies the decline in the relative profitability of manufacturing in

the 1990s as the most important contributor to the lack of vitality in that sector. Section V

concludes.



II. Why is South Africa not Malaysia?

       The title of this section is not as crazy as it may sound at first. South Africa and Malaysia

are both medium-sized economies with deep racial cleavages, in which an ethnic majority

controls the polity but economic power lies with an ethnic minority. Table 1 shows some

comparisons using the Hall and Jones (1999) database for 1988. As the table reveals, the

economic structures of the two economies were strikingly similar at that time. Output per head

and TFP were virtually identical—roughly at a quarter and a half of the U.S. level, respectively.

Human capital levels were also quite close. And both economies had a similar dependence on

mining.

       But this snapshot hides important differences in the evolution of the structure of the two

economies. Most importantly, Malaysia was undergoing a process of industrialization, while

South Africa had begun to de-industrialize. Figure 3, which shows the trends in the share of the

labor force employed in manufacturing in the two economies, tells a striking story. As of the

mid-1980s, South Africa still had a larger manufacturing base: Roughly 12 percent of its total
                                                 6

labor force was employed in manufacturing, compared to less than 8 percent in Malaysia. But

since then, Malaysia has industrialized by leaps and bounds, with this number reaching 16

percent a decade later. In South Africa, by contrast, the proportion of the workforce employed in

manufacturing has come steadily down, to below 7 percent by 2000. What is also remarkable in

Malaysia’s experience is that this pick-up in industrialization came after a period of what looked

like a continuous decline in manufacturing in the early 1980s. The latter suggests that it is

possible to reverse a trend deterioration in manufacturing performance, provided the policy

framework is adequate (on which more later).

       The expansion of manufacturing in Malaysia has been both growth and equity promoting.

It has been good for growth, because as Figure 4 shows, manufacturing is the sector where labor

is the most productive by far. Even if the productivity differences are smaller at the margin than

on average, there are still large unexploited gains from moving labor into manufacturing from

other activities. And it was equity promoting because much of the gains from this process of

structural change accrued to the workers themselves.

       If the South African economic structure moved in the opposite direction, it is not because

manufacturing did not enjoy similar advantages in South Africa. While South African

manufacturing appears not as productive as that of Malaysia, it still remains more productive

than South African services (Figure 4). Why South Africa de-industrialized prematurely is

therefore an important question, and one that I will analyze econometrically in section IV.

       Manufactures are the quintessential tradables, and the different roads traveled by the two

economies are perhaps most evident in their trade performance. Once again, the two economies

started out in roughly similar positions. Around the mid-1970s, the share of manufactured

exports in GDP stood at around 6-7 percent in both countries. By 2004, this figure had in
                                                 7

creased to more than 80 percent in Malaysia, but only to 12 percent in South Africa. And as

Malaysia developed its manufacturing base, it caught up with and surpassed South Africa in

terms of the “sophistication” of its export basket (Figure 5).

       There are of course a multitude of reasons that account for the different paths taken by

the two economies. Malaysia was in a different neighborhood, one that was considerably

friendlier to an export-oriented strategy. South Africa had to contend with the debilitating effects

of the trade embargo it faced in world markets in the 1980s and its heavy spending on defense

industries for the purpose of propping up the Apartheid regime. But one should not minimize the

active role played by government to promote manufacturing (and manufactured exports) in

Malaysia. Even though industrial policies went through various phases (for a summary, see Box

1), expanding and diversifying the industrial base of the economy remained an unwavering goal.

Policies employed a mix of market signals and direct incentives through tax, trade, and labor-

market interventions. Some of the industries spawned by these interventions have been failures

(such as the national auto manufacturer, Proton, launched in the early to mid-1980s), but the

successes (in electronics, for example) have been more than adequate to pay for these failures.

Malaysia’s experience is in line with other successful industrializers’. The productive

diversification that economic growth requires is not an automatic process that well-functioning

markets generate on their own; it requires an experimental, nurturing approach by the

government in strategic collaboration with the private sector (Hausmann and Rodrik 2003,

Rodrik 2004).
                                                          8

III. Patterns of employment and structural change in South Africa

         Formal employment in South Africa has stagnated during the 1990s, despite the pick-up

in economic growth since 1994 and the increase in labor force participation associated with

democratization and the end of the Apartheid era (Figure 6). Semi- and low-skilled workers still

constitute around 42 percent of those employed in the formal sector.3

         The constancy of overall employment masks a tremendous structural change that has

taken place within the economy over the last two decades or so. This can be seen in Figure 7,

where I show the shares in total employment of three different types of economic activities:

tradable activities (mining, agriculture, and manufacturing); private non-tradable activities

(financial services, construction, trade, retail, transport, and other services); and public non-

tradable activities (utilities and government services). The figure shows a dramatic increase in

the employment share of private non-tradables at the expense of tradables. The latter have come

down from more than 40 percent of employment in the late 1970s to around 30 percent currently.

What this reflects is a decline in agricultural and mining employment which has not been

compensated by an increase in manufacturing employment. Among expanding sectors, financial

intermediation, insurance, real estate and business services (F.I.R.E., SIC 8) have been

particularly notable. That sector now employs as many workers as all of manufacturing taken

together (around 15 percent of total formal employment).

         This pattern of structural change implies a significant decline in the relative demand for

low skill labor because the declining sectors constitute the least skill intensive parts of the South

African economy. The skill intensity of the three sectors is shown in Figure 8, which displays

the shares of low and skilled workers in sectoral employment. First, what is evident in the graph


3
 All data in this section, including the classification of workers by skill category come from the Quantec database,
accessed through the TIPS (Trade and Industrial Policy Secretariat) website.
                                                  9

is that there has been across-the board skill upgrading in the economy, with the low-skilled share

falling in all three sectors. Second, and more importantly, tradable sectors remain the most low-

skill intensive part of the economy by far. As late as 2004, more than 70 percent of workers

employed in tradable industries were classified as “low and unskilled” workers. The

corresponding figure in private non-tradables was only 25 percent. Even if we exclude mining

and agriculture from tradables and focus on manufactures, there remains a big gap: slightly less

than 60 percent of workers employed in manufacturing in 2004 were classified as low and

unskilled.

       The negative relationship between low-skill intensity and employment growth shows up

also at finer levels of disaggregation. Figure 9 shows the pattern of structural change within

manufacturing. The simple correlation between the initial share of semi- and unskilled workers

and the subsequent increase in employment for the 28 subsectors within manufacturing is -0.41.

       This pattern of structural change helps explain the persistent concern in South African

business and policy circles with a “skills shortage.” The view that skills acts as a significant

constraint on economic growth is widely held, and is reflected in the government’s official

policy document on the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa (ASGI-SA).

It is natural that a pattern of growth that has (thus far) emphasized the expansion of skill-

intensive tertiary sectors at the expense of low-skill intensive tradable sectors puts a premium on

skills and human capital. On the other hand, if it is true, as I have argued, that higher levels of

growth and employment creation require a different pattern of structural change—an expansion

of low-skill intensive manufactures at the expense of skill-intensive non-tradables—skills can no

longer be viewed as a serious constraint on future growth. In view of the patterns of skill
                                                 10

intensity discussed earlier, manufactures-led growth would on balance reduce the relative

demand for skilled workers.

       A final trend worth emphasizing is capital deepening. The process of substituting capital

for labor has been particularly marked in tradable activities (including manufacturing).

Interestingly, this trend is confined to tradables: capital-labor ratios have remained more or less

constant within the (private) non-tradable sector (Figure 10). The result is that tradable activities

now employ considerably higher capital per worker than non-tradable activities.

       To sum up, we have identified three important trends in the economy which together

have put a significant damper on the demand for low skilled workers in South Africa. First,

there has been substitution towards skilled workers within each economic activity. Second, there

has been significant structural change away from the most low-skill intensive parts of the

economy, namely tradables. Third, within tradables, production techniques have become

progressively more capital-intensive. The first and third of these trends probably have a lot to

do with ongoing patterns of technological change. Skill-biased technological change, in

particular, has been a common feature of all open economies during the last two decades or so.

But the reasons for the second trend are unclear, and since the structural shift against tradables

relates closely to determinants of growth in South Africa, these reasons will be analyzed in the

next section of the paper.

       These shifts in the demand for labor (particularly low-skill labor) make it easier to

understand why unemployment has trended up and is so high in South Africa. Of course, a

rising unemployment could perhaps have been avoided by a commensurate decline in real wages

for low-skilled workers. But this would have been a political impossibility in view of the

democratic transformation in South Africa and the role played by unions in the anti-Apartheid
                                                 11

struggle and the new democratic government. That is not to say that unemployment is itself

without political cost. But the relatively generous social grants put in place by the democratic

government has apparently taken the edge off what would have otherwise been a very serious

social problem. There is some evidence that households view paid employment and social grants

as substitutes at the margin. For example, households that lose a pension-eligible member

subsequently report increased labor force participation (Rancchod 2006, as reported in Banerjee

et al. 2006; see also Bertrand et al. 2003).

       As discussed in the introduction, unemployment of the scale experienced by South Africa

could also have been avoided if young, unskilled job seekers could be absorbed into the informal

sector. The informal sector is the employer of last resort in most developing countries with

institutionalized formal labor markets. But while informal employment has grown quite rapidly

in South Africa, informality still does not present the large footprint one would have expected it

to have. Informal employment (as a share of total non-agricultural employment) remains a

fraction of what it is elsewhere in Africa, Latin America, and Asia (see Table 2).

       The reasons why informality does not play a larger role in absorbing surplus labor remain

unclear. One obvious candidate is the legacy of the Apartheid regime (and its pass laws in

particular), which confined blacks who did not already have jobs to separate townships and

prevented the unemployed from migrating into urban areas. Restrictive zoning and licensing

regulations and periodic “slum clearance” efforts undermined fledgling informal activities. Even

though the pass laws themselves were repealed in 1986 and democracy itself is more than a

decade old, it is possible that this history delayed the creation of the social and other networks

needed to maintain large-scale informality. (The burden of these pass laws and the difficulty of

getting around them were immortalized in Athol Fugard’s hilarious play Sizwe Bansi is Dead
                                                12

(1973), a passage from which is reproduced in the accompanying Box.) Another possibility is the

prevalence of high levels of crime, which acts as a particularly onerous tax on small-scale




                               Excerpt from Sizwe Bansi is Dead


BUNTU. Listen…[reads]. ‘You are required to report to the Bantu Affairs Commissioner, King
William’s Town, within three days of the above-mentioned date for the… .’ You should have
been home yesterday!... ‘for the purpose of repatriation to home district.’ Influx Control. You’re
in trouble, Sizwe.

MAN. I don’t want to leave Port Elizabeth.

BUNTU. Maybe. But if that book says go, you go.

MAN. Can’t I maybe burn this book and get a new one?

BANTU. [sic] Burn that book? Stop kidding yourself, Sizwe! Anyway suppose you do. You
must immediately go apply for a new one. Right? And until that new one comes, be careful the
police don’t stop you and ask for your book. Into the Courtroom, brother. Charge: Failing to
produce Reference Book on Demand. Five rand or five days. Finally the new book comes.
Down to the Labour Bureau for a stamp…it’s got to be endorsed with permission to be in this
area. White man at the Labour Bureau takes the book, looks at it—doesn’t look at you!—goes to
the big machine and feeds in your number…
            [Buntu goes through the motions of punching out a number on a computer.]
…card jumps out, he reads: ‘Sizwe Bansi. Endorsed to King William’s Town…’ Takes your
book, fetches that same stamp, and in it goes again. So you burn that book, or throw it away, and
get another one. Same thing happens.
                           [Buntu feeds the computer; the card jumps out.]
‘Sizwe Bansi. Endorsed to King William’s Town…’ Stamp goes in the third time… . But this
time it’s also into a van and off to the Native Commissioner’s Office; card around your neck
with your number on it; escort on both sides and back to King William’s Town. They make you
pay for the train fare too!

MAN. I think I will try to look for some jobs in the garden.

BUNTU. You? Job as a garden-boy? Don’t you read the newspapers?

MAN. I can’t read.

BUNTU. I’ll tell you what the little white ladies say: ‘Domestic vacancies. I want a garden-boy
with good manners and a wide knowledge of seasons and flowers. Book in order.’ Yours in
                                                13

order? Anyway what the hell do you know about seasons and flowers? [After a moment’s
thought.] Do you know any white man who’s prepared to give you a job?

MAN. No. I don’t know any white men.

BUNTU. Pity. We might have been able to work something then. You talk to the white man,
you see, and ask him to write a letter saying he’s got a job for you. You take that letter from the
white man and go back to King William’s Town, where you show it to the Native Commissioner
there. The Native Commissioner in King William’s Town reads that letter from the white man in
Port Elizabeth who is ready to give you the job. He then writes a letter back to the Native
Commissioner in Port Elizabeth. So you come back here with the two letters. Then the Native
Commissioner in Port Elizabeth reads the letter from the Native Commissioner in King
William’s Town together with the first letter from the white man who is prepared to give you a
job, and he says when he reads the letters: Ah yes, this man Sizwe Bansi can get a job. So the
Native Commissioner in Port Elizabeth then writes a letter which you take with the two letters
from the Native Commissioner in King William’s Town and the white man in Port Elizabeth, to
the Senior Officer at the Labour Bureau, who reads all the letters. Then he will put the right
stamp in your book and give you another letter from himself which together with the letters from
the white man and the two Native Affairs Commissioners, you take to the Administration Office
here in New Brighton and make an application for Residence Permit, so that you don’t fall
victim of raids again. Simple.

MAN. Maybe I can start a little business selling potatoes and… .

BUNTU. Where do you get the potatoes and…?

MAN. I’ll buy them.

BUNTU. With what?

MAN. Borrow some money… .

BUNTU. Who is going to lend money to a somebody endorsed to hell and gone out in the bush?
And how you going to buy your potatoes at the market without a Hawker’s Licence? Same
story, Sizwe. You won’t get that because of the bloody stamp in your book.
There’s no way out, Sizwe. You’re not the first one who has tried to find it. Take my advice and
catch that train back to King William’s Town. If you need work so bad go knock on the door of
the Mines Recruiting Office. Dig gold for the white man. That’s the only time they don’t worry
about Influx Control.



From Athol Fugard, Sizwe Bansi is Dead, New York, N.Y., 1986, pp. 24-26.
                                                 14

enterprises (Stone, forthcoming). Finally, the existing system of social grants presumably sets a

higher reservation wage level in South Africa than in comparable countries, acting as a deterrent

to low-productivity informal activities (e.g. street peddling).



IV. Explaining patterns of structural change

       In this section, I present an analysis of the determinants of recent patterns of structural

change in South Africa, paying particular attention to the manufacturing sector. As explained

earlier, the health of the manufacturing sector is vital to both growth and employment creation in

South Africa. Understanding the lack of dynamism of this sector is therefore key to designing

appropriate growth policies.

       Formal employment in manufacturing has declined from 1.6 million in 1990 to 1.2

million in 2004. The fall in semi- and unskilled employment, from 1.0 million to 0.7 million,

accounts for the bulk of this decline. What is the reason for this adverse trend? Figures 11, 12,

13 and 14 display some of the candidate explanations.

       First, there has been an apparent fall in the relative price of the manufacturing sector.

Figure 11 charts the relative price of manufacturing (value added price index of manufacturing

divided by the GDP deflator) and shows that it tracks the behavior of manufacturing employment

since the late 1970s quite well. The decline in the relative price of manufacturing is of the order

of 15 percent (if the GDP deflator is used as the denominator) and 50 percent (if the price of the

F.I.R.E. sector [SIC 8] is used as the denominator). When relative prices are adjusted by sectoral

TFP growth (on the logic that a decline in output price can be offset by an increase in

productivity), the relative profitability of manufacturing exhibits a decline of the order of 30

percent (Figure 12).
                                                 15

        Second, the South African economy is now considerably more open to international trade

and the manufacturing sector presumably faces much greater competitive discipline, regardless

of whether firms are import-competing or export-oriented. Edwards and Lawrence (2006) report

a drop in the import-weighted effective rate of protection from 35.6 percent in 1989 to 14 percent

in 2000. As Figure 13 shows, import penetration levels have increased significantly within

manufacturing, from an average of around 20 percent before 1990 to around 28 percent recently.

Even though the work of Aghion, Braun, and Fedderke (2006) finds no evidence of decline in

(average) markup ratios in South Africa, in view of the trade liberalization that has taken place to

date it is difficult to believe that competitive pressure on manufacturing firms has not increased

at the margin. I will provide some evidence below which suggests that this increase in import

competition is one of the reasons behind the decline in manufacturing’s relative price.

        Third, we may consider the role played wage pressure. South African data do not break

down wages by skill category, but average real remuneration in manufacturing shows a steep

increase in the 1990s (Figure 14). Before we draw any conclusions from this, however, we need

to bear in mind the trends in factor substitution that we discussed in the previous section:

manufacturing has experienced both skill upgrading and capital deepening. The average worker

is now more skilled and has greater productivity because s/he works with more capital. We have

to explicitly control for this before we can ascribe employment decline to any element of wage-

push.



Decomposing remuneration into skill-upgrading and wage-push components

        We have data on total remuneration and skill composition of the workforce by sector.

Therefore we can decompose changes in real sectoral remuneration into the following two
                                                  16

components: (a) a part that is due to purely to changes in skill composition; and (b) a part that

represents the skill-adjusted wage (the residual). I will call the first the “skill upgrading”

component and the second the “wage push” component. Specifically, I first run the following

regression:

       Log real remuneration =                 α x (share of skilled)

                                       +       β x (share of highly-skilled)

                                       +       γ x (share of skilled) x (post-1990s dummy)

                                       +       δ x (share of highly-skilled) x (post-1990s dummy)

The regression is run across nine one-digit sectors over the 1980-2004 period with a full set of

year and sector dummies. The results are shown in Table 3. The coefficients α and β represents

our estimates of the skill premium (for skilled and highly-skilled workers, respectively, relative

to semi and unskilled workers). Both of these are positive and statistically significant as

expected, with α < β. The coefficients γ and δ are meant to capture a possible step increase in

the economy-wide skill premium post-1990. We find no such increase—in fact, the estimated

values for γ and δ are negative, indicating a decline in the skill premium in the 1990s. (The

interpretation of these coefficients is clouded somewhat by the presence of year dummies in the

specification.)

       With these estimates in hand, we split the remuneration series into a component that is

the part that is predicted according to the specification above, and a component that represents

the skill-adjusted remuneration level (the residual). In other words,

       real remuneration = skill-upgrading (rem_pred) + wage push (rem_resid)

One problem with this decomposition is that skill-upgrading may not be exogenous, and may

respond to wage push. Imagine, for example, that unions push the wages of low-skilled workers
                                                 17

above market-clearing levels. Then firms may respond by reducing the share of low-skilled

employees in their workforce. In such a scenario, the rise in real remuneration is fully the

consequence wage push, even though the mechanical decomposition carried out here will

suggest otherwise. I will suggest below that this possibility is not quite consistent with the facts

that we observe.

       Figure 15 shows the trends in rem_pred and rem_resid for the manufacturing sector. We

see a striking contrast in the behavior of the two series. Skill upgrading has been clearly an

ongoing process since at least 1980. But the skill-adjusted (residual) component of the real

remuneration series exhibits a distinct fall during the 1990s compared to the 1980s. In other

words, once the effect of skill upgrading is taken out, labor costs in manufacturing appear to

have become less onerous in the 1990s than they were in the 1980s. This makes it very unlikely

that wage-push factors can account for the reduction in manufacturing employment during the

1990s—regardless of what one thinks of the level of labor costs in South Africa.

       What of the possibility, mentioned previously, that skill upgrading itself is the

consequence of a wage push? Even if partly true, it is hard to square the evidence in the

remuneration series with this hypothesis. Note first that skill upgrading has been a steady and

ongoing process—it does not just pick up in the 1990s. It is not clear why manufacturing

employment would start to decline only in the 1990s if this were the main story. Second, a bit of

economic theory helps. Consider the comparative static exercise where we shock employment

by an exogenous backward shift in the labor supply curve (a “wage push”). If the series we

observe in Figure 15 were the equilibrium responses to such a shock, we would expect to see an

increase in skill upgrading (which we do see) and an increase in the residual (which we do not

see). For the initial wage push to result in a lower skill-adjusted wage level in the new
                                                  18

equilibrium, the labor demand curve would need to be positively sloped rather than negatively

sloped. For these reasons, it seems implausible that rising wage costs were themselves the

original source of the decline in manufacturing employment.



The econometrics of structural change

       I posit that output and employment in each sector of the economy responds to the following

economic determinants:

   •    relative prices, measured by each sector’s value added price index divided by the GDP

        deflator (lnp_pgdp)

   •    labor costs, measured by skill-adjusted real remuneration levels (lnrem_resid)

   •    skill-biased technological change, measured by the component of real remuneration that

        is “explained” by the skill composition of the workforce (lnrem_pred)

   •    total factor productivity growth (lnTFP).

I then run panel regressions for the following three dependent variables: (i) output (value added);

(ii) total employment; and (iii) semi and unskilled employment. The panel consists of eight one-

digit sectors—I exclude SIC 9, government services—over the 1980-2004 period. Each

regression includes a full set of fixed effects for sectors and years.

        Table 4 shows the results. The first two rows display the estimated coefficients on

relative prices, allowing a different coefficient for the manufacturing sector (by entering a

separate term that is interacted with a dummy for manufacturing). Where output is concerned,

manufacturing shows no discernible difference from other sectors: a decrease in its relative

prices reduces output in manufacturing by a virtually identical amount to that in other sectors on

average. But with respect to employment, there are strong differences. We find that both total
                                                 19

employment and unskilled employment is considerably more sensitive to changes in relative

prices in manufacturing than they are elsewhere. And the effect is quantitatively quite strong: a

ten percent reduction in relative prices is associated with an equivalent decline in employment

(of roughly 10 percent).

       Second, we find that while skill upgrading and labor costs are not associated strongly

with changes in output, they have powerful effects on employment. Skill upgrading and skill-

adjusted labor costs both have the predicted, negative effects on employment, with the effect of

skill upgrading particularly powerful on unskilled employment (which makes sense). The

elasticity of employment with respect to (skill-adjusted) labor costs is around -0.6 and is very

tightly estimated.

       Finally, we find that productivity growth has asymmetric effects on output and

employment. An increase in TFP boosts output (with an elasticity of 0.46) but reduces

employment (with an elasticity of -0.19 for total employment and -0.21 for unskilled

employment).

       These results establish that patterns of structural change in South Africa can be

understood within a parsimonious framework and using a relatively small number of economic

determinants. Since this exercise yields encouraging econometric results, I next ask how well

this framework explains the decline in manufacturing employment since the democratic

transition in 1994 specifically. I do this by running a sector-level version of the specification in

Table 4 (using data just from the manufacturing sector) and undertaking a “causal”

decomposition of employment changes since 1994. Note that the sectoral regression for

manufacturing yields coefficient estimates that are very close to those obtained in the panel

specification (see the coefficients reported in Table 5). These regressions provide a remarkably
                                                 20

good fit for the actual trends in employment (see Figure 16, which plots actual and fitted

employment series for total and unskilled employment in manufacturing). Instrumental-

variables estimation (using the external terms of trade and real exchange rate as instruments for

lnp_pgdp) also produces very similar results.

       The results of the decomposition exercise are reported in Table 5. Taking the 1980-90

period as the base, the decade since 1994 has witnessed a 14 log-point decline in total

manufacturing employment. Meanwhile, relative prices for manufacturing have declined also by

14 log-points, skill-adjusted wage costs have fallen by 36 log-points, remuneration costs due to

the skill composition of the workforce have increased by 32 log-points, and TFP has increased

by 9 points. Applying these changes to the respective coefficient estimates for each explanatory

variable, we get the causal decomposition reported at the bottom of the table. The bottom line

that emerges is that the decline in relative price of manufacturing is the predominant cause of the

fall in manufacturing employment. In fact, this factor alone accounts for more than 100 percent

of the employment reduction.

       Skill-biased technical change is the second most important contributor. TFP growth turns

out to have made a comparatively small contribution to the decline in employment (around 11

percent), while the drop in skill-adjusted remuneration costs has operated in reverse, preventing

manufacturing employment from falling even further.

       In view of the starring role that the relative price of manufacturing plays in accounting

for manufacturing’s misfortunes, it is worth pausing to ask how real the decline in this price is,

and what has caused it in the first place. I leave the second question to the next subsection,

focusing here on the credibility of the fall of manufacturing’s relative profitability. As I have

discussed earlier, the decline in the terms of trade of manufacturing shows up in a variety of
                                                       21

relative prices—including TFP-adjusted relative prices. Another comforting piece of evidence is

that, as I will show below, standard economic variables do a reasonable job of explaining

manufacturing’s relative price, although a significant component of the decline remains

unaccounted (attributed to a simple time trend). But a somewhat contradictory finding, reported

by Aghion, Braun, and Fedderke (2006), is that markups in South African manufacturing are

both high by international standards and have refused to come down since the 1990s. Indeed,

gross operating surplus ratios in manufacturing (per unit of capital or as a share of value added)

seem to have, if anything, increased over time.4 But there are reasons to worry about what these

“markup” rates are measuring. One telling indicator is that measured markups rose significantly

in footwear during the 1990s—a sector that epitomizes hard times due to intense import

competition from low-wage countries. In addition, there seems to have been even more striking

increases in markup rates in sectors other than manufacturing. When one compares markups in

manufacturing to those in, say, F.I.R.E., we observe a definite trend against manufacturing after

1990 (Figure 17). Indeed, if we take as our index of relative profitability the ratio of markups in

manufacturing to markups in F.I.R.E., the trend that we observe is virtually identical to that when

we use value-added prices (see Figure 17).

        In sum, while measured markup rates throw out some important puzzles, the picture that

one obtains after considering these various indicators is a consistent one: a post-1994 investor—

domestic or foreign—considering an investment in South Africa would have been far less likely

(than s/he would have been in the 1980s) to commit resources to manufacturing, compared to

banking, insurance, or other services oriented towards the home market.




4
 These data come from the same TIPS data base as the labor and output statistics used above. Aghion et al. use
additional data sources from UNIDO and published company balance sheets in their international comparisons.
                                                  22

Understanding the decline in manufacturing’s relative price

        Why did relative profitability in manufacturing decline in the 1990s? As discussed

earlier, one candidate is intensified import competition. But other factors, including the real

exchange rate and the terms of trade, may have played a role as well. Table 7 presents the results

of an econometric attempt to model the behavior of manufacturing’s relative price. The

independent variables included are the terms of trade, the real exchange rate, import penetration,

and a time trend. The dependent variable is the (log of the) value-added price of manufacturing

divided by the GDP deflator (lnp_pgdp). As Figure 18 shows, the model does a decent job of

tracking the in-sample behavior of this relative price and its decline over time. As expected,

import penetration enters with a negative and statistically significant coefficient. The estimated

coefficient on the real exchange rate is negative and significant as well, indicating that a real

appreciation worsens the relative profitability of manufacturing (with an elasticity of 0.1). To

the extent that the real exchange rate approximates the price of non-tradables relative to

tradables, the inverse relationship between the real exchange rate and manufacturing’s relative

price reflects the fact that manufactures are the quintessential tradables. The econometrics

confirm that the level (and also presumably the volatility) of the real exchange rate is a

significant determinant of the health of manufacturing. The external terms of trade do not enter

significantly, but that could well be the result of the fact that we are controlling for the real

exchange rate separately. Since South Africa is a natural resource exporter, the main channel

through which the terms of trade affects the relative profitability of manufacturing would be

through the real exchange rate. Finally, the regression indicates that there is a strong downward

time trend in manufacturing’s relative price even after we control for these other influences.
                                                 23

       Table 8 reports the results of a decomposition exercise using the regression coefficients

just discussed. Once again, we compare the decade after 1994 with the baseline of 1980-90. The

relative price of manufacturing has declined by 14 log-points between these two periods. The

main message that comes across from the decomposition is that the bulk of this decline is

“explained” by the time trend—i.e., remains unexplained by the economic determinants included

in the regression. Import competition itself accounts for about a quarter of the decline in

profitability. The real exchange rate, which stood at a more depreciated level post-1994, makes a

positive contribution to manufacturing’s relative profitability. In fact, the depreciation of the real

exchange rate seems to have offset about four-fifths of the adverse effect of import competition.

A more depreciated exchange rate presumably would have been even better for the health of

manufacturing.

       In order to examine the effect of international trade on manufactures more closely, I have

also looked at the relationship between imports and export ratios and relative output prices across

twenty-eight individual manufacturing subsectors (in a fixed effects framework with year and

subsector dummies). I find that an increase in import penetration has a strong negative effect on

a manufacturing subsector’s relative price, while an increase in exports has a less strong but still

statistically significant positive effect (Table 9, col. 1). These results confirm at a more

disaggregated level that manufacturing’s profitability is strongly linked to trade competition and

performance. They also confirm that the causality runs from trade to prices, rather than vice

versa. (If higher import penetration were the result of higher prices charged by domestic

suppliers, the correlation between imports and prices would be positive rather than negative.)

Looking at employment consequences across manufacturing subsectors directly, we similarly
                                                         24

find that import penetration has adverse effects on employment while exports have a positive

effect (Table 9, col. 2).5

          But what do we make of the large unexplained time trend in manufacturing’s relative

profitability? My speculative answer is that the simple regression model above does a poor job

of capturing the full effect of trade openness and globalization on manufacturing profitability.

Caught between more advanced countries at the high end and China at the low end, it seems safe

to assume that South African producers have had a rough ride during the 1990s.



V. Concluding remarks

          The disappointing growth and employment trajectory of the South African economy

since its democratic transition is best understood as a consequence of the under-performance of

its non-resource tradables sector, and of manufacturing in particular. Had the South African

manufacturing sector expanded rapidly, economic growth would have been higher and far more

jobs would have been created for the relatively unskilled. The good news is that the objectives

of macroeconomic stability, economic growth, and social equity all require the same

fundamental structural shift in the South African economy: an expanded non-resource tradables

sector.

          As I have shown in this paper, the behavior of South Africa’s manufacturing sector is

well explained by standard economic determinants. Prices, costs, and productivity are the main

drivers of manufacturing production and employment. Therefore putting manufacturing on a

permanently steeper trajectory will necessitate working on these same levers. In particular, it


5
  It is the case that the trade-induced decline in manufacturing employment has been partially offset by an increase
in employment in trade-related services, particularly wholesale and retail trade (SIC 6). But since wholesale and
retail trade is considerably more skill intensive compared to manufacturing, the net job loss for unskilled workers
has still been considerable.
                                                 25

will require reversing the decline in relative profitability which the econometrics tells us has

been the primary culprit for the sector’s misfortunes.
                                              26

REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Braun, and Johannes Fedderke, “Markups and Growth in South
Africa,” CID South Africa Project Report, Harvard University, July 2006.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Sebastian Galiani, Jim Levinsohn, and Ingrid Woolard, “Why is
Unemployment So High in South Africa?” CID South Africa Project Report, Harvard University,
July 2006.

Bertrand, Marianne, Sendhil Mullainathan and Douglas Miller, “Public Policy and Extended
Families: Evidence from Pensions in South Africa,” The World Bank Economic Review, vol. 17,
no. 1, 2003, 27-50.

Charmes, Jacques, “Informal sector, poverty and gender: A review of empirical evidence,”
background paper for World Development Report 2001, Centre of Economics and Ethics for
Environment and Development, University of Versailles-St Quentin en Yvelines, 2000.

du Plessis, Stan, and Ben Smit, “Economic growth in South Africa since 1994,” University of
Stellenbosch, 2006.

Edwards, Lawrence, and Robert Lawrence, “South African Trade Policy Matters: Trade
Performance & Trade Policy,” CID South Africa Project Report, Harvard University, July 2006.

Fedderke, Johannes, “Towards an understanding of the growth absence: reviewing the evidence
that can account for the poor growth performance of the South African economy,” Johannesburg,
WITS University and ERSA, 2002.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Ricardo Hausmann, Ben Smits, and Federico Sturzenegger, “South Africa
Project Macro Report: Managing Capital Flows,” CID South Africa Project Report, Harvard
University, July 2006.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
Per Worker Than Others?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114(1), pages 83-116,
February 1999.

Hartzenberg, Trudi, and John Stuart, “South Africa’s Growth Performance since 1960: A Legacy
of Inequality and Exclusion,” Prepared for AERC Growth Project, School of Economics,
University of Cape Town, May 2002.

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik, “Economic Development as Self-Discovery,” Journal of
Development Economics, vol. 72, December 2003.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik, “What You Export Matters,” Harvard
University, May 2006.
                                              27

Hirsch, Alan, Season of Hope: Economic Reform under Mandela and Mbeki, University of
KwaZulu-Natal Press/IDRC, 2005.

Kingdon, G. and J. Knight. “Unemployment in South Africa: The Nature of the Beast”, World
Development , 32, No. 3, March, 2004.

Leibbrandt, Murray, James Levinsohn, and Justin McCrary, “Incomes in South Africa since the
Fall of Apartheid,” NBER Working Paper No. 11384, May 2005.

Nowak, Michael, and Luca Antonio Ricci, eds., Post-Apartheid South Africa: The First Ten
Years, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., 2005.

Pollin, Robert, Gerald Epstein, James Heintz, and Leonce Ndikumana, An Employment-
Targeted Economic Program for South Africa, United Nations Development Program, New
York, 2006.

Rancchod, V., “Household Responses to Adverse Income Shocks,” University of Michigan,
draft, 2006.

Rodrik, Dani, “Industrial Policy for the Twenty-First Century,” Harvard University, September
2004.
       1500
              2000
                     2500
                            3000
                                   3500
                                                                               4000
                                                                                                              Figure 1


1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
                                          GDP per capita (constant 2000 US$)




1974
                                          Gross fixed capital formation (% of GDP)




1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
                                                                                      Investment and growth




1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
       10
              15
                     20
                            25
                                   30
                                                                               35
                                       29

Figure 2

                 Unemployment rates (c. 2002)

  35




  30




  25




  20




  15




  10




   5




   0
                                   1

           MYS   MEX   POL   ZAF       THA   TUR   VEN   BRA
                                                      30

Table 1

A snapshot in 1988 (US=1)

                                                                  mining
                                                                 share of
                         Y/L      (K/Y)^a    H/L      A           GDP
          ZAF              0.25      0.959    0.568       0.46      0.111
          MYS             0.267      1.004    0.592       0.45      0.103


Source: Hall and Jones (1999)
       0
           0.02
                  0.04
                         0.06
                                0.08
                                             0.1
                                                   0.12
                                                          0.14
                                                                 0.16
                                                                        0.18
                                                                                                                                    Figure 3


1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
                                                                                                                                               31




1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
                                                                               Manufacturing employment (as share of labor force)




1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
                                       ZAF
                                       MYS
                                                          32

Figure 4

                                             ZAF-MYS comparisons (2004)


  35000
           ZAF
           MYS

  30000




  25000




  20000




  15000




  10000




   5000




      0
           GDP per capita   GDP per worker   GDP per employee   VA per employee,   VA per employee,   VA per employee,
                                                                    services           industry        manufacturing
                                                                 33

Figure 5

                                                 Income level of exports (EXPY)


  9.5
           ZAF
           MYS



    9




  8.5




    8




  7.5




    7
           1962-65       1966-70       1971-75         1976-80        1981-85      1986-90      1991-95   1996-00

Note: This measure of the sophistication of export baskets comes from Hausmann et al. (2006).
                                                     34

Box 1: Malaysian policies to promote manufacturing



 •    Early 1970s: EPZs combined with restrictions on unionism to attract
      MNEs
 •    Early 1980s: heavy industrialization strategy focusing on trade
      protection, bumiputera-ownership, and public enterprise
 •    Recession in mid-1980s, followed by privatization
 •    Late 1980s: trade liberalization plus substantial incentives to
      investment and exports (including on “priority products”)
        – Very little rise in skill intensity, even though manufacturing takes off
 •    Early 1990s: Focus on training and skills
        – Incentives increasingly tied to domestic sourcing of inputs
                                                                               35

Figure 6
                                                             Total employment, by skill category


  9000000
                     Semi- and unskilled
                     Skilled
  8000000
                     Highly skilled


  7000000



  6000000



  5000000



  4000000



  3000000



  2000000



  1000000



       0
       1970   1972         1974       1976   1978   1980   1982    1984    1986     1988    1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004
                                                                            36

Figure 7
                                                      Employment shares: all skill categories


   0.5



  0.45



   0.4



  0.35



   0.3



  0.25                                                                                                                  Tradable
                                                                                                                        Private non-tradable
                                                                                                                        Public non-tradable
   0.2



  0.15
         1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982    1984      1986     1988      1990    1992   1994   1996   1998    2000      2002    2004
                                                                       37

Figure 8


                 Low skill intensity by sectors: Shares of low and unkilled workers in sectoral employment

   1


  0.9


  0.8


  0.7


  0.6


  0.5


  0.4


  0.3


  0.2

                                                                                                             Tradable
  0.1                                                                                                        Private non-tradable
                                                                                                             Public non-tradable
                                                                                                             Manufacturing
   0
        1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002    2004
                                                               38

Figure 9


            Change in employment versus initial low-skill intensity, by manufacturing subsectors, 1970-
                                   2004 (annual average percent changes)

                                                    0.95




                                                    0.85

                                                                                       y = -84.677x + 0.7337
                                                                                              2
                                                                                            R = 0.1698

                                                    0.75




                                                    0.65




                                                    0.55




                                                    0.45




                                                    0.35
  -0.0015         -0.001            -0.0005                0            0.0005              0.001              0.0015
                                                                            39

Figure 10

                                                Real capital per worker (Rm in 2000 prices)

  0.25




   0.2




  0.15




   0.1




  0.05
                  Tradable sector
                  Private non-tradable sector
                  Public non-tradable sector
                  Manufacturing


    0
         1970   1972   1974    1976    1978     1980   1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004
                                                       40

Table 2

             Urban             Informal
             unemployment rate employment (as a
             (1990s)           share on non-agr.
                               employment)
South               29.3              18.9
Africa

Other sub-          16.0              74.8
Saharan
Africa
Latin               8.1               56.9
America

Asia                5.3               63.0




Source: Charmes (2000) via Kingdon and Knight (2003)
                                                                                                                                   41

Figure 11
                                                                      Manufacturing employment and relative output prices

  1,800,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.3
                                                                                                                                    Manufacturing employment                     Rleative price of manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.25
  1,600,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.15
  1,400,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.1

  1,200,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.05

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
  1,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.95

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.9
   800,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.85

   600,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.8
              1 97 0
                       1 97 1
                                1 97 2
                                1 97 3
                                         1 97 4
                                                  1 97 5
                                                  1 97 6
                                                           1 97 7
                                                                    1 97 8
                                                                             1 97 9
                                                                             1 98 0
                                                                                      1 98 1
                                                                                               1 98 2
                                                                                               1 98 3
                                                                                                        1 98 4
                                                                                                                 1 98 5
                                                                                                                 1 98 6
                                                                                                                          1 98 7
                                                                                                                                   1 98 8
                                                                                                                                   1 98 9
                                                                                                                                            1 99 0
                                                                                                                                                     1 99 1
                                                                                                                                                     1 99 2
                                                                                                                                                              1 99 3
                                                                                                                                                                       1 99 4
                                                                                                                                                                       1 99 5
                                                                                                                                                                                1 99 6
                                                                                                                                                                                         1 99 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 99 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 99 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2 00 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2 00 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2 00 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 00 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 00 4
                                                                                                                               42

Figure 12

                                                                         TFP-adjusted relative prices for manufacturing

  1.5
                                           Relative to GDP deflator                                                     Relative to financial intermediation, real estate and business services

  1.4


  1.3


  1.2


  1.1


   1


  0.9


  0.8


  0.7


  0.6
        1970
               1971
                      1972
                             1973
                                    1974
                                           1975
                                                  1976
                                                         1977
                                                                1978
                                                                       1979
                                                                              1980
                                                                                     1981
                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                   1983
                                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                                 1985
                                                                                                                        1986
                                                                                                                               1987
                                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                                                       1995
                                                                                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                        43

Figure 13

                                                                          Manufacturing employment and import penetration

  1,800,000                               employment                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                          import penetration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    28
  1,600,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    26

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    24
  1,400,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    22

  1,200,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    18
  1,000,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
   800,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12

   600,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
              1970
                     1971
                            1972
                                   1973
                                           1974
                                                  1975
                                                         1976
                                                                1977
                                                                       1978
                                                                              1979
                                                                                     1980
                                                                                            1981
                                                                                                   1982
                                                                                                          1983
                                                                                                                 1984
                                                                                                                        1985
                                                                                                                               1986
                                                                                                                                      1987
                                                                                                                                             1988
                                                                                                                                                    1989
                                                                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                                                                                1993
                                                                                                                                                                                       1994
                                                                                                                                                                                              1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                 44



Figure 14

                                                                              Manufacturing employment and real remuneration

  1,800,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70,000
                                          Employment
                                          Real remuneration per employee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65,000
  1,600,000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   60,000

  1,400,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   55,000


  1,200,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50,000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   45,000
  1,000,000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40,000

    800,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   35,000


    600,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30,000
              1970
                     1971
                            1972
                                   1973
                                          1974
                                                 1975
                                                        1976
                                                               1977
                                                                      1978
                                                                             1979
                                                                                    1980
                                                                                           1981
                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                         1983
                                                                                                                1984
                                                                                                                       1985
                                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                                     1987
                                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                                   1989
                                                                                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                                                                                 1991
                                                                                                                                                                        1992
                                                                                                                                                                               1993
                                                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                                                             1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2004
                                                                   45



Table 3

                     α               β              γ               δ
coeff.             4.36           11.64           -0.51           -2.59
t-stat             4.76           10.33           -2.98           -4.21

Estimated across nine 1-digit industries over 1980-2004, with a full set of year
and sector dummies.
                                   real remuneration predicted from skill composition
                                10.6        10.8          11          11.2          11.4   Figure 15




                         1980
                         1985
                         1990
                  year
                         1995




skill upgrading
(rem_predicted)
                         2000
                         2005
                                                                                                       46




                                  real remuneration not predicted by skill composition
                                  -.2       -.1       0         .1          .2       .3
                         1980
                         1985
                         1990
                  year
                         1995




“wage push”
(rem_residual)
                         2000
                         2005
                                                                   47

Table 4

                             dependent variable (in logs)

                                              unskilled
                      value added employment employment

lnp_pgdp                        0.35             0.21            -0.21
                                 4.45             1.74            -2.04


lnp_pgdp x
manufacturing                  -0.04             1.24             1.12
                                 -0.13            2.67             2.77


lnrem_resid                    -0.02            -0.62            -0.61
                                 -0.34           -8.75            -9.72


lnrem_pred                      0.04            -0.35            -0.59
                                 1.04            -5.56           -10.85


ln TFP                          0.46            -0.19            -0.21
                                 8.52            -2.26            -2.92


N                                200              200             200

Estimated across eight 1-digit industries (excluding government employment)
Over 1980-2004, with a full set of industry and year fixed effects. Robust t-stats
in parentheses.
                                                                      48



Figure 16



                Total employment                                                         Unskilled employment
  14.3




                                                                           13.9
                                                                           13.8
  14.2




                                                                           13.7
  14.1




                                                                           13.6
                                                                           13.5
  14




         1980   1985       1990            1995         2000   2005               1980   1985   1990            1995        2000   2005
                                  year                                                                   year

                           Fitted values          lnl                                           Fitted values          lnl_un




Explanatory variables used to generate the fitted values are: lnp_pgdp, lnrem_resid, lnrem_pred, lntfp.
                                                            49

Table 6: Explaining the fall in manufacturing employment


Total employment (manufacturing)
                                                                           Due to:
                             ln l            lnp_pgdp      lnrem_residual lnrem_predicted   lntfp     total
1980-1990                   14.24               0.17            0.15           10.77        4.48
1994-2004                   14.09               0.02            -0.11          11.10        4.57
log-points diff             -0.14              -0.14              -0.26        0.32         0.09

coefficient                                    1.445             -0.624       -0.347        -0.187

contribution                                   -0.21               0.16        -0.11        -0.02     -0.17
(percent)                                     143.8%             -113.0%      78.2%         11.2%    120.2%
                                                                                                                                        50

Figure 17

                                                         Profitability of manufacturing (SIC 3) relative to F.I.R.E. (SIC 8)
                                                               (measured by gross operating surplus per capital)

  2.5


  2.3


  2.1


  1.9


  1.7


  1.5


  1.3


  1.1


  0.9


  0.7


  0.5
        1970
               1971
                      1972
                             1973
                                    1974
                                           1975
                                                  1976
                                                         1977
                                                                1978
                                                                       1979
                                                                              1980
                                                                                     1981
                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                   1983
                                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                                 1985
                                                                                                                        1986
                                                                                                                               1987
                                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                                                                           1991
                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                                                       1995
                                                                                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2005
                                        51

Table 7

Dependent variable: lnp_pgdp

                                                   import
                               ln TOT   ln RER   penetration    time
estimated coefficient            0.09     -0.1     -0.006      -0.009
t-stat                          1.03     -2.5       -2.72       -5.73


R-sq             0.92
N                  25
                                           52

Figure 18
    .2
    .15
    .1
    .05
    0




          1980   1985     1990           1995         2000   2005
                                  year

                        Fitted values           lnp_pgdp
                                              53

Table 8
Relative price of manufacturing
                                                   Due to:
                  lnp_pgdp   lntot_imf    lnrer      imp     time    total
1980-1990             0.17      0.15       4.93     19.94    1985
1994-2004             0.02      0.06       4.65     26.31    1999

log-points diff      -0.14        -0.09   -0.28      6.37    14.00

coefficient                       0.09    -0.10     -0.01    -0.01

contribution                      -0.01    0.03      -0.04   -0.12   -0.14
(percent)                         5.6%    -19.6%    25.3%    83.5%   94.8%
                                                                    54

Table 9
 Fixed effects regressions across manufacturing subsectors

                                   dependent variable:
                              lnp_pgdp    ln employment
                                 (1)             (2)

import penetration              -0.003              -0.008
                                 -4.18               -5.58

export ratio                     0.002              0.006
                                  2.80               4.73

lnrem_resid                                         -0.289
                                                     -7.76

lnrem_pred                                          -0.663
                                                     -5.11

lntfp                                               -0.001
                                                     -0.03

N                                 980                700

Estimated with a full set of year and subsector dummies across 28 manufacturing
subsectors
over the periods 1970-2004 (col. 1) and 1980-2004 (col. 2).
T-stats are shown under the coefficients.
