NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS SUDDEN STOPS IN A BUSINESS CYCLE MODEL WITH COLLATERAL CONSTRAINTS:
A FISHERIAN DEFLATION OF TOBIN'S Q
Enrique G. Mendoza
Working Paper 12564
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12564

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

I am grateful to Guillermo Calvo, Dave Cook, Mick Devereux, Gita Gopinath, Tim Kehoe, Nobuhiro
Kiyotaki, Narayana Kocherlakota, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Marcelo Oviedo, Helene Rey, Vincenzo Quadrini,
Alvaro Riascos, Lars Svensson, Linda Tesar and Martin Uribe for helpful comments. I am also grateful
for comments by participants at the 2006 Texas Monetary Conference, 2005 Meeting of the Society
for Economic Dynamics, the Fall 2004 IFM Program Meeting of the NBER, and seminars at the ECB,
BIS, Bank of Portugal, Cornell, Duke, Georgetown, IDB, IMF, Harvard, Hong Kong Institute for Monetary
Research, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Johns Hopkins, Michigan, Oregon, Princeton,
UCLA, USC, Western Ontario and Yale. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with Collateral Constraints:A Fisherian
Deflation of Tobin's Q
Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 12564
October 2006
JEL No. D52,E44,F32,F41
ABSTRACT
The current account reversals, large recessions, and price collapses that define Sudden Stops contradict
the predictions of a large class of models in which the current account is a vehicle for consumption
smoothing and investment financing. This paper shows that the quantitative predictions of a business
cycle model with collateral constraints are consistent with the key features of Sudden Stops. Standard
shocks to imported input prices, the world interest rate, and productivity trigger collateral constraints
on debt and working capital when borrowing levels are high relative to asset values, and these high-leverage
states are endogenous outcomes. In these situations, Irving Fisher's debt-deflation mechanism causes
Sudden Stops as the deflation of Tobin's Q leads to a spiraling decline in the prices and holdings of
collateral assets. This has immediate effects on output and factor demands because collapsing collateral
values cut access to working capital. In contrast with previous findings, collateral constraints induce
significant amplification in the responses of macroaggregates to shocks. Because of precautionary
saving, Sudden Stops are infrequent events nested within normal cycles in the long run, but they remain
a positive probability event.
Enrique G. Mendoza
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th St Nw
Washington Dc 20431
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

1.

Introduction

The Great Depression showed that market economies can experience deep recessions
that differ markedly from typical business cycle downturns. The recessions that hit
emerging economies in the aftermath of the financial crises of the last twelve years
illustrated the same fact. In contrast with the Great Depression, however, the loss of
access to world capital markets played a key role in emerging markets crises. That is, the
crises of emerging economies featured a phenomenon referred to as a “Sudden Stop.”
Three striking stylized facts characterize Sudden Stops: (1) large reversals in the
current account, (2) deep recessions, and (3) collapses in real asset prices and the price of
nontradable goods relative to tradables. The recessions were in most cases the largest
downturns experienced by the affected countries since the Great Depression, with GDP,
consumption and investment falling well below two standard deviations from their
corresponding trends (see Calvo, Izquierdo and Loo-Kung (2006), Mendoza (2002)).
Sudden Stops are a puzzle for a large class of macroeconomic models in which the
current account is an efficient vehicle for consumption smoothing and investment
financing, and countries enjoy uninterrupted access to credit markets. Models in this class
include frictionless real business cycle (RBC) models of small open economies (SOE) as
well as models with nominal rigidities. In contrast, the recent literature on Sudden Stops
emphasizes the role of frictions in world capital markets. Several studies propose models
that predict sudden adjustments in production, absorption and the current account as a
result of the adverse effects of financial frictions (see, for example, Calvo (1998), Gopinath
(2003), Cook and Choi (2003), Cook and Devereux (2006a, 2006b), Martin and Rey
(2006), and Paasche (2001)).
Empirical evidence from Sudden Stops suggests that, in addition to the “demandside” effects of credit frictions widely studied in the Sudden Stops literature, there are
important “supply-side” effects. Growth accounting shows that changes in capital and
labor account for a small fraction of the initial output collapse (see Bergoeing et. al.
(2002) and Section 2 of this paper). This could indicate that a large exogenous drop in
total factor productivity (TFP) caused the fall in output. Section 2 of this paper shows,
however, that large declines in imported inputs and capacity utilization accounted for an
important share of the output collapse in Mexico’s 1995 Sudden Stop: Of the 8.5 percent
decline in output per worker between the third quarter of 94 and the second quarter of 95,
3.1 percentage points were due to the drop in imported inputs and at least 2.5 percentage
points were due to reduced capacity utilization.
The stylized facts of Sudden Stops suggest that an equilibrium business cycle
framework aiming to account for this phenomenon should have three desirable features:
First, it should produce a stochastic stationary equilibrium in which infrequent Sudden
Stops are nested together with normal business cycles. Second, in a Sudden Stop episode,
typical realizations of the same underlying exogenous shocks that drive business cycles in
non-Sudden Stop periods should result in a sharp reversal in the current account, a deep
recession, and a fall in asset prices. Third, endogenous declines in imported inputs and
capacity utilization should play a key role in a Sudden Stop’s initial output collapse. This
paper proposes a model with these features, and explores whether it can deliver
quantitative predictions consistent with those of actual Sudden Stops. The model

1

introduces financial frictions similar to those studied in the Sudden Stops literature into
an RBC-SOE setup with incomplete markets, imported inputs and capacity utilization.
The standard RBC-SOE model cannot produce Sudden Stops even if imported inputs
and endogenous utilization are added. Agents in this model still have unrestricted access
to a perfect international credit market. Negative shocks to TFP, the world interest rate,
or the world price of imported inputs induce the standard consumption-smoothing and
investment-reducing effects of the RBC-SOE model. Large TFP shocks could trigger large
output collapses driven by cuts in imported inputs and capacity utilization, but this would
still fail to explain the current account reversal and the collapse in consumption (since
households would borrow from abroad to smooth consumption). Adding large shocks to
the world interest rate or access to external financing could alter these results, but such a
theory of Sudden Stops would hinge entirely on unexplained “large and unexpected”
shocks. The shocks would need to be large, because by definition they need to induce
recessions larger than the normal non-Sudden-Stop recessions, and they would need to be
unexpected (i.e. outside the set realizations of shocks agents consider possible), because
otherwise agents would self-insure to undo their real effects.
Despite the above shortcomings, large, unexpected shocks often drive current account
reversals in the Sudden Stops literature. In contrast, the quantitative findings of this
paper show that credit constraints can provide an explanation for Sudden Stops that does
not hinge on large, unexpected shocks. The model features two collateral constraints:
First, a limit on debt not to exceed a fraction of the liquidation value of collateral assets.
Second, a constraint that limits working capital financing not to exceed a fraction of the
value of the firms’ assets. The emphasis is on studying the quantitative significance of
these constraints for the business cycle transmission mechanism, along the lines of the
recent Macroeconomics literature on this subject, including Kiyotaki and Moore (1997),
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1998), Aiyagari and Gertler (1999), Kocherlakota (2000),
Cooley, Miramon and Quadrini (2004) and Jermann and Quadrini (2005).
The collateral constraint on debt is similar to the margin constraint used by Mendoza
and Smith (2006) in their extension of the Aiyagari-Gertler setup to an environment of
global asset trading. This paper incorporates this idea into a quantitative business cycle
setup with endogenous capital accumulation and dividends that vary in response to the
collateral constraint. The constraint shares some of the features of the collateral
constraints studied by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Kocherlakota (2000) and others
examined in theoretical studies of Sudden Stops (e.g. Auenhaimer and Garcia (2000),
Izquierdo (2000), Paasche (2001)).
The collateral constraint on working capital is a modification of the working capital
constraint typical of limited participation models, in which firms borrow to finance factor
costs. Neumeyer and Perri (2005), Uribe and Yue (2006) and Oviedo (2004) examine the
quantitative implications of world interest rate disturbances in RBC-SOE models with
working capital. The model of this paper differs in that firms are required to provide
collateral for working capital loans, and the role of this constraint is to amplify recessions
during Sudden Stops (rather than generate larger business cycles in general).
The transmission mechanism created by the collateral constraints has three elements
that are key for the model’s ability to produce Sudden Stops nested within normal cycles:

2

(1) The constraints only bind when the economy’s leverage ratios (the ratios of debt
and/or working capital to asset values) are sufficiently high. Otherwise, adverse shocks of
standard magnitude do not alter the economy’s access to world credit markets, and thus
yield the same responses as in a typical RBC-SOE model.
(2) The loss of credit market access is an endogenous result. In particular, the high
leverage ratios at which the collateral constraints bind are an endogenous feature of the
model. These high-leverage states are reached with positive long-run probability as the
outcome of the dynamics driven by optimal plans for debt and capital accumulation under
particular sequences of “typical” realizations of exogenous shocks. In contrast with
endowment economy models, in which agents use debt to smooth consumption in response
to adverse shocks, the economy of this paper accumulates debt also to finance investment
and increase consumption in response to persistent favorable shocks. Hence, high-leverage
states can be preceded by economic expansions, as observed in many emerging economies.
Households self insure to reduce the likelihood of large consumption drops when the
collateral constraints bind, but this precautionary saving does not rule out Sudden Stops
completely in the long run.
(3) Sudden Stops are driven by three “credit channel” effects that induce amplification,
asymmetry and persistence in the macroeconomic effects of exogenous shocks. Two of
these credit channels are endogenous financing premia (one on debt and one on working
capital) that arise because the effective cost of borrowing rises when the collateral
constraints bind. The third is Fisher’s (1933) classic debt-deflation mechanism: When the
collateral constraint on debt binds, agents liquidate capital in order to meet “margin
calls.” This fire-sale of assets reduces the price of capital and hence tightens further the
constraint, setting off a spiraling collapse of investment and asset prices. This debtdeflation spiral has important real effects: The current account and domestic absorption
suffer immediate reversals. Future levels of capital, output, and factor demands fall in
response to the initial investment decline. Moreover, the collapse in the value of collateral
assets can trigger the collateral constraint on working capital and thus induce immediate
declines in production, factor demands and capacity utilization.
The quantitative analysis of the model calibrated to Mexican data shows that
economies with and without collateral constraints exhibit largely the same long-run
business cycle co-movements. In contrast, these economies yield sharply different responses
to one-standard-deviation shocks conditional on a positive-probability initial state with
high leverage ratios. The economy with the collateral constraints on debt and working
capital yields Sudden Stops with initial collapses in consumption and investment similar
to those observed in Mexico’s 1995 crash. The current account reversal is larger and the
drops in output and asset prices are smaller. Still, the amplification effects induced by the
collateral constraints on the responses of all macroeconomic aggregates are significantly
larger than previous estimates. These effects are weaker if the collateral constraints are
replaced with exogenous credit limits, if working capital or imported inputs are removed,
and if shocks to the world interest rate or imported input prices are ignored.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the stylized facts of
Mexico’s 1994-95 Sudden Stop. Section 3 describes the model economy and characterizes
its competitive equilibrium. Section 4 provides a simple example that illustrates the

3

quantitative potential of the debt-deflation mechanism. Section 5 conducts the numerical
analysis of the model based on the calibration to Mexican data. Section 6 concludes.

2.

Empirical Regularities of Sudden Stops: The Mexican Case

A growing number of empirical studies document the stylized facts of Sudden Stops
(e.g. Calvo and Reinhart (1999), Calvo, Izquierdo and Loo-Kung (2006), and MilesiFerretti and Razin (2000)). This paper focuses instead on a detailed analysis of Mexico’s
Suddent Stop following the December, 1994 devaluation. The objectives are to quantify
the stylized facts of this Sudden Stop, to identify potentially relevant features of the
business cycle transmission mechanism that was at work at that time, and to provide
information for the calibration of the model used in the quantitative analysis of Section 5.
Figure 1 plots the levels and the Hodrick-Prescott trend of annual per-capita GDP for
the period 1900-2004. The Figure shows two striking facts. First, the Sudden Stop of 1995
produced the largest recession since the Great Depression. Second, the trend of Mexico’s
GDP per capita fell sharply around the time of the first post-war currency crises in 1976,
and its recovery since then has been prevented first by the protracted recession that
followed the 1982 Debt Crisis, and later by the 1995 Sudden Stop. Since the Debt Crisis
can also be regarded as a Sudden Stop, this observation suggests that vulnerability to
Sudden Stops has played a central role in Mexico’s growth slowdown (although studying
this issue is beyond the scope of this paper).
Figure 2 uses quarterly data for the annualized current-account GDP ratio to
illustrate the magnitude of the cutback in external financing during the 1982 debt crisis
and the 1995 crash. In both instances, current account deficits of about 8 percent of GDP,
which were built up gradually in the years before the Sudden Stops, were fully reversed.
In the 1982 episode, the reversal was more gradual but it was also larger and more
persistent (the current account shifted into surpluses that averaged about 3 percent of
GDP for nearly six years). The 1995 current account reversal was nearly immediate but
the country returned to current account deficits in late 1996. In line with these
observations, Figure 1 suggests that the recession after 1982 was milder but more
prolonged than the one associated with the 1995 Sudden Stop.
Figure 3 illustrates the evolution of three key relative prices: real equity prices (in
units of the GDP deflator), the price of imported intermediate goods relative to export
prices, and the price of nontradable goods relative to tradables (taken from Mendoza
(2002)). The plot starts in 1993 because quarterly data for imported input prices are not
available before this year. The Figure shows a boom in equity prices in the two years
before the 1995 Sudden Stop, followed by a collapse in 1995. The real price of imported
inputs rose by about 15 percent in 1995 and remained high for almost six years, before
declining and then rising sharply again since 2002. The relative price of nontradables
goods fell by a little more than the increase in imported input prices, but since 1996 the
nontradables relative price has followed an increasing trend.
One important aspect of these price movements is the “liability dollarization”
problem identified in the Sudden Stops literature. Since foreign debt obligations of agents
in emerging economies are generally denominated in units of world tradable goods (i.e.

4

hard currencies) and this debt is leveraged on incomes and assets denominated in different
units (nontradable goods or domestically-produced tradable goods), a sudden drop in the
relative price of nontradables, or a sudden surge in the relative price of imported inputs,
impairs the ability of domestic agents to service debts. It is also possible that these sharp
price movements reflect in part price rigidities. For instance, Cook and Devereux (2006a)
report a sharp rise in import prices relative to manufacturing export prices, similar to the
one shown here for Mexican data, for South East Asian countries in the 1997-1998 crises.
They associate this to a combination of slow adjustment in dollar prices of Asian exports
with quick pass-through of exchange rate changes to import prices. The Mexican data
show, however, that the relative price of imported inputs in terms of exports can rise
sharply even when the exchange rate is not moving much, as has been the case since 2002.
Table 1 summarizes key features of Mexico’s business cycles and the Sudden Stop of
1995 using quarterly data. The Table provides standard measures of business cycle
variability, co-movement and persistence of macroeconomic time series (GDP, private
consumption, fixed investment, the current account-GDP ratio, and equity prices) using
the Hodrick-Prescott filter to isolate cyclical components of the data. The Table also
reports business cycle moments for the price of imported inputs relative to exports and for
Uribe and Yue’s (2005) measure of Mexico’s real interest rate in world capital markets.
The moments reported in Table 1 are in line with well-known business cycle facts.
Investment is more variable than GDP, nondurables consumption is less variable than
GDP, all variables exhibit positive first-order autocorrelations, consumption and
investment are positively correlated with GDP and the current account-GDP ratio is
negatively correlated with GDP. Equity prices are very volatile and procyclical.
Intermediate goods prices are slightly more variable than GDP and they are
countercyclical. Mexico’s real interest rate in world markets is about 70 percent as
variable as output and is also countercyclical (by contrast, the standard measure of the
world real interest rate, the rate on three-month U.S. tbills deflated by the U.S. CPI is
about 60 percent as variable as output but is nearly uncorrelated with Mexico’s GDP).
Table 1 also reports measures of the magnitude of the Sudden Stop in each variable
(defined as the lowest deviation from trend during the sample period, or the largest one in
the case of the current account-GDP ratio and the price of intermediate goods) and the
ratio of this measure of Sudden Stop to the standard deviation of the same variable. The
latter is an indicator of the extent to which the movements observed during the Sudden
Stop exceeded those of Mexico’s “typical” business cycles. The magnitude of the recessions
in GDP, consumption and investment, the size of the reversal in the current account, and
the collapse in asset prices are significantly larger than those of typical Mexican
recessions. Except for the asset price collapse and the increase in intermediate goods prices
(which measured just below 2 standard deviations), the Sudden Stops in all macro
aggregates are well in excess of the two-standard deviation threshold.
Mexican National Accounts data provide further insights into the nature of the 1995
output collapse. In particular, changes in measured capital and labor played a relatively
minor role in the fall in output, compared to changes in TFP, imported inputs and
capacity utilization. The rationale for considering the latter two is the standard problem
biasing Solow residuals as measures of “true” TFP in the presence of large swings in
capacity utilization and prices of intermediate goods (see Finn (1995)).

5

Consider first the contributions of the capital stock (kt), labor usage (Lt) and the
Solow residual measure of TFP (AtS) to the 1995 output collapse implied by a CobbDouglas technology, AtSktβLtα. The first step to measure these contributions is to construct
estimates of factor income shares. Mexican data shows that the average labor share on
GDP for the period 1988-2002 is α = 0.35, but this figure is subject of debate because of
problems in measurement of proprietor’s income and other forms of labor income.
Recently, Garcia (2005) constructed estimates of Mexico’s factor shares using household
survey data and obtained α = 0.66, much higher than the average from national accounts.
Using Garcia’s estimates of factor shares, a standard capital stock series constructed using
the method of perpetual inventories (see Section 4 for details), and labor data from
Mexico’s National Accounts, the near 7 percent decline in GDP per worker observed
between the third quarter of 1994 and the second quarter of 1995 breaks down into a
contribution of -11 percentage points of the Solow residual, and a weighted contribution of
4 percentage points due to the capital-GDP ratio (weighted by the share of capital in
GDP). Thus, standard Solow residual analysis would suggest that the output collapse was
fully driven by a change in TFP that had to be large enough to overcome the growth in
the capital-GDP ratio (which grew because investment was still positive in 1994).
The results are very different using a production function for gross output of the form
At(mtkt) βLtαvtη, where At is “true” TFP, vt are imported inputs and mt is the utilization
rate of capital. The estimate of η implied by the 1993:1-2005:2 average share of imported
inputs in gross output at current prices (measuring gross output as GDP plus imported
inputs) is 10.2 percent. Given Garcia’s (2005) factors shares and this estimate of η, the
implied factor shares of capital and labor in gross output are α = 0.59 and β = 0.31.
Changes in utilization are difficult to gauge because capacity utilization is ignored in
National Accounts, and existing indicators based on utilization surveys of limited coverage
or indirect proxies, like electricity demand, are unreliable.1 There are, however,
methodologies that can be used to infer utilization rates from National Accounts. This
paper uses a methodology that follows from the capacity utilization framework of Calvo
(1975), in which the utilization rate determines the rate of depreciation of physical capital
according to an isoelastic cost function. Optimal utilization under competitive factor
pricing yields a mapping for the utilization rate that is a positive, isoelastic function of the
gross output-capital ratio, with an elasticity parameter determined by the ratio of β
divided by the long-run investment rate (see Section 4 for details). Combining the
estimates of utilization produced by this mapping with data on labor and imported inputs,
and using the capital stock estimates and factor shares in gross output mentioned earlier,
the contribution of TFP to the 8.5 decline in gross output per worker observed between
1994:3 and 1995:2 falls to 7.7 percentage points (instead of 11 percentage points with the
Solow residual). The contribution of the ratio of imported inputs to gross output is -3
percentage points, and the contribution of capacity utilization is -2.5 percentage points.
It is interesting that, because of the large swing in the relative price of imported
inputs, and hence in the demand for these inputs, a factor of production that is just 10
percent of gross output can contribute 3 percentage points of the 8.5 percent drop in gross
output per worker.2 Moreover, the contribution of TFP can still be overstated to the
1
2

Utilization surveys in Mexico started in November, 1996 and cover only the manufacturing sector.
Finn (1995) made a similar argument for the case of energy in the United States.

6

extent that there are other key inputs that experienced large price changes. Taking these
inputs into account would reduce more the contribution of TFP and increase that of the
key inputs. This exercise focuses only on imported inputs because their price relative to
export prices can be treated as shocks exogenous to the Mexican economy.
The findings of this TFP accounting exercise indicate that if, as the Sudden Stops
literature argues, financial frictions are at the core of the transmission mechanism that
triggers Sudden Stops, the effects of those frictions on investment and employment are of
little relevance for explaining the initial output collapse. Sudden Stops models that focus
only on the investment or labor effects of financial frictions could mimic the observed falls
in capital and labor and yet explain little of the fall in output. Changes in imported inputs
and capacity utilization play a bigger role, and hence Sudden Stops models should include
mechanisms that link them with financial frictions.
Interpreting the TFP results as suggesting that financial factors are irrelevant would
be misleading because the sudden, sharp reversal of Mexico’s current account in 1995
provides independent evidence showing that during Sudden Stops access to external
financing is severely restricted. There is also evidence from firm-level data showing that
(a) corporate leverage ratios rise in the buildup phase to a Sudden Stop, and (b) when the
Sudden Stop hits, leverage ratios collapse. Chapter II of IMF (2002) reports country and
regional aggregates of leverage ratios for listed corporations generated with firm-level data
on a fiscal year basis from the Worldscope database, including ratios of debt to assets and
debt to market value of equity. The median debt-to-assets ratio of Mexican corporations
rose by 5 percentage points in the two years before the Sudden Stop, and fell by more
than 5 percentage points in the fiscal year 1995-1996. For the aggregate of emerging
markets in Asia, the median ratio of debt to market value of equity rose from 0.4 to 1.2
between 1996 and 1998, and then fell by 20 percentage points in 1998-1999.

3.

A Model of Sudden Stops and Business Cycles with Collateral Constraints

The model economy is a variation of the standard RBC-SOE model with incomplete
insurance markets and capital adjustment costs proposed in Mendoza (1991). Two
important modifications are introduced here. First, the assumption of perfect credit
markets is relaxed to introduce endogenous collateral constraints. Second, the supply-side
of the model is modified to introduce imported inputs and endogenous capacity utilization.
3.1 Households
The small open economy is inhabited by a large set of identical, infinitely lived
households. The preferences of the representative household are defined over stochastic
sequences of consumption ct and labor supply Lt, for t=0,…,∞ . Preferences are modeled
using Epstein’s (1983) Stationary Cardinal Utility (SCU) function, which features an
endogenous rate of time preference, so as to obtain a unique, invariant limiting
distribution of foreign assets.3

3

Since agents face non-insurable income shocks and the world interest rate is exogenous,
precautionary saving leads foreign assets to diverge to infinity with the standard assumption of a
constant rate of time preference equal to the interest rate.

7

The preference specification is:4
⎡ ∞
⎫
⎤
⎪⎧ t −1
⎪
E 0 ⎢ ∑ exp ⎪⎨ − ∑ ρ (cτ − N (Lτ ) )⎪
⎬ u (ct − N (Lt ) ) ⎥⎥
⎢ t =0
⎪⎩⎪ τ = 0
⎪
⎪
⎣
⎭
⎦

(1)

In this expression, u(.) is a standard twice-continuously-differentiable and concave period
utility function and ρ(.) is an increasing, concave and twice-continuously-differentiable
time preference function. Following Greenwood et al. (1988), utility is defined in terms of
the excess of consumption relative to the disutility of labor, with the latter given by the
twice-continuously-differentiable, convex function N(.). This assumption eliminates the
wealth effect on labor supply by making the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and labor independent of consumption.
There are other methods that yield well-defined stochastic stationary equilibria in
SOE models (see Arellano and Mendoza (2003) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2002) for
details). In the context of models with credit constraints, SCU has the advantage that it
can support stationary equilibria in which these constraints can bind permanently. This is
because a binding credit constraint drives a wedge between the intertemporal marginal
rate of substitution in consumption and the rate of interest. In a stationary state with a
binding credit constraint, the rate of time preference adjusts endogenously to
accommodate this wedge. In contrast, in models with an exogenous discount factor, credit
constraints never bind in the long run (if the rate of time preference is greater or equal to
the world interest rate) or always bind at steady state (if the rate of time preference is
fixed below the interest rate).
Households choose sequences of consumption, labor supply, investment in domestic
capital, kt+1, and foreign borrowing or lending in one-period international bonds, bt+1, so as
to maximize SCU subject to the following period budget constraint:
ct = (dt + qt ) kt − qt kt +1 + wt Lt − bt +1 + bt R exp(εtR )

(2)

Households take as given the dividend rate on capital holdings, dt, the market price of
capital, qt, the wage rate, wt, and the stochastic gross world real interest rate on foreign
assets, Rexp(εtR ). εtR is an interest rate shock that follows a Markov process joint with the
other shocks defined later in this section.
The world credit market is imperfect. In particular, lenders require households to
guarantee their debt by offering domestic assets as collateral. The collateral constraint
takes the form of the margin requirement proposed by Aiyagari and Gertler (1999):
bt +1 ≥ −κqtkt +1

4

(3)

Epstein showed that SCU requires weaker preference axioms than those behind the standard
utility function with exogenous discounting. Exogenous discounting requires preferences over
stochastic future allocations to be risk-independent from past allocations and past allocations to be
risk-independent from future allocations, while SCU preferences only require the latter. Epstein
proved that a preference order consistent with the weaker axioms has a von Neumann-Morgenstern,
time-recursive representation if and only if it takes the form of the SCU function.

8

Thus, households can borrow up to a fraction κ of the market value of their capital. This
constraint resembles a debt contract with a margin clause. Margin clauses typically
require borrowers to surrender the control of collateral assets when the debt contract is
entered and give creditors the right to sell the assets when their market value falls below
the contract value. There are also other arrangements in financial markets that operate in
a similar way as a margin constraint without explicit margin clauses. These include valueat-risk strategies of portfolio risk management used by investment banks, and capital
requirements imposed by regulators on financial institutions and institutional investors.
For example, if an aggregate shock hits emerging markets, value-at-risk estimates increase
and lead investment banks to reduce their exposure in these markets, but since the shock
is aggregate, the resulting sale of assets increases price volatility and leads value-at-risk
models to require further portfolio adjustments. Dunbar (2000) provides a detailed
account of the central role that these mechanisms played in propagating the Russian crisis
of 1998 across the financial markets of emerging and industrial economies.
The margin constraint is not derived here from an optimal credit contract. Instead,
the constraint is imposed directly as in the models with endogenous credit constraints
examined by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Aiyagari and Gertler (1999), and Kocherlakota
(2000). Still, a credit relationship with a constraint like (3) could result, for example, from
an environment in which limited enforcement prevents lenders to collect more than a
fraction κ of the value of a defaulting debtor’s assets. In states of nature in which (3)
binds, the model produces an endogenous premium over the world interest rate at which
borrowers would agree to contracts in which bt+1 satisfies (3).5
3.2 Firms
Firms are owned by households and discount future profits taking as given the
households’ stochastic discount factors (i.e., the intertemporal marginal rates of
substitution in consumption, the reciprocal of which are denoted by Rtt+1 , for t=0,…,∞
with R0−1 = 1 ). Firms produce a tradable good that sells at a world-determined price
(normalized to unity without loss of generality). They make plans for factor demands and
investment. Capital depreciates at a rate that varies with capacity utilization, as
determined by the continuously-differentiable, increasing function δ(mt). Thus, as in Calvo
(1975), the cost of higher utilization is faster depreciation. Net investment, zt = kt+1 - kt,
incurs unitary investment costs determined by the function Ψ(zt/kt), which is linearly
homogeneous in zt and kt. 6 Firms need working capital to pay for a fraction φ of their
purchases of imported inputs, wage payments, and capacity utilization costs in advance of
sales. Firms are required to guarantee working capital loans so working capital financing
cannot exceed the fraction κ f of the value of firms’ assets. Imported inputs are purchased
5

Arellano (2005), Cook and Devereux (2006a), Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue
(2006) study the quantitative implications of country risk for business cycles in small open
economies. Arellano endogenizes country risk in a setup of strategic default. Neumeyer and Perri,
and Uribe and Yue study the effects of introducing exogenous risk premia of the magnitude
observed in the data in models with working capital, while Cook and Devereux conduct a similar
experiment in a model with sticky dollar pricing of exports and intra-regional trade.
6
Separating the utilization-depreciation cost from investment adjustment costs yields a more
tractable recursive formulation of the competitive equilibrium that preserves Hayashi’s (1982)
results regarding the conditions that equate marginal and average Tobin Q.

9

at an exogenous, stochastic relative price pexp(εtP), where exp(εtP) represents a shock to
the world price of imported inputs. TFP is also subject to random shocks exp(εtA).
The firms’ problem is to choose labor demand, investment, imported inputs, and the
rate of capacity utilization so as to maximize their value:
A
⎡ ∞ t
⎛
⎜⎜ exp(εt )F (mtkt , Lt , vt )
⎛
⎞
⎢
−
1
⎟
 j −1 ) ⎟ ⎜⎜
E 0 ⎢⎢ ∑ ⎜⎜⎜ ∏ ( R
⎟
j
⎡
⎛z
⎜
⎝
⎠⎟ ⎜⎜⎜
− ( 1 + φrt ) ( wt Lt + p exp(εtP )vt + δ(mt )kt ) − zt ⎢ 1 + Ψ ⎜⎜ t
=
0
t
=
0
j
⎢
⎝
⎝ kt
⎣
⎣⎢

⎞⎤
⎟⎟ ⎥
⎟
⎟
⎟⎟ ⎥⎥ , (4)
⎞⎤
⎟⎟ ⎥ ⎟ ⎥
⎠⎟ ⎦⎥ ⎠⎟ ⎦

where rt ≡ Rexp(εtR )-1, subject to the law of motion for capital,
zt = kt +1 − kt ,

(5)

and the collateral constraint on working capital financing:
R exp(εtR )φ ( wt Lt + p exp(εtP )vt + δ(mt )kt ) ≤ κ f qtkt +1.

(6)

Working capital is a within-period loan contracted at the beginning of each period and
paid off after the current output is sold at the end of each period. Hence, lenders set the
limit on working capital considering that the market value of the assets offered as
collateral must cover interest and principal on working capital loans.
3.3 Competitive Equilibrium & Credit Channel Effects
A competitive equilibrium for the small open economy is defined by stochastic
 ⎤∞
⎡
sequences of allocations [ ct , Lt , kt +1, bt +1, mt , vt , zt ]∞
0 and prices ⎣ qt , dt , wt , Rt + 1 ⎦ 0 such that: (a)
households maximize SCU subject to (2) and (3), taking as given dividends, wages, equity
prices, the world interest rate, and the initial conditions (k0,b0), (b) firms maximize their
value subject to (5) and (6), taking as given wages, the price of imported inputs, the
world interest rate, the household discount factors and the initial condition ko, and (c) the
capital, labor and goods markets clear.
In the absence of credit constraints, the competitive equilibrium is the same as in a
standard RBC-SOE model. The credit constraints distort this equilibrium by introducing
three credit-channel effects. Two of them are external financing premia affecting the cost
of borrowing for households and firms and the third is the Fisherian debt-deflation
process. These credit-channel effects can be analyzed using the optimality conditions of
the competitive equilibrium.
The household’s optimality conditions yield the following Euler equation for bt+1:
0 < 1−

⎡λ
⎤
μt
= Et ⎢ t +1 R exp(εtR+1 ) ⎥ ≤ 1
λt
⎢⎣ λt
⎦⎥

(7)

where λt is the non-negative Lagrange multiplier on the date-t budget constraint (2),
which equals also the lifetime marginal utility of ct, and μt is the non-negative Lagrange
multiplier on the collateral constraint (3). It follows from (7) that, when the collateral
constraint binds, households face an endogenous external financing premium on the

10

effective real interest rate at which they borrow ( Rth+1 ) relative to the world interest rate.
This expected premium is given by:
μ + cov(λt +1, εtR+1 )
,
Et ⎡⎣ Rth+1 − R exp(εtR+1 ) ⎤⎦ = t
Et [ λt +1 ]

Rth+1 ≡

λt
Et [ λt +1 ]

(8)

This external financing premium can be viewed as the premium at which domestic agents
would choose debt contracts with loan amounts that satisfy the collateral constraint with
equality in a credit market in which the constraint is not imposed directly.
In the canonical RBC-SOE model, international bonds are a risk-free asset and μt=0
for all t, so there is no premium. If the world interest rate is stochastic, the premium can
be positive or negative depending on the sign of the covariance term in (8). If the
collateral constraint binds, there is a direct effect by which the multiplier μt increases the
households’ external financing premium. In addition, there is an indirect effect that pushes
in the same direction because a binding credit constraint makes it harder to smooth
consumption, and hence the covariance between marginal utility and the world interest
rate is likely to increase.
The effects of the external financing premium on the asset price valuation of
households can be derived from their Euler equation for capital. Solving forward this
equation yields the following asset-pricing condition:
⎡ ∞ ⎛ j ⎛ 1 ⎞⎞
⎤
qt = Et ⎢ ∑ ⎜⎜⎜ ∏ ⎜⎜ t +i ⎟⎟⎟ ⎟⎟⎟dt +1+ j ⎥ ,
⎢ j = 0 ⎝ ⎜⎝ R
⎥
⎟⎟
i =0
t +i +1 ⎠ ⎠
⎣
⎦

t +i ≡ λt +i − κμt +i
R
t +i +1
λt +i +1

(9)

where Rtt++ii+1 is again the reciprocal of the households’ stochastic discount factor. Given
the financing premium in (8), it can be shown that a collateral constraint binding at t or
expected to bind at any future date, increases the rate at which future dividends are
discounted and thus lowers the date-t price of equity. In particular, the Euler equations
for bonds and equity yield the following expression for the equity premium (the excess
return on equity, Rtq+1 ≡ ( dt +1 + qt +1 ) / qt , relative to the gross world interest rate):
Et ⎡⎣ Rtq+1 − R exp(εtR+1 ) ⎤⎦ =

μt (1 − κ) + COVt (λt +1, εtR+1 ) − COVt (λt +1, Rtq+1 )
Et [λt +1 ]
=

Et ⎡⎣ Rth+1

−R

exp(εtR+1 ) ⎤⎦

μ κ + COVt (λt +1, Rtq+1 )
− t
Et [λt +1 ]

(10)

The above expression collapses to the standard equity premium expression if the
collateral constraint does not bind and the world interest rate is deterministic. As
Mendoza and Smith (2006) explained, when the collateral constraint binds it induces
direct and indirect effects on the equity premium similar to those affecting the external
financing premium. The direct effect of the binding collateral constraint is reduced by the
κμt
term
, which measures the marginal benefit of being able to borrow more by
Et [ λt +1 ]

holding an additional unit of capital. There is also a new element in the indirect effect
that is not present in the external financing premium and is implicit in the covariance
between λt+1 and Rtq+1 : since a binding collateral constraint makes it harder for households
to smooth consumption and self-insure, this covariance term is likely to become more
negative when the constraint binds, thereby increasing the equity premium.

11

Given the sequence of expected equity returns from (10), the forward solution for the
households’ valuation of equity can be re-written as:
⎛ ∞ ⎡ j ⎛
1
qt = Et ⎜⎜⎜ ∑ ⎢ ∏ ⎜⎜
q
⎝⎜ j = 0 ⎣⎢ i = 0 ⎝⎜ Et [ Rt +1+i

⎞
⎞⎟ ⎤
⎟⎟ ⎥⎥dt +1+i ⎟⎟⎟
]⎠⎦
⎠⎟

(11)

It follows then from (10) and (11) that, as Aiyagari and Gertler (1999) showed, higher
expected returns when the collateral constraint binds, or is expected to bind in the future,
increase the discount rate of future dividends and lower equity prices in the present.
In general equilibrium, the equity market clears and asset prices adjust so that the
households’ investment plans are consistent with those formulated by firms. On the firms’
side, the optimality conditions for kt+1 and zt are:
⎛
⎛z
⎜ 1 + Ψ ⎜⎜ t
⎜⎝
⎝ kt

⎞⎟ ⎡ zt ⎤ ⎛ zt
+ ⎢ ⎥ Ψ '⎜
⎠⎟⎟ ⎣⎢ kt ⎥⎦ ⎝⎜ kt

⎞⎞
⎟⎟
⎟⎟
⎟⎟ = ζt
⎠⎠

(12)

t )−1 ( dt +1 + ζt +1 ) ⎤ = ζt
Et ⎡⎢ ( R
⎣ t +1
⎦⎥
⎡ z ⎤2 ⎛ z
⎞
dt +1 ≡ exp(εtA+1 )mt +1F1(mt +1kt +1, Lt +1, vt +1 ) + ⎢ t +1 ⎥ Ψ ' ⎜⎜ t +1 ⎟⎟⎟
⎢⎣ kt +1 ⎥⎦
⎝⎜ kt +1 ⎠
tt+1
− δ(mt +1 ) ( 1 + φ ( rt +1 + χt +1R exp(εtR+1 ) ) ) + χt κ f qt R

(13)

where ζ and χ are the Lagrange multipliers on the investment equation (5) and the
working capital constraint (6) respectively.
Notice that, since firms discount at the households’ stochastic discount factors, the
forward solution of (13) yields asset prices consistent with those from the households’
forward solution (9) when ζt=qt. The optimal choice for zt+1 (given kt and qt) implied by
the firm’s optimal investment condition (12) represents the firms’ demand for investment
resources (i.e., its equity supply function). Since (12) is a standard Tobin Q relationship,
the fact that Ψ(.) is increasing and convex implies that there is a positive relationship
between investment demand and the equity price, or that the firms’ equity supply
function is upward sloping. This is because adjustment costs prevent firms from
instantaneously adjusting the stock of capital to its long-run level.7 Hence, when the
collateral constraint causes a negative shock to the households’ equity demand, firms
reduce gradually the capital stock and thus the fall in equity demand is accommodated
partly with a cut in firm investment and partly with a fall in the price of equity.
The second external financing premium present in the model arises because of the
collateral constraint on working capital financing. Firms observe the date-t realizations of
the shocks and, since the date-t capital stock is predetermined, they set factor demands
and capacity utilization according to these marginal productivity rules:
exp(εtA )F2 (mtkt , Lt , vt ) = wt ⎡⎣ 1 + φ(rt + χt R exp(εtR )) ⎤⎦

(14)

With the standard functional form Ψ(z / k ) = (a / 2)[ z / k ] , the elasticity of investment with
respect to q is (kq )/(az ) so without adjustment costs investment demand would be infinitely elastic.
7

12

exp(εtA )F1(mtkt , Lt , vt ) = δ ′(mt ) ⎡⎣ 1 + φ(rt + χt R exp(εtR )) ⎤⎦

(15)

exp(εtA )F3 (mtkt , Lt , vt ) = p exp(εtP ) ⎡⎣ 1 + φ(rt + χt R exp(εtR )) ⎤⎦

(16)

In the right-hand-side of each of these conditions, the term χtRexp(εtR) reflects the
increase in the effective marginal financing cost of working capital caused by the collateral
constraint. This external financing premium represents the excess over rt at which firms in
a competitive market of working capital loans would find it optimal to agree to loan
contracts that satisfy constraint (6) voluntarily.
The third credit channel present in the model, Fisher’s debt-deflation mechanism, is
harder to illustrate than the above external financing premia because of the lack of closedform solutions for equity prices and investment. In light of this, Section 4 provides a
simple quantitative example based on a simplified version of the model. Still, the debtdeflation mechanism can be described intuitively: When the households’ collateral
constraint binds, they respond to “margin calls” from lenders by fire-selling equity.
However, when they do this they meet with firms that feature an upward-sloping supply
of equity because of Tobin’s Q. These firms thus find it optimal to lower investment given
the reduced demand for equity and higher discounting of future dividends, and hence
equilibrium equity prices fall. But if the households’ collateral constraint was binding at
the initial equity prices and equity holdings, it must be more binding at the reduced prices
and investment levels, so another round of margin calls takes place and Fisher’s debtdeflation mechanism is set in motion. Moreover, as the value of collateral assets falls, the
collateral constraint on working capital may become binding, and if it does, the Fisherian
deflation will also cause a sudden increase in marginal financing costs for firms, resulting
in reduced levels of factor demands and capacity utilization.

4.

Amplification with Fisherian Deflation: A Simple Example

This Section of the paper uses a simple version of the model to show the potential of
the debt-deflation mechanism to produce large amplification effects. This exercise is
similar to the one conducted by Kocherlakota (2000) to quantify the amplification induced
by credit constraints in the responses of output and asset prices to unanticipated linear
income shocks in a simple deterministic model. The two models are very similar, except
that his model assumes that a fixed supply of land serves as collateral and agents can
borrow up to 100 percent of the value of land (i.e., κ=1).
The model of Section 3 is simplified by adopting these assumptions: (1) perfect
foresight, (2) a standard intertemporal utility function that depends only on consumption
and has a constant discount factor, (3) zero depreciation of capital, (4) a production
technology with capital as the only input, (5) standard functional forms for preferences,
technology and adjustment costs (analogous to those used in the quantitative analysis of
the full model in Section 5), and (6) a rate of time preference equal to the world real
interest rate. The equilibrium conditions of this model, for t=0,…,∞, are the following:
u ′(ct ) − μt = u ′(ct +1 ) ,

13

(17)

( u ′(ct ) − μt κ )qt =

2
⎞⎟
u ′(ct +1 ) ⎛⎜ β −1 a ⎜⎛ kt + 2 − kt +1 ⎞⎟
⎜⎜ βkt +1 + ⎜⎜
⎟⎟ + qt +1 ⎟⎟ ,
2⎝
R ⎝⎜
kt +1
⎠
⎠⎟

⎡
a kt +1 − kt
ct = ktβ − (kt +1 − kt ) ⎢ 1 +
kt
2
⎢⎣

( )

⎤
⎥ − bt +1 + Rbt + Δt ,
⎥⎦

(18)

(19)

and the credit constraint bt +1 ≥ −κqtkt +1 . Condition (17) is the consumption Euler
equation (considering that the rate of time preference equals the interest rate), condition
(18) is the investment Euler equation (where a is the adjustment cost coefficient and
qt = 1 + a(kt +1 − kt )/ kt is Tobin’s Q) and (19) is the resource constraint. The deterministic
sequence of linear income shocks [ Δt ]∞
0 satisfies two conditions: (a) the sequence can be
split into an initial shock Δ0 and a time-invariant shock Δt ≡Δ-0 for all t>0, and (b) Δ0
and Δ-0 are such that the present discounted value of [ Δt ]∞
is zero. Thus, Δ0 is a
0
“wealth-neutral” shock to date-0 income, which can be expressed for simplicity as a
fraction s of date-0 output, Δ0=sk0β (recall that date-0 output is pre-determined by k0).
It is straightforward to show that if credit markets are perfect, wealth-neutral shocks
do not affect the equilibrium of this economy (except for debt dynamics). Given the initial
conditions (k0,b0), the model with frictionless credit yields standard textbook solutions:
kt +1 − kt = ( Λ − 1 ) (kt − kss )

(20)

⎡
a ⎛ (Λ − 1)(kt − kss ) ⎞⎤
⎟⎥
yt = ktβ − (Λ − 1)(kt − kss ) ⎢ 1 + ⎜⎜
⎠⎟⎟ ⎦⎥
2⎝
kt
⎣⎢

(21)

⎡ ∞
⎤
ct = c = (1 − R−1 ) ⎢ ∑ R−t ( yt + Δt ) + b0R ⎥
⎢⎣ t = 0
⎥⎦

(22)

where yt is output net of investment and adjustments costs, kss is the steady state capital
stock (which satisfies βkssβ-1+1=R), and 0≤Λ≤1 is the partial-adjustment coefficient of the
capital stock that depends on R, β and a. These results imply that consumption is
perfectly smooth at a constant fraction of the economy’s wealth, while investment, the
capital stock, and net income display standard dynamics that converge monotonically to
steady state. Wealth-neutral shocks do not alter these outcomes because the present value
of [ Δt ]∞
vanishes from the measure of wealth in eq. (22). The shocks alter only bond
0
dynamics, with agents borrowing more (less) at date 0 when Δ0 is negative (positive).
Consider now the effects of wealth-neutral shocks in the economy with the collateral
constraint. To simplify transitional dynamics, κ takes two values known with full
certainty: a low value κL at t=0 and a high value κH for all t>0, with κL≤κH and κH high
enough so that the collateral constraint does not bind for all t>0. Given κL, if s is small
enough agents can borrow as needed to afford c at date 0 without violating the credit
constraint, and hence the results of the perfect-credit-markets case still hold. Since this
implies that μ0=0, eq. (18) predicts that in this case the return on kt+1 is equal to R. There
is, however, a large enough shock ŝ that makes the constraint bind at date 0. This is the
value of s for which the equilibrium of the perfect-credit-markets case satisfies jointly the
resource constraint and the collateral constraint with equality:

14

ˆ 0β + Rb0 + κLq 0 ( Λk0 + (1 − Λ)kss )
c = y 0 − sk

(23)

The equilibrium of the economy with a binding collateral constraint at date 0 can be
solved in two stages. First, the solutions from date 1 forward are given by the solutions
from the case with nonbinding credit constraints (eqs. (20)-(22)), adjusted for the initial
conditions (k1,b1) and incorporating the sequence of time-invariant income shocks that
complements the date-0 shock (Δt ≡Δ-0 = (R/(1-R-1))sk0β for all t>0). Second, the values
of c0, k1, b1 and μ0 solve the following non-linear equation system:
u ′(c0 ) − μ0 = u ′ ( c (k1, b1, Δ−0 ) ) ,

⎛ k1 − k0 ⎞⎞
⎟⎟
⎟⎟
⎟⎟ =
k0 ⎠⎠
,
( u ′(c0 ) − μ0 ) ⎛⎜ β −1 a ⎛⎜ ( Λ − 1 ) (k1 − kss ) ⎞⎟2
⎛ ( Λ − 1 ) (k1 − kss ) ⎞⎟ ⎞⎟
⎜
⎟
+
+
1
a
⎜⎜ βk1 + ⎜
⎟
⎟
⎠⎟
⎝⎜
⎠⎟ ⎠⎟⎟
2⎝
R
k1
k1
⎝

(24)

⎛

( u ′(c0 ) − μ0κL ) ⎜⎜⎝ 1 + a ⎜⎜⎝

(25)

⎡
a ⎛ k1 − k0 ⎞⎤
⎟⎟ ⎥ − b1 + Rb0 ,
⎜
c0 = (1 − s )k0β − (k1 − k0 ) ⎢ 1 +
2 ⎜⎝ k0 ⎠⎟ ⎦⎥
⎣⎢

(26)

⎡
⎛ k − k0 ⎞⎤
⎟⎥ k ,
b1 = −κL ⎢ 1 + a ⎜⎜ 1
⎝ k0 ⎠⎟⎟ ⎥⎦ 1
⎢⎣

(27)

( )

where c (k1, b1, Δ−0 ) denotes the stationary consumption level that solves eqs. (20)-(22) for
initial conditions (k1,b1) and Δ-0 ≡(R/(1-R-1))sk0β .
The intuition behind the debt-deflation mechanism implicit in eqs. (24)-(27) can be
explained as follows: When the shock first hits and triggers the constraint (i.e., before
considering its endogenous effect on capital and Tobin’s Q), k1 falls as agents seek to offset
the impact of their reduced borrowing ability by cutting investment. The cut in
investment lowers q0 and date-1 dividends and rises q1, so the return on k1 raises above R.
If the credit constraint was set as an exogenous fixed amount, these would be the main
adjustments. But the lower k1 and q0 tighten further the endogenous collateral constraint,
forcing extra adjustments in bond holdings, consumption, investment, and asset prices.
The value of κL plays an important role in the debt-deflation process. If κL=1, it
follows from (25) that the return on k1 remains equal to R even if the constraint binds,
which implies that investment and Tobin’s Q remain the same as with perfect credit
markets, and hence there is no debt-deflation. Consumption and debt still adjust, but they
do so as they would with an exogenous credit constraint. At the other extreme, if κL=0
the collateral constraint induces a decline in investment (as well as adjustments in
consumption and debt) and raises the return on k1 above R. But again there is no debt
deflation because now capital cannot be used as collateral. Hence, for the debt-deflation
mechanism to operate, credit markets must allow borrowers to leverage their assets but
only to some degree.
The size of the amplification effects produced by this simple model is illustrated with
a set of numerical experiments. These experiments use the parameter values β=0.34,

15

R=1.086, and a=2.65, which correspond to the calibration to Mexican data discussed in
the next section. The value of b0 is set at 40 percent of GDP, also as in Mexican data, and
k0 is set at 90 percent of kss. The baseline shock is s=0.027 percent, equivalent to 1
standard deviation of Mexico’s GDP in Table 1. Given these parameters, the initial
leverage ratio is b0/q-1k0 =-10.2 percent, hence κL=0.102. Under perfect credit markets, the
leverage ratio would fall to -12 percent at date 0 (i.e., b1/q0k1 =-0.12) and would continue
to fall monotonically to reach -20 percent at steady state. Thus, κH≥0.2 guarantees that
the credit constraint never binds for any t>0.8
Table 2 shows amplification effects for output, Tobin’s Q, consumption and the GDP
shares of investment and the current account. These effects are measured as differences
between responses to the shock with and without collateral constraints in percent of the
latter. The Table also includes Kocherlakota’s (2000) measure of amplification: the
difference between the responses to the shock with the credit constraint and the pre-shock
values of the variables in percent of the size of the shock. Five panels of results are
reported: Panel A reports the baseline results. Panel B changes the endogenous borrowing
constraint into an exogenous constraint set to an amount equal to 10.2 percent of the
date-0 value of capital in the economy with perfect credit markets. Panel C sets k0 1/3rd
below the steady state capital stock. Panel D raises the adjustment cost coefficient by a
factor of 40. Panel E lowers the same coefficient by a factor of 1/40. Panel F shows results
for shocks ranging from 2 to 6 percent. The parameter changes in Panels C, D and E,
change the initial leverage ratio, so the value of κL is adjusted accordingly.
The baseline results show that the credit constraint has important amplification
effects for a shock of just 1 standard deviation of the observed output variability. The
amplification effects (in absolute value) are 0.6 percent for GDP, 4.5 percent for Tobin’s
Q, 2.6 percent for consumption, 6.6 percentage points of GDP for investment, and over 9
percentage points of GDP for the current account. The amplification coefficients are 22
percent for GDP and nearly 86 percent for Tobin’s Q.
The changes in the results in panels B-F relative to Panel A illustrate the role of key
factors affecting the size of amplification effects: (1) the effects are weaker without the
endogenous feedback between investment and Tobin’s Q that drives the debt-deflation
process (Panel B with the exogenous borrowing constraint shows significantly smaller
effects than Panel A); (2) the effects are larger if the leverage needs of the economy are
stronger (Panel C with initial capital 1/3rd below steady state requires higher leverage
ratios because the incentives to borrow are stronger the smaller initial capital, and hence
income, are relative to long-run values); (3) higher (lower) capital adjustment costs in
Panels D and E enlarge (reduce) the effects on asset prices and consumption but reduce
(enlarge) the effects on output, investment and the current account – this result reflects
the tradeoff of price and quantity effects typical of Tobin Q models when adjustment costs
increase; (4) larger shocks produce larger amplification effects (in Panel F, tripling the size
of the shock from 2 to 6 percent, which is a little over twice the standard deviation of
Mexico’s GDP, increases the amplification effects by about 70 percent). These findings
extend to the stochastic simulations of Section 5, where binding credit constraints with

8

Note that the constraint can bind for 0.102≤κL≤0.12 (κL≥0.102 because the initial leverage ratio
must satisfy the credit constraint and κ L≤0.12 because when κ L=0.12, s= ŝ =0.027).

16

large amplification are found in the “high-leverage” region of the state space, and
amplification effects are significantly smaller with an exogenous credit constraint.
The results in Table 2 also show that the model can produce larger amplification
coefficients for output and asset prices than those computed by Kocherlakota (2000). He
found that, varying the share of capital from 0.1 to 0.3, the amplification coefficients were
small, ranging from 15 to 35 percent for output and 0.4 to 0.8 percent for the price of
land. The amplification coefficient for GDP in Panel A of Table 2 is in line with these
findings, but the coefficient for asset prices is much larger. In addition, the results in
Panels C and E suggest that higher borrowing needs and/or lower adjustment costs can
yield amplification coefficients that exceed Kocherlakota’s by large margins. The larger
effects obtained here are due in part to the fact that land used as collateral in his model is
in fixed supply, which breaks the feedback between asset prices and asset accumulation
operating via the debt-deflation process. He noted, however, that using a credit constraint
formulated in terms of capital seemed to produce even weaker amplification coefficients.
This is consistent with the model examined here because, as explained earlier, the model
predicts zero amplification on output and asset prices when κ=1. Thus, the assumption in
Kocherlakota’s model that agents can use the full value of their assets as collateral also
plays a role in explaining the larger effects shown in Table 2.

5.

Stochastic Simulation Analysis

5.1 Functional Forms and Numerical Solution Method
This section studies the quantitative implications of the complete model by analyzing
the results of numerical simulations calibrated to Mexican data. The functional forms of
preferences and technology are the following:
Lω ⎤1−σ
⎡
−1
⎢ ct − t ⎥
ω ⎦⎥
⎢
u(ct − N (Lt )) = ⎣
,
1−σ

σ, ω > 1,

Lω ⎞⎤
⎡ ⎛
v(ct − N (Lt )) = γ ⎢ Ln ⎜⎜ 1 + ct − t ⎟⎟⎟ ⎥ ,
ω ⎠ ⎥⎦
⎢⎣ ⎝

F ( mtkt , Lt , vt ) = A ( mtkt )β Lαt vtη ,
⎛z
Ψ ⎜⎜ t
⎝ kt

0 ≤ α, β, η ≤ 1, α + β + η = 1, A > 0,

⎞⎟ a ⎛ zt
= ⎜
⎠⎟⎟ 2 ⎝⎜ kt

δ(mt ) =

0 < γ ≤ σ,

⎞⎟
,
⎠⎟⎟

hmtθ
,
θ

a≥0

θ ≥ 1, h > 0.

(28)

(29)
(30)
(31)

(32)

The utility and time preference functions in (28) and (29) are standard from RBCSOE models. The parameter σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, ω determines the
wage elasticity of labor supply, which is given by 1/(ω -1), and γ is the semi-elasticity of
the rate of time preference with respect to composite good c-N(L). The restriction γ ≤ σ is
a condition required to ensure that the SCU function supports a unique, invariant limiting

17

distribution of assets (see Epstein (1983)). The Cobb-Douglas production function (30) is
the same used in the TFP accounting exercise of Section 2. Equation (31) is the net
investment adjustment cost function. Following Hayashi (1982), the production function
and the adjustment cost function are linearly homogeneous in their arguments. The
isoelastic capacity utilization cost (or depreciation rate) function in (32) is standard from
the utilization literature (e.g. Finn (1995), Greenwood et al. (1988)).
The model is solved numerically by representing the competitive equilibrium in
recursive form (see Mendoza and Smith (2006) and Arellano and Mendoza (2003) for
details on algorithms for solving SOE models with collateral constraints). The endogenous
state variables of the problem are k and b. These are chosen from discrete grids of NK
non-negative values of the capital stock, K={k1<k2 <…< kNK}, and NB values of bond
positions, B={b1<b2 <…< bNB}. The exogenous states are the realizations of shocks in the
triple e=(ε A,ε R,ε P). The shocks follow a joint Markov process, which defines the set E of
all triples of possible realizations of the shocks and their one-step transition probability
matrix π. Hence, the state space of the problem is defined by all triples (k,b,e) in the set
K×B×E. An Appendix with the details on the formulation of the recursive representation
of the competitive equilibrium is available from the author on request.
5.2 Calibration to Mexican Data
The calibration exercise assigns values to the model’s parameters so that the
deterministic stationary equilibrium matches key averages from quarterly Mexican data.
This exercise adopts two assumptions to make the calibration easier to compare with
typical RBC calibrations: (1) the working capital coefficient is set to φ=0 (otherwise
working capital payments distort factor shares) and (2) the collateral coefficients κ and κf
are high enough so that the constraints do not bind at the deterministic steady state.
In the data, the average ratio of GDP to gross output (gdp/y), with gross output
defined as GDP plus imported inputs, is 0.896, and the ratio of imported inputs to GDP
(pv/gdp) is 0.114. The average share of imported inputs in gross output is 0.102, hence
η=0.102. This factor share, combined with the 0.66 labor share on GDP from Garcia
(2005) implies the following factor shares for the production function of gross output:
⎛
⎞⎟
0.66
α = ⎜⎜⎜
⎟ =0.592 and β=1-α-η=0.305.
⎝ 1 + (pv / gdp) ⎟⎠

National Accounts data for investment and GDP at 1993 prices are used to construct
a quarterly time series for k that matches the capital-output ratios estimated by Garcia
(2005) using annual data. He used data for the period 1970-2000 and applied the standard
perpetual inventories method to estimate capital stocks. The average capital-output ratio
of his estimates is 1.88 and his 1980 point estimate is 1.56. The quarterly capital stock
series constructed here is based also on the perpetual inventories method, and is targeted
to produce quarterly estimates of the capital-output ratio that replicate Garcia’s annual
estimates for 1980 and the 1970-2000 average. The initial condition applies to 1980
because existing quarterly National Accounts data at constant prices begin in that year.
The quarterly capital stock estimates match the targets taken from Garcia’s series by
setting the 1980:01 capital-output ratio to 1.45 and the depreciation rate to the quarterly
equivalent of 8.8 percent per year.

18

The capital stock estimates imply that the 1980:01-2005:02 average ratio of capital to
gross output is 1.758. Combined with the 0.088 depreciation rate, this capital-gross output
ratio yields an average ratio of investment to gross output (i/y) of 15.5 percent. The
optimality condition for capacity utilization can then be used together with this estimate
of the i/y ratio to obtain an implied value for the elasticity parameter of the utilization
cost function: θ = β/[(i/y)] = 1.97. This is possible because at steady state the i/y ratio is
also equal to the share of utilization costs in gross output (since at steady state i=δ(m)k)).
Given the value of θ , and setting the long-run utilization rate at 0.9, the endogenous
depreciation rate δ(m) matches the value of 0.088 obtained in the computation of the
capital stock series by setting h=0.214. Thus, the parameters of the depreciation rate
function, which are crucial for determining the marginal cost of utilization and the
utilization rate, are inferred from National Accounts data and the optimality conditions of
firms in a manner similar to that used to set the Cobb-Douglas factor shares.
In the deterministic stationary state, imported input prices and the real interest rate
take their mean values. The mean price of imported inputs is set so as to match the price
obtained by dividing the mean ratios of imported intermediate goods to gross output at
current and constant prices, which is 1.028. The mean value of the annual-equivalent of
the gross real interest rate is derived by imposing the values set for β, θ, (i/y), and the
depreciation rate on the Euler equation for capital (eq. (13)) evaluated at steady state and
solving for R. The resulting expression yields R=1+[δβ(1-θ -1)]/(i/y))=1.086. A real
interest rate of 8.6 percent may seem relatively high, but in this calibration it represents
the implied real interest rate that, given the values of δ, β, and θ, supports Mexico’s
average investment-gross output ratio as a feature of the deterministic steady state of a
standard small open economy model with perfect credit markets.
The households’ optimality condition for labor supply equates the marginal disutility
of labor with the real wage, which at equilibrium is equal to the marginal product of
labor. This equilibrium condition reduces to: Ltω = α exp(εtA )F (⋅) . Using the logarithm of
this expression and Mexican data on gross output and employment growth, the implied
value of the exponent of labor supply in utility is ω = 1.8461.
Since aggregate demand in the data includes government expenditures, the model
needs an adjustment to consider these purchases in order for the deterministic steady state
to match the average private consumption-GDP ratio (0.65). This adjustment is done by
setting the deterministic steady state to match the average ratio of government purchases
to GDP (0.11), assuming that these government purchases are unproductive and paid out
of a time-invariant, ad-valorem consumption tax. The tax is equal to the ratio of the GDP
shares of government and private consumption, 0.11/0.65=0.168, which is very close to
the statutory value-added tax rate in Mexico. Since this tax is time invariant, it does not
distort the households’ intertemporal decision margins and any distortion on the
consumption-leisure margin does not vary over the business cycle.
Given the preference and technology parameters set in the previous paragraphs, the
optimality conditions for L, m, and v, and the firms’ steady-state Euler equation for
capital accumulation are solved as a nonlinear simultaneous equation system in the steady
state levels of k, L, v and m. Given these, the levels of gross output and GDP are
computed using the production function and the definition of GDP, and the level of

19

consumption is determined by multiplying GDP times the average consumption-GDP
ratio in the data. The value of γ follows then from the steady-state consumption Euler
equation: γ =

ln(R )
= 0.0166 . As is typical in calibration exercises for RBC-SOE
ln(1 + c − ω−1Lω )

models with SCU preferences (see Mendoza (1991)), the value of the time preference
coefficient is very low, suggesting that the “impatience effects” introduced by the
endogenous rate of time preference have negligible quantitative implications on business
cycle dynamics. Finally, the steady-state foreign asset position follows from the household
budget constraint (eq. (2)) evaluated at steady state. This implies a ratio of external debt
to GDP of about 79 percent.
The only two parameter values that were not determined in this calibration exercise
were those for the adjustment cost coefficient a and the working capital coefficient φ. The
value of a will be set below so that in the stochastic simulations the model without credit
constraints matches the observed business cycle variability of investment. This parameter
does not affect the deterministic steady state because total and marginal adjustment costs
are zero at steady state. The value of φ is set to 0.25 in the stochastic simulations, which
implies a stock of working capital loans of about 19 percent of GDP in the deterministic
steady state. Data on working capital financing for Mexican firms are not available but
the 1994:01-2005:01 average of total financing to private nonfinancial firms as a share of
GDP is 24.4 percent. Note, however, that this measure includes financing at all maturities
and for all uses (including long-term investment financing) so it is likely to overestimate
actual working capital financing. Still, φ=0.25 is significantly lower than the working
capital coefficients used in the studies of RBC-SOE models for emerging markets by
Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue (2006).
5.3 Markov Process of Exogenous Shocks
Price, TFP, and interest rate shocks follow a joint Markov process. Shocks to the real
interest rate and the relative price of imported inputs are taken directly from the data as
described in Section 2. TFP shocks can be approximated in two ways. One approach is to
use the “true” TFP estimates constructed also in Section 2. However, since this measure
of TFP can still be inaccurate because of measurement problems affecting factor shares,
input prices and implied utilization rates, the simulations follow a second approach akin to
an “identification procedure.” This approach calibrates the variability and persistence of
TFP shocks so that the model matches the variability and persistence of Mexico’s GDP.9
The procedures starts by using the interest rate, price and TFP shocks taken from the
data to estimate an unrestricted, first-order VAR, and the VAR is then approximated as a
discrete Markov process using Tauchen’s (1991) quadrature method. Next, in the
identification stage, the elements of the VAR that pertain to TFP are adjusted so that the
model matches the business cycle moments of GDP in the data.
Given that the cyclical components have zero mean, the VAR has the following form:

9

This is similar to an approach used often in RBC analysis to set the moments of productivity
shocks so that the models mimic the cyclical moments of GDP (see Greenwood et al. (1988)).

20

et +1 = RHO ⋅ et + ut ,
⎡ εtR ⎤
⎢ ⎥
⎢ ⎥
et ≡ ⎢ εtP ⎥ ,
⎢ ⎥
⎢ A⎥
⎢⎣ εt ⎥⎦

⎡ ρR
⎢
RHO ≡ ⎢⎢ ρP ,R
⎢ρ
⎢⎣ A,R

ρR,P
ρP
ρA,P

ρR,A ⎤⎥
ρP ,A ⎥⎥ ,
ρA ⎥⎥
⎦

⎡ utR ⎤
⎢ ⎥
⎢ ⎥
u ≡ ⎢ utP ⎥
⎢ ⎥
⎢ A⎥
⎢⎣ ut ⎥⎦

(33)

The innovations in u are independently and identically distributed over time, with zero
mean and a known stationary variance-covariance matrix cova(u). Tauchen’s algorithm
takes as input the estimates of RHO and cova(u) and the desired number of elements of
the Markov realizations of the shocks, and it returns as output the vectors of realizations
and the transition probability matrix π of moving across states.
The VAR analysis cannot reject the hypothesis that the three shocks follow
independent first-order autoregressive processes.10 The resulting estimates of the
autocorrelation and covariance matrices are:
⎡ .571861
0
0 ⎤⎥
⎢
⎢
⎥
RHO ≡ ⎢ 0
.737109
0 ⎥,
⎢
⎥
⎢ 0
0
.390259 ⎥
⎣
⎦

⎡ .000215
0
0 ⎤⎥
⎢
⎢
⎥
cova(u ) ≡ ⎢ 0
.000533
0 ⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢ 0
0
.000091 ⎥
⎣
⎦

The standard deviations of the shocks implied by these results are: σ(ε
σ(εP)=0.034 and σ(ε A)=0.01.

(34)

R

)=0.019,

Solving the model without collateral constraints and using the Markov representation
of the above VAR yields an output process with a standard deviation of 2.94 percent and
a first-order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.545 (using a=2.6 so as to match the observed
standard deviation of investment).11 The corresponding statistics in the data are 2.72
percent and 0.749 respectively (see Table 1). Hence, with the TFP series constructed in
Section 2, the model is close to matching the variability of output but it underestimates
its persistence. The identification procedure shows that the model can match the
variability and persistence of GDP by setting σ(ε A)=0.009 and ρ(ε A)=0.65 (with a=2.65
to match the observed variability of investment). Thus, the model can mimic the
variability and persistence of Mexico’s GDP by reducing the standard deviation of TFP
shocks by 1/10 of a percentage point and by increasing their autocorrelation from 0.39 to
0.65, relative to the moments of the TFP series constructed with actual data.
5.4 Baseline Results
The baseline experiment compares the results of a simulation in which the collateral
constraints never bind (the “frictionless model”) with those from three scenarios in which
the constraints bind in some states of nature: one with both collateral constraints, one
with the constraint on foreign debt only, and one with the constraint on working capital
10

In this case, a simpler way to obtain the Markov approximation of the shocks is by using the
“simple persistence” rule, which uses two symmetric points for each Markov process set at ±1
standard deviation, and transition probabilities set to yield the observed autocorrelation of each
shock. See Mendoza (1995) for details.
11
The realizations and transition probabilities of the Markov chains are available from the author.

21

only. All the simulations use a K grid with 50 nodes and a B grid with 72 nodes, both
evenly spaced. There are 2 realizations for each Markov shock, and hence 8 triples of
realizations of shocks. Hence, the discrete state space of the model has 52×100×8
coordinates that represent all possible combinations of k, b and e.12
Panel I of Table 3 lists the statistical moments that characterize the stochastic steady
state of the frictionless economy, computed with the corresponding limiting distribution of
k, b, and e. These moments are generally consistent with standard results from RBC-SOE
models. As indicated earlier, however, the frictionless model cannot produce Sudden Stops
because it assumes that credit markets are perfect. In particular, as shown below, this
economy responds to adverse shocks with a relatively smooth adjustment of the current
account and “normal” recessions, regardless of the size of debt and working capital
financing or the leverage ratios.
Panels II-IV of Table 3 list business cycle moments for the economies with collateral
constraints. Panel II shows moments for the economy with the two collateral constraints,
based on a simulation with κ = 0.248 and κf = 0.139. These collateral coefficients imply
that the debt leverage ratio (-bt+1/qtkt+1) cannot exceed 24.8 percent and the working
capital leverage ratio (wcapt/qtkt+1, where wcapt=φ(wtLt+ptvt+δ(mt)kt) cannot exceed 13.9
percent. These values of the collateral coefficients are 1½ standard deviations below the
mean of the corresponding leverage ratio in the frictionless economy. With these values,
the joint probability of hitting both collateral constraints predicted by the model matches
the 1.96 percent frequency of Sudden Stops observed in the 1980:1-2005:2 sample of
quarterly Mexican data (counting the 1982 Debt Crisis and the 1995 crash as Sudden
Stops). The collateral constraint on debt binds with 2 percent probability, and that on
working capital binds with 14 percent probability.
The high leverage states at which the economy is vulnerable to Sudden Stops are
reached after sequences of realizations of the shocks lead the leverage ratios to approach
their ceilings. Because of the curvature of the constant-relative-risk-aversion period utility
function, households accumulate precautionary savings to self insure against the risk of
large consumption collapses, and hence the long-run probability of states of nature where
Sudden Stops are possible is low. As a result, the long-run business cycle indicators in
Panel II do not differ much from those of the frictionless economy in Panel I. This result
also holds for Panels III and IV for economies that use only one collateral constraint.
Hence, the long-run features of business cycles are largely the same with and without the
collateral constraints.
The next task is to show that in the economies with collateral constraints Sudden
Stops coexist with the normal business cycles summarized in Table 2. To show that this is
the case, Figures 4.a and 4.b plot conditional forecast functions of the equilibrium Markov
processes of macroeconomic aggregates in response to combined one-standard-deviation
shocks to the world interest rate, imported input prices and TFP at t=1. These forecast
functions are Markovian impulse response functions that preserve the non-linearity of the
decision rules that characterize the equilibrium of the model. The forecast functions are
12

A simulation with 100 nodes in the K grid and 144 nodes in the B grid showed negligible
differences in the first and second moments of the endogenous variables, but CPU time increased
by a factor of 7 (using parallelized code and dual Pentium Xeon 3.6Mhz processors).

22

conditional on initial conditions of high leverage in debt and working capital inside the
“Sudden Stop region” of the state space, defined as the region in which adverse shocks
trigger a Sudden Stop with positive long-run probability. Since initial conditions in this
class are distant from the long-run averages of k and b, the low-frequency dynamics
driving these variables back to long-run averages has been removed by plotting the
difference between the forecast functions of each economy with collateral constraints and
those of the frictionless model, in percent of the means in the latter. The plots show data
only for the first 36 quarters after the shocks hit. The initial conditions feature a debt
ratio of 51 percent of GDP and a debt leverage ratio of 26.8 percent. The economy with
both collateral constraints hits this particular initial state with 0.0012 probability in the
long run.13
In the economy with both collateral constraints, Figures 4a-4b show that the Sudden
Stop impact effects at are: -3 percent in GDP, -5.5 percent in working capital, -3 percent
in labor, -5 percent in imported inputs, -2.5 percentage points in capacity utilization, -2.9
percent in “effective capital” (mk), -8 percent in consumption, -32 percent in investment, 7 percent in asset prices, and a current account reversal of 10 percentage points of GDP.
Output, factor demands, utilization and working capital recover somewhat in the next
period, but the Sudden Stop effects persist because these variables converge to their values
in the frictionless economy only by the 24th–30th quarter. Note also that, while the impact
effect on capacity utilization is negative, after that firms substitute away from factor
demands into more intensive use of existing capital, and this effect is also persistent.
Thus, beyond its impact effect contributing to enlarge the initial output collapse,
endogenous utilization actually works to weaken Sudden Stop effects. Figure 4b shows
that the Sudden Stop effects on consumption, investment, the Tobin Q and the current
account dissipate by the 10th quarter. This Figure also shows that the Sudden Stop
induces the expected tilt in the time profile of consumption, with lower consumption than
in the frictionless economy for the first 15 periods and converging thereafter to a slightly
higher consumption level.
A comparison of Sudden Stop dynamics across the three economies with collateral
constraints shows that the constraints on debt and working capital need to be combined
in order to obtain realistic Sudden Stops. The collateral constraint on debt alone cannot
generate declines in output, factor demands or working capital on impact because the
capital stock as of this date is predetermined and there is no feedback via working capital.
Hence, the “supply side” of the economy that includes only the debt constraint responds
on impact to the shocks in the exact same way as the frictionless case. There are Sudden
Stop impact effects on consumption, investment, the Tobin Q and the current account,
and these are of similar magnitude as those of the economy with the two constraints.
After the impact effects, the initial investment and asset price collapses affect supply-side
dynamics, and these effects are qualitatively similar but quantitatively weaker than those
of the economy with the two collateral constraints.

13

Since economies with the collateral constraint on working capital feature slightly lower long-run
averages of consumption, output, factor demands, capacity utilization, and working capital than
the frictionless economy, the plots for these economies do not converge to zero (i.e., the variables
do not converge to the means of the frictionless economy).

23

Figures 4a-4b indicate that the economy with the collateral constraint on working
capital alone does not produce Sudden Stops. The responses of this economy differ only
slightly from those of the frictionless economy. This is because the working capital
constraint on its own does not bind when the shocks hit. Hence, the amplification and
persistence obtained in the Sudden Stop effects on the supply side of the economy with
the two constraints are caused by the feedback from the debt collateral constraint to the
working capital collateral constraint: Collapsing asset prices and investment trigger the
collateral constraint on working capital and induce a substantial downward adjustment in
the supply side of the economy. Moreover, this result shows that the role of working
capital in this model is very different from that in the models of Neumeyer and Perri
(2005) and Uribe and Yue (2006). The key feature here is that access to working capital is
suddenly reduced by feedback effects between endogenous collateral constraints. Working
capital per se, or even a stand-alone collateral constraint on working capital, do not
produce responses to shocks that differ markedly from those of the frictionless economy.
Kocherlakota (2000) argued that the analysis of business cycle effects of credit
constraints should focus on amplification, asymmetry and persistence in the responses to
exogenous shocks. The amplification and persistence of Sudden Stops effects in the model
of this paper are illustrated in Figures 4a-4b. In addition, it is possible to compute
amplification coefficients comparable with Kocherlakota’s measure of amplification
described in Section 4. Given the stochastic nature of the model, amplification coefficients
are computed here as the difference between the values of the variables in the frictionless
economy and those pertaining to the economies with collateral constraints, in percent of
the standard deviation of each variable in the frictionless economy. Hence, these
coefficients measure how much larger are the recessions of a Sudden Stop in units of the
standard deviations that measure normal business cycles. Figures 5-7 plot these
amplification coefficients for GDP, consumption, investment, the Tobin Q, working capital
and capacity utilization for the first 36 quarters after the same shocks considered in
Figures 4a-4b hit the economy (using the same initial conditions).
The amplification effects are significantly larger than Kocherlakota’s. In the economy
with the two collateral constraints, the initial amplification effects are near 100 and 300
percent for GDP and consumption respectively (Figure 5), over 300 percent for investment
and the Tobin Q (Figure 6), and about 175 percent for working capital and utilization
(Figure 7). These estimates imply that GDP (the price of capital) is lower in the economy
with collateral constraints than in the frictionless economy by a deviation from the mean
that is 1.1 (3) times larger than the standard deviation of output (the price of capital) in
the frictionless economy. Moreover, amplification occurs also beyond the impact effect
because of the persistence of the Sudden Stop effects.
The asymmetry of the effects of the collateral constraints on GDP is illustrated in
Figure 8, which plots the histogram of the differences in the GDP deviations from means
in the economy with the two collateral constraints relative to the frictionless economy
using data from a stochastic time-series simulation with 10,000 periods. The histogram
shows that there is a bias to the left of the mean. The skewness coefficient is -1.88,
indicating that the distribution of GDP has a long left tail.
Figures 9-10 show surface plots of impact effects (i.e., deviations from long-run means
on the initial date that the shocks hit the economy) for the entire state space of (k,b)

24

pairs, instead of the particular pair used in Figures 4a-4b to illustrate a Sudden Stop
scenario. Figure 9 shows consumption impact effects. The plot on the left is for the
economy with perfect credit markets and the plot on the right is for the economy with
collateral constraints. Figure 10 shows similar plots for the impact effects on Tobin’s Q.14
Figure 9 shows large drops in consumption in response to adverse shocks of standard
size in the high-leverage area of (k,b) pairs where the collateral constraints bind. These
consumption collapses are much larger than the mild recessions that these shocks cause in
the same economy outside of this area, or in the same area but in the economy with
perfect credit markets. The impact effects on consumption are nearly identical in the two
economies for high values of b that are outside the region in which collateral constraints
bind. Note that, because of the precautionary saving effect, the area of very large
consumption collapses in the economy with collateral constraints includes many states
that have zero probability in the long run. These states can be interpreted as representing
outcomes that the model predicts to be the result of “large, unexpected” shocks (which
can be viewed as shocks that move the economy to states with leverage ratios that
otherwise would have zero probability in the long run). In response to shocks of this type,
the model can predict massive consumption collapses of up to 60 percent!
An alternative interpretation of the Sudden Stop scenarios ruled out in the long run
by precautionary saving is that they represent scenarios that economies could face in the
short run if financial liberalization is adopted when leverage ratios are high. In this
situation, a country that has yet to build up a large enough stock of precautionary savings
is more vulnerable to suffer a Sudden Stop. Interestingly, the majority of emerging
economies have built up large stocks of foreign exchange reserves in recent years that
reflect in part their efforts to self insure against future Sudden Stops.
Figure 10 shows the effects of the Fisherian deflation on asset prices. Adverse shocks
of typical size cause small declines in the price of capital when credit markets are perfect,
or with collateral constraints but outside the area of the state space where they bind. On
the other hand, when leverage ratios are high enough for the constraints to bind, the
shocks trigger the collateral constraint and this results in agents fire-selling capital. The
price of capital sinks below the value that would have prevailed in the economy with
perfect credit markets, and this tightens further the collateral constraint, inducing agents
to reduce further their capital holdings and cause further price declines. The plot in the
right-hand-side of Figure 10 shows the end result of this process. The downward spiral in
the price of capital is hampered by the negative wealth effect induced by the adverse
effect of reduced investment on future output. Note also that, as before, the states of
nature with the largest equity price and investment collapses in Figure 10 are ruled out in
the long run by precautionary saving (since they lead to states with very low
consumption).
In summary, the economy with the two collateral constraints accounts for several
features of Sudden Stops. Unusually large and infrequent recessions can take place in
response to shocks of standard magnitude when the economy is highly leveraged, and
14

The region with the lowest b values in the plots of the economy with collateral constraints cannot
support equilibrium allocations because, for the corresponding (kt,bt) pairs, there is no (kt+1,b t+1)
pair in K×B that can keep ct positive and at the same time satisfy the collateral constraint.

25

these Sudden Stops are nested within normal business cycles. The economy arrives at
these high-leverage states with positive long-run probability, and in these states binding
collateral constraints cause significant amplification, asymmetry and persistence in
macroeconomic responses to shocks. One weakness, however, is that the decline in asset
prices is about 1/3rd the size of the asset price collapse observed in Mexico. Still, the
Sudden Stop effects reported in this Section are in response to one-standard-deviation
shocks, whereas the price and interest rate shocks observed at the beginning of the 1995
Sudden Stop in Mexico were significantly larger.
5.5 Sensitivity Analysis
The remainder of this Section reports the results of a sensitivity analysis that
highlights the key determinants of the model’s Sudden Stop effects. This analysis focuses
on three issues: the role of endogenous v. exogenous credit constraints, the implications of
separate shocks to imported input prices, the world interest rate and TFP, instead of joint
shocks, and the implications of removing from the model (one at a time) working capital,
endogenous utilization and imported inputs.
Table 4 compares Sudden Stop effects across economies with endogenous and
exogenous credit constraints. The Table shows responses in macroeconomic aggregates (as
defined to construct Figures 4a-4b) to joint negative one-standard-deviation shocks in the
first two periods for three economies: one with both debt and working capital constraints,
one with the debt constraint alone, and one with exogenous credit limits. To make the
experiments comparable, the exogenous limits are set as ad-hoc credit limits equal to the
lowest b and the highest wcap with positive probability in the limiting distribution of the
economy with the two endogenous collateral constraints. The results show that the debtdeflation mechanism of the endogenous collateral constraints is crucial for the model’s
performance. Sudden Stop effects on impact and one period later are several orders of
magnitude smaller when the endogenous collateral constraints are replaced by ad-hoc
credit limits. Thus, exogenous credit limits produce significantly weaker amplification and
persistence than the endogenous collateral constraints. The ad-hoc limits eliminate both
the effects of the Fisherian deflation on the debt constraint and the feedback from this
constraint to the working capital constraint. The former can be seen in that the date-0
responses of i, q and ca/y are similar in the economies with collateral constraints but
much smaller in the economy with ad-hoc credit constraints. The fact that ad-hoc credit
limits eliminate also the feedback from the debt constraint to the working capital
constraint is illustrated in that the impact effects on output, factor demands, utilization
and working capital vanish. The ad-hoc limit on working capital is not triggered by the
ad-hoc debt limit, and hence the economy with ad-hoc credit limits cannot produce
contemporaneous supply side effects.
Table 5 shows date-0 and date-1 impact effects of separate one-standard-deviation
shocks to the world interest rate, imported input prices and TFP. Naturally, the effects
are weaker than in the baseline case which considers the combined impact of the three
shocks. The interesting implication of the results in the Table is that interest rate and
price shocks generate larger Sudden Stop effects than TFP shocks. Considering output, for
example, the Sudden Stop effects due to an interest rate (price) shock exceed those due to
a TFP shock by a factor of 2 (1.4). Interest rate shocks generate the largest effects on

26

consumption and supply side variables, while price shocks generate the largest effects on
investment and asset prices.
Table 6 compares the Sudden Stop effects of the baseline exercise (Panel A) with
those produced by alternative versions of the model that exclude working capital (Panel
B), capacity utilization (Panel C) or imported inputs (Panel D). The Table also lists the
long-run probabilities of hitting each of the collateral constraints. Since the collateral
constraint on working capital does not bind in the simulations that use this constraint
alone, Table 6 reports results only for cases with the two collateral constraints or the debt
constraint alone (or just the debt constraint for the economy without working capital).
A comparison of Panels A and B reaffirms the important role that working capital,
and the feedback from the debt constraint to the working capital constraint, play in the
model’s ability to generate large amplification effects during Sudden Stops. This is true
not just for the supply side variables that show zero amplification when working capital is
removed from the model (Panel B) but also for investment, Tobin’s Q and the currentaccount output ratio, which show larger date-0 Sudden Stop effects when the two
constraints are at play (Panel A) than in the economy without working capital.
Panels A and C show that the main contribution of endogenous utilization is that it
enlarges the date-0 Sudden Stop effect on output because of the reductions in utilization
and effective capital allowed in the baseline case. The resulting contribution to the output
collapse is about 2/3rds of a percentage point, which is equivalent to enlarging the date-0
output effect in the economy with constant utilization by 25 percent. This contribution
could be larger if the coefficients of the utilization cost function are altered to increase the
endogenous response of utilization to the shocks.
The results in Panels A and D indicate that imported intermediate goods are crucial
for the baseline results. Removing imported inputs has two important effects: it changes
the production technology and it removes the shock on imported input prices that has
direct effects on factor costs and working capital. As a result, the binding debt constraint
in the economy without imported inputs (Panel D) can no longer trigger the collateral
constraint on working capital at the same initial conditions that apply to the baseline case
(Panel A). Since the constraint on working capital does not bind, all the date-0
amplification effects on supply side variables are lost, and the effects on the rest of the
variables are weakened.

6.

Conclusions

This paper shows that the quantitative predictions of an equilibrium business cycle
model with collateral constraints are consistent with key features of the Sudden Stop
phenomenon. The model features two collateral constraints: A constraint that limits debt
not to exceed a fraction of the value of the collateral assets, and a constraint that limits
working capital financing not to exceed a fraction of the value of the firms’ assets. These
constraints only bind in states of nature in which the ratios of debt and/or working
capital to asset values are sufficiently high. In turn, these high-leverage states are an
endogenous outcome of the model’s stochastic competitive equilibrium and, despite strong
precautionary saving effects, they remain a positive probability event even in the long run.

27

The motivation for introducing collateral constraints on both debt and working
capital originates in observations from Mexico’s Sudden Stop of 1995 suggesting that
explanations of Sudden Stops need to connect two sets of facts: First, the large reversal of
the current account, the loss of access to credit, and the collapse of equity prices are
strong indications that financial frictions are a central feature of Sudden Stops. Second,
growth accounting indicates that declines in imported inputs, capacity utilization, and
TFP account for the bulk of the large output collapse in its early stages, while capital and
labor play a relatively small role. In the model of this paper, the collateral constraint on
debt introduces Fisher’s debt-deflation mechanism, and the constraint on working capital
links credit frictions to factor demands and capacity utilization. The combined effects of
these constraints produce quantitatively significant amplification, asymmetry and
persistence in the responses of macroeconomic aggregates to shocks of the same magnitude
that drive normal business cycles. Because of precautionary saving, Sudden Stops are
infrequent events nested within normal business cycles in the stochastic stationary
equilibrium of the model.
In simulations calibrated to Mexican data, the long-run business cycle moments of
economies with and without credit constraints differ marginally, while the responses to
one-standard-deviation shocks conditional on a positive-probability initial state with high
leverage ratios differ sharply across the two economies. In particular, the economy with
the two collateral constraints produces Sudden Stops with initial declines in consumption
and investment similar to those observed in Mexico, a larger reversal in the current
account and smaller collapses in output and asset prices. Still, credit-driven amplification
effects on the responses of all macroeconomic aggregates are significantly larger than those
reported in previous studies. Thus, this paper shows that explanations of Sudden Stops
need not rely on large, unexpected shocks, and that credit constraints can be used to
integrate a theory of business cycles with a theory of Sudden Stops within the same
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium framework.
The collateral constraints introduce three credit channel effects. Two of these effects
are in the form of endogenous external financing premia that emerge when the constraints
bind. These premia reflect the effective real interest rates that lead households and firms
to choose levels of debt and working capital that satisfy their credit constraints. The third
credit channel is the debt-deflation mechanism. This mechanism plays a key role in the
ability of the model to generate large Sudden Stop effects. In a high-leverage state of the
economy, adverse shocks of standard magnitudes that would result in RBC-like responses
under perfect credit markets trigger the collateral constraint on debt. This causes a fall in
physical investment and equity prices which tightens further the constraint and leads to a
spiraling collapse of credit, asset prices and investment. Accordingly, Sudden Stop effects
in experiments that replace the collateral constraints with exogenous credit limits are
much weaker that in the experiments in which the debt-deflation mechanism operates.
The debt-deflation process also induces significant feedback from the collateral constraint
on debt to the one on working capital, as the decline in the value of collateral assets
triggers the limit on access to working capital forcing firms to cut factor demands and
reduce capacity utilization. In contrast, the collateral constraint on working capital is of
little consequence when introduced without the debt constraint.
Further research on this subject can go in several directions. One interesting
extension would be to study the “liability dollarization effect,” caused by the fact that the

28

foreign debt of emerging economies is denominated in hard currencies (i.e. tradables
goods) but largely leveraged on assets and incomes in domestic currencies and generated
by non-tradables industries. In this case, the debt-deflation mechanism can operate
through a fall in the relative price of nontradables and lead to a relative price collapse
that causes a financial crash. However, since the key aspects of the “liability dollarization”
effect are (1) the difference in the units in which debt contracts and incomes and assets
securing those contracts are denominated, and (2) sharp movements in the relative price
of those two units, the “liability dollarization” effect could also operate via changes in
prices of imported inputs if the firms’ working capital loans are denominated in units of a
world tradable good. In this case, a sharp increase in the price of imported inputs relative
to this numeraire increases not just the direct cost of inputs but also the real financing
costs faced by firms.
The findings of this paper suggest that the key to reducing the probability of Sudden
Stops in emerging economies is in promoting the attainment of levels of financial and
institutional development that weaken the contractual frictions behind collateral
constraints. In contrast, taking as given the underlying uncertainty in the form of
aggregate shocks to TFP, world interest rates and relative prices, tighter capital
requirements or “value-at-risk” targets, designed to manage exposure to idiosyncratic risk,
can be counterproductive and rise the probability of observing Sudden Stops.
Other policy conclusions derived from this analysis relate to financial contagion and
the desirability of holding large stocks of foreign reserves. In the setup of this paper, an
emerging economy can have solid domestic policies and competitive, open markets, and
still reach a point of high leverage at which a Sudden Stop is caused by a relatively
modest increase in the world interest rate, or in the relative price of imported inputs, due
to developments elsewhere in the world. If waiting for financial development to eliminate
this problem seems naïve, and since tighter credit limits can make things worse, self
insurance in the form of a sufficiently large stock of foreign reserves can be a useful way of
lowering the probability of facing Sudden Stops that the model favors. Another alternative
to explore is a mechanism that could be set at international financial organizations to help
emerging economies maintain access to credit by preventing asset prices from collapsing
during situations of financial contagion (see, for example, Calvo’s (2002) proposal).

29

References
Aiyagari, S. Rao and Mark Gertler (1999), “Overreaction of Asset Prices in General
Equilibrium,” Review of Economic Dynamics.
Arellano, Cristina (2005), “Default Risk and Aggregate Fluctuations in Emerging
Economies,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
Auenhaimer, Leonardo and Roberto Garcia-Saltos (2000), “International Debt and the
Price of Domestic Assets, ” IMF Working Paper 00/177.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford eds.
Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C, ed. by, North-Holland.
Calvo, Guillermo A., (1975), “Efficient and Optimal Utilization of Capital Services,”
American Economic Review, v. 65, no.1, March, 181-186.
, (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of
Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, v.1, pp 35-54.
, (2002), “Globalization Hazard and Delayed Reform in Emerging Markets,”
Economia, Spring, v. 2, no. 2.
, and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999), “When Capital Inflows come to a Sudden Stop:
Consequences and Policy Options,” mimeo, University of Maryland.
, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Rudy Loo-Kung (2006), “Relative Price Volatility under
Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,”Journal of International
Economics, v. 69, pp. 231-254.
Choi, Woon Gyu and David Cook (2003), “Liability Dollarization and the Bank Balance
Sheet Channel,” Journal of International Economics.
Cooley, Thomas, Ramon Marimon and Vincenzo Quadrini (2004), “Aggregate
Consequences of Limited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Pol. Economy, 111(4).
Cook, David and Devereux, Michael B., (2006a), “External Currency Pricing and the East
Asian Crisis,” Journal of International Economics, v. 69, pp. 37-63.
Cook, David and Devereux, Michael B., (2006b), “Accounting for the East Asian Crisis: A
Quantitative Model of Capital Outflows in a Small Open Economies,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
Dunbar, Nicholas, (2000) Inventing Money: The Story of Long-Term Capital Management
and the Legends Behind it, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex: England.
Epstein Larry G. (1983), “Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under
Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 31, 133-152.
Fisher, Irving (1933), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 1,
337-57.
Finn, Mary G. (1995), “Variance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Residual and their
Cyclical Implications,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 19, 1249-1281.
Garcia-Verdu, Rodrigo (2005), “Factor Shares from Household Survey Data,” mimeo,
Research Department, Banco de Mexico.
Gopinath, Gita (2003), “Lending Booms, Sharp Reversals and Real Exchange Rate
Dynamics,” Journal of International Economics.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Huffman (1988), “Investment,
Capacity Utilization & the Real Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, June.
Izquierdo, Alejandro (2000) “Credit Constraints, and the Asymmetric Behavior of Asset
Prices and Output under External Shocks,” mimeo, The World Bank. June.
Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini (2005), “Financial Innovations and
Macroeconomic Volatility,” mimeo, Wharton School of Business.

30

Hayashi, Fumio (1982), “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation,” Econometrica, v. 50, no. 1, 213-224.
International Monetary Fund (2002), World Economic Outlook, September.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political
Economy, v.105, 211-248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana (2000) “Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, v. 24, no. 3, Summer, 2-10.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, (2001), “The External Wealth of Nations:
Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,”
Journal of International Economics, 55, 263-294.
Martin, Phillippe and Helene Rey, (2006), “Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or
Without Crash?,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Mendoza, Enrique G. (2002), “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden
Stop.” In Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, Jeffrey and
Sebastian Edwards eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
, (1995), “The Terms of Trade, The Real Exchange Rate and Economic
Fluctuations,” International Economic Review, v. 36, 101-137, February.
, (1991), “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,” American Economic
Review, v. 81, 797-818, September.
, and Katherine A. Smith (2006), “Quantitative Implications of a Debt-Deflation
Theory of Sudden Stops & Asset Prices,” Journal of Int. Econ., forthcoming.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin (2000), “Current Account Reversals and
Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities.” In Currency Crises, Paul Krugram ed.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Neumeyer, P. Andres and Fabrizio Perri (2005), “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies:
The Role of Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Oviedo, P. Marcelo (2004), “Intermediation of Capital Inflows: The Macroeconomic
Implications of Neoclassical Banks &Working Capital,” mimeo, Iowa State University.
Paasche, Bernhard (2001), “Credit Constraints and International Financial Crises,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, v.28, 623-650.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2002), “Closing Small Open Economy
Models,” Journal of International Economics.
Tauchen, George, (1991), “Quadrature-based Methods for Obtaining Approximate
Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, v. 59, no. 2, 371-396.
Uribe, Martin and Zhanwei Vivian Yue, (2006), “Country Spreads and Emerging
Countries: Who Drives Whom?,” Journal of International Economics, v. 69, 6-36.

31

Table 1. Mexico: Business Cycle Statistics and the Sudden Stop of 1995
standard
deviation

standard dev.
relative to GDP

correlation
with
GDP

first-order
autocorrelation

Sudden Stop
(date in brackets)

Sudden Stop
relative to
standard dev.

GDP

2.723

1.000

1.000

0.749

3.053

intermediate goods imports

7.850

2.882

0.905

0.759

-8.315
(1995:2)
-27.229
(1995:2)

private consumption
total

3.397

1.247

0.895

0.701

2.490

0.914

0.893

0.676

investment

9.767

3.586

0.944

0.816

current account-GDP ratio

1.560

0.573

-0.754

0.720

equity prices

14.648

5.379

0.570

0.640

intermediate goods prices

3.345

1.228

-0.377

0.720

world real interest rate

1.958

0.719

-0.590

0.572

variable

non durables & services

-8.175
(1995:3)
-5.649
(1995:2)
-30.074
(1995:3)
3.838
(1995:2)
-27.397
(1995:2)
5.915
(1995:1)
6.752
(1995:2)

Note: The data were expressed in per capita terms, logged and detrended with the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Equity prices are in units of
the GDP deflator. Intermediate goods prices are defined as the ratio of the deflator of imported intermediated goods divided by the exports deflator.
"Sudden Stop" corresponds to the lowest deviation from trend observed in the corresponding variable (for the current account-GDP ratio it is
the largest change in percentage points observed in two consecutive quarters). The world real real interest rate is the sum of the return
on 3-month U.S. T bills plus the EMBI+ spread for Mexican sovereign debt minus a measure of expected U.S. CPI inflation (see Uribe and
Yue (2005) for details). The data are for the period 1993:1-2005:2, except the Uribe-Yue real interest rate, which is for the period
1994:1-2004:1.

3.469

2.407
2.269
3.079
2.460
1.870
1.768
3.448

Table 2: Amplification Effects of the Debt-Deflation Mechanism

Output

Tobin Q

Consumption

Amplification coefficients
(Kocherlakota's measure)

Investment

Current Account

GDP Ratio

GDP Ratio

Output

Tobin Q

9.18

-21.53

-85.66

-16.15

-64.33

-65.72

-293.63

-2.30

-345.28

-85.10

-8.56

A. Baseline case
L

κ = 0.102

-0.58

-4.45

-2.59

-6.57

1
B. Exogenous borrowing constraint set at κL×7.55

κ L = 0.102

-0.44

-3.34

-1.75

-4.94

6.73

C. Initial capital 1/3rd below steady state capital
L

κ = 0.112

-1.76

-12.60

-7.70

-16.52

25.08

D. High Adjustment Costs (a =100)
L

κ = 0.099

-0.06

-17.30

-9.26

-0.70

9.89

E. Low Adjustment Costs (a =0.066)
L

κ = 0.104

-2.27

-0.46

-26.37

26.98

F. Changing the size of the shocks (baseline with κ =0.102)

s=
0.02
0.04
0.06

-0.56

-0.52
-0.70
-0.89

-3.95
-5.33
-6.72

-2.30
-3.11
-3.93

-5.79
-7.98
-10.27

8.11
11.12
14.26

-26.02
-17.58
-14.81

-103.59
-69.87
-58.73

Note: Amplification effects are measured as differences between economies with and without binding collateral constraint
in percent of the value of each variable in the economy without binding collateral constraint. The effects for investment and the
current account are changes in percentage points of GDP. Kocherlakota coefficients are differences between economies with
and without binding collateral constraints in percent of the size of the shock (sk 0 β). All the effects are for date 0 except for output
effects that correspond to date 1.
7.55 is the date-0 value of capital in the economy with perfect credit markets.

1

Table 3. Long-Run Business Cycle Moments in the Baseline Simulations
variable

standard
deviation
(in percent)

standard
deviation
relative to GDP

correlation
with
GDP

first-order
autocorrelation

I. Frictionless Economy
GDP
2.71%
1.000
1.000
0.744
consumption
2.88%
1.061
0.763
0.842
investment
9.80%
3.611
0.502
0.486
net exports-GDP ratio
2.38%
0.878
0.015
0.585
capital stock
2.97%
1.095
0.502
0.970
foreign assets-GDP ratio
13.28%
4.894
equity prices
1.93%
0.711
0.244
0.448
debt-value of capital ratio
6.88%
2.535
intermediate goods
5.08%
1.873
0.779
0.741
capacity utilization
1.48%
0.544
0.482
0.682
working capital
2.94%
1.085
0.985
0.741
working cap.-asset ratio
0.54%
0.200
0.031
0.637
Savings-investment correlation
0.642
GDP-world interest rate correlation
-0.338
GDP-int. goods price correlation
-0.314
II. Economy with Collateral Constraints on Debt (24.8%) & Working Capital (13.9%)
GDP
2.73%
1.000
1.000
0.759
consumption
2.85%
1.045
0.789
0.836
investment
10.39%
3.808
0.478
0.487
net exports-GDP ratio
2.45%
0.898
0.001
0.567
capital stock
3.29%
1.205
0.549
0.972
foreign assets-GDP ratio
12.52%
4.591
equity prices
2.06%
0.756
0.229
0.455
debt-value of capital ratio
6.50%
2.384
intermediate goods
5.05%
1.853
0.776
0.746
capacity utilization
1.48%
0.541
0.388
0.677
working capital
3.01%
1.105
0.976
0.754
working cap.-asset ratio
0.55%
0.200
-0.057
0.643
Savings-investment correlation
0.589
GDP-world interest rate correlation
-0.386
GDP-int. goods price correlation
-0.291
prob. of binding debt constraint
2.000%
16.100%
prob. of binding working cap. constraint
III. Economy with Collateral Constraint on Debt (24.8%)
GDP
2.73%
1.000
1.000
0.747
consumption
2.82%
1.035
0.791
0.835
investment
9.81%
3.601
0.508
0.486
net exports-GDP ratio
2.31%
0.849
0.003
0.562
capital stock
3.03%
1.111
0.509
0.971
foreign assets-GDP ratio
11.89%
4.363
equity prices
1.93%
0.707
0.251
0.445
debt-value of capital ratio
6.16%
2.261
intermediate goods
5.09%
1.868
0.780
0.742
capacity utilization
1.48%
0.545
0.467
0.685
working capital
2.95%
1.084
0.985
0.743
working cap.-asset ratio
0.54%
0.199
0.018
0.637
Savings-investment correlation
0.643
GDP-world interest rate correlation
-0.337
GDP-int. goods price correlation
-0.314
prob. of binding debt constraint
2.16%
IV. Economy with Collateral Constraint on Working Capital (13.9%)
GDP
2.71%
1.000
1.000
0.756
consumption
2.90%
1.070
0.761
0.842
investment
10.36%
3.821
0.471
0.488
net exports-GDP ratio
2.52%
0.928
0.014
0.588
capital stock
3.23%
1.192
0.542
0.971
foreign assets-GDP ratio
13.91%
5.129
equity prices
2.06%
0.760
0.221
0.457
debt-value of capital ratio
7.22%
2.662
intermediate goods
5.04%
1.858
0.775
0.745
capacity utilization
1.47%
0.542
0.403
0.675
working capital
3.00%
1.105
0.976
0.752
working cap.-asset ratio
0.55%
0.202
-0.043
0.643
Savings-investment correlation
0.587
GDP-world interest rate correlation
-0.387
GDP-int. goods price correlation
-0.290
15.76%
prob. of binding working cap. constraint
Note: Standard deviations are percentages of the corresponding mean, except for variables defined as ratios.

Table 4. Sudden Stop Effects in Response to Joint One-Standard-Deviation Shocks
(differences relative to frictionless economy in percent of frictionless averages)
Collateral Constraints 1/
both constraints
debt only
Ad-hoc debt limits 2/
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
gdp
-2.937
-1.093
0.000
-0.893
0.000
-0.190

c

-8.504

-0.486

-6.103

-0.323

-0.989

-0.552

i

-33.045

-3.833

-27.628

-2.676

-4.605

-2.820

q

-6.906

-0.646

-6.906

-0.444

-1.151

-0.649

ca/gdp

10.154

0.917

9.888

0.778

1.648

0.928

tb/gdp

10.261

0.010

9.888

-0.134

1.648

0.778

L

-3.067

-0.701

0.000

-0.495

0.000

-0.125

v

-5.233

-1.236

0.000

-0.868

0.000

-0.223

m

-2.682

0.602

0.000

0.784

0.000

0.091

mk

-2.779

-1.843

0.000

-1.659

0.000

-0.315

wcap

-5.417

-1.263

0.000

-0.890

0.000

-0.226

Note: The Sudden Stop state is defined by initial conditions K=690.7, B=-185.2, which imply a debt/GDP
ratio of 51 percent and a debt-to-value-of-capital ratio of 26.8 percent.
1/ Results for the economy with working capital constraint are ommitted because impact effects are zero
because the constraint does not bind at the Sudden Stop state in this economy.
2/ Debt and working capital limits set to highest debt and highest level of working capital with positive
long-run probability in the economy with both collateral constraints (the limits are 191.20 for debt and
96.03 for working capital)

Table5. Sudden Stop Effects in Response to Separate One-Standard-Deviation
Shocks in the Economy with Collateral Constraints on Debt and Working Capital
(differences relative to frictionless economy in percent of frictionless averages)
interest rate shock
price shock
TFP shock
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
gdp
-1.478
-0.985
-0.997
-0.783
-0.734
-0.528

c

-6.420

-0.528

-5.511

-0.697

-5.798

-0.358

i

-13.096

-5.090

-14.506

-6.430

-11.715

-5.245

q

-2.590

-0.888

-3.165

-1.316

-2.590

-1.128

ca/gdp

6.140

0.924

6.127

1.448

6.176

1.224

tb/gdp

6.189

0.370

6.161

0.944

6.203

0.709

L

-1.525

-0.847

-1.036

-0.608

-0.767

-0.384

v

-2.703

-1.544

-1.781

-1.077

-1.308

-0.689

m

-1.332

-0.284

-0.906

0.024

-0.671

0.118

mk

-1.380

-1.220

-0.938

-1.108

-0.695

-0.802

wcap

-2.735

-1.538

-1.844

-1.102

-1.354

-0.694

Note: The Sudden Stop state is defined by initial conditions K=690.7, B=-185.2, which imply a debtGDP ratio of 0.51 and a debt-to-value-of-capital ratio of 0.268.

Table 6. Sensitivity Analysis of Sudden Stop Effects in Response to One-Standard-Deviation Shocks
(differences relative to frictionless economy in percent of frictionless averages)
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Baseline model
No working capital
Constant utilization rate
No intermediate goods
both constraints
with debt constraint
both constraints
debt only
debt only
both constraints
debt only
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1
date 0
date 1

gdp

-2.937

-1.093

0.000

-0.893

0.000

-0.748

-2.391

-1.314

0.000

-1.314

0.000

-0.751

0.000

-0.751

c

-8.504

-0.486

-6.103

-0.323

-5.119

-0.745

-8.957

-0.789

-6.087

-0.789

-5.088

-0.119

-5.088

-0.119

i

-33.045

-3.833

-27.628

-2.676

-22.835

-3.970

-27.730

0.047

-27.730

0.047

-23.032

5.045

-23.032

5.045

q

-6.906

-0.646

-6.906

-0.444

-5.755

-0.814

-6.906

0.660

-6.906

0.660

-5.755

1.492

-5.755

1.492

ca/gdp

10.154

0.917

9.888

0.778

8.321

1.369

10.099

0.231

9.883

0.231

8.167

-0.786

8.167

-0.786

tb/gdp

10.261

0.010

9.888

-0.134

8.321

0.600

10.162

-0.669

9.883

-0.669

8.167

-1.543

8.167

-1.543

L

-3.067

-0.701

0.000

-0.495

0.000

-0.415

-3.662

-0.731

0.000

-0.731

0.000

-0.415

0.000

-0.415

v

-5.233

-1.236

0.000

-0.868

0.000

-0.729

-6.224

-1.277

0.000

-1.277

na

na

na

na

m

-2.682

0.602

0.000

0.784

0.000

0.660

na

na

na

na

0.000

0.658

0.000

0.658

mk

-2.779

-1.843

0.000

-1.659

0.000

-1.387

0.000

-2.422

0.000

-2.422

0.000

-1.390

0.000

-1.390

wcap

-5.417

-1.263

0.000

-0.890

na

na

-5.276

-1.511

0.000

-1.511

0.000

-0.749

0.000

-0.749

P[μ >0]

0.020

0.022

0.037

0.028

0.028

0.003

0.003

P[χ >0]

0.161

na

na

0.016

na

0.000

na

Note: The Sudden Stop state is defined by initial conditions K=690.7, B=-185.2, which imply a debt/GDP ratio of 51 percent and a debt-to-value-of-capital ratio of 26.8 percent.
Results for economies with working capital constraint only are ommitted because impact effects are zero as the constraint does not bind at the Sudden Stop state.

2004

2000

1996

1992

1988

1984

1980

1976

1972

1968

1964

1960

1956

1952

1948

1944

1940

1936

1932

1928

1924

1920

1916

1912

1908

1904

1900

Figure 1. Mexico: Real GDP Per Capita 1900-2004
(1980 prices)

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Figure 2. Mexico: Current Account-GDP Ratio
(annualized quarterly data)

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04

Figure 3. Mexico: Relative Prices of Imported Inputs, Equity & Nontradable Goods
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04
price of imported inputs

price of equity

price of nontradables

Note: Price of imported inputs relative to exports, equity prices relative
to GDP deflator, and price of nontradables (services) to tradables (durables).

Figure 4a. Sudden Stop Dynamics in Response to Adverse One-Standard-Deviation Shocks
(percent deviations from long-run average in the frictionless economy)
Gross Domestic Product

Working Capital

1

1

0

0

-1

-1
-2

-2

-3

-3
-4

-4

-5

-5

-6

-6
5

10

15

20

25

30

5

35

15

20

25

30

35

Imported Intermediate Goods

Labor

1

10

1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

-4

-4

-5

-5

-6
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Effective Capital

Capacity Utilization

1

-6

1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

-4

-4

-5

-5

-6

-6
5

10

15

20

25

debt & working capital constraints

30

35
debt constraint only

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

working capital constraint only

Note: Sudden Stop dynamics are measured as differences in Markov forecast functions between economies with
collateral constraints and the economy with perfect credit markets, in percent of averages in the latter. The forecast
functions are conditional on the initial conditions K=690.7, B=-185.2, which imply a debt/GDP ratio of 51 percent and
a debt-to-value-of-capital ratio of 26.8 percent.

Figure 4b. Sudden Stop Dynamics in Response to Adverse One-Standard-Deviation Shocks
(percent deviations from long-run average in the frictionless economy)
Current Account-Output Ratio

Private Consumption
2

12

0

10

-2

8

-4

6

-6

4

-8

2

-10

0

-12

-2
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

Investment
5

1

0

0

-5

-1

-10

-2

-15

-3

-20

-4

-25

-5

-30

-6

-35

20

25

30

35

25

30

35

Tobin Q

-7
5

10

15

20

25

30

debt & working capital constraints

35

5
debt constraint only

10

15

20

working capital constraint only

Note: Sudden Stop dynamics are measured as differences in Markov forecast functions between economies with
collateral constraints and the economy with perfect credit markets, in percent of averages in the latter. The forecast
functions are conditional on the initial conditions K=690.7, B=-185.2, which imply a debt/GDP ratio of 51 percent and
a debt-to-value-of-capital ratio of 26.8 percent.

Figure 5. Output & Consumption Amplification Effects of Collateral Constraints
in Response to One-Standard-Deviation Shocks
(in units of the corresponding standard deviation in the economy with perfect credit markets)
Gross Domestic Product

Private Consumption
debt & working capital constraints

debt & working capital constraints
3.0
1.0

2.5

0.8

2.0

0.6

1.5
1.0

0.4
0.5
0.2

0.0

0.0

-0.5
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

30

35

30

35

debt constraint only

debt constraint only

3.0

1.0

2.5

0.8

2.0

0.6

1.5
1.0

0.4
0.5
0.2

0.0

0.0

-0.5
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

working capital constraint only

10

15

20

25

working capital constraint only
3.0

1.0

2.5

0.8

2.0

0.6

1.5
1.0

0.4
0.5
0.2

0.0

0.0

-0.5
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 6. Investment & Tobin Q Amplification Effects of Collateral Constraints
in Response to One-Standard-Deviation Shocks
(in units of the corresponding standard deviation in the economy with perfect credit markets)
Tobin Q

Investment

debt & working capital constraints

debt & working capital constraints

3.5
3.0

3

2.5
2

2.0
1.5

1
1.0
0.5

0

0.0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

debt constraint only

3.5

15

20

25

30

35

30

35

30

35

debt constraint only

3.0

3

2.5
2

2.0
1.5

1
1.0
0.5

0

0.0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

working capital constraint only

10

15

20

25

working capital constraint only

3.5
3.0

3

2.5
2

2.0
1.5

1
1.0
0.5

0

0.0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 7. Working Capital & Utilization Amplification Effects of Collateral Constraints in
Response to Adverse One-Standard-Deviation Shocks
(in units of the corresponding standard deviation in the economy with perfect credit markets)
Capacity Utilization

Working Capital
debt & working capital constraints

2.0

debt & working capital constraints

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

-1.0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

debt constraint only
2.0

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

15

20

25

30

35

30

35

30

35

debt constraint only

-1.0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

working capital constraint only

10

15

20

25

working capital constraint only

2.0

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

-1.0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 8. Histogram of GDP Fluctuations in the Economy
with the Two Collateral Constraints
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0
-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0.00

Note: Stochastic simulation with 10,000 quarters, differences in
deviations from the mean relative to economy with perfect
credit markets.

Figure 9. Impact Effects on Consumption with Perfect Credit Markets and with Collateral Constraints
(as a percent of long-run averages, in response to one-standard-deviation shocks to εA, εR, and εP)

a. economy with perfect credit markets

b. economy with collateral constraints

Figure 10. Impact Effects on Tobin’s Q with Perfect Credit Markets and with Collateral Constraints
(as a percent of long-run averages, in response to one-standard-deviation shocks to εA, ε R, and εP)

a. economy with perfect credit markets

b. economy with collateral constraints

