                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HOW TO ADVANCE THEORY WITH STRUCTURAL VARS:
                     USE THE SIMS-COGLEY-NASON APPROACH

                                          Patrick J. Kehoe

                                        Working Paper 12575
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12575


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




Forthcoming in the NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006. This work is a response to the comments
of Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson (forthcoming in the NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2006) on the critique of structural VARs with long-run restrictions by V.V.
Chari, Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan. The author thanks numerous economists including his
coauthors, Tim Cogley, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Bob Hall, Chris House, Narayana
Kocherlakota, Ricardo Lagos, Monika Piazzesi, Juan Rubio-Ramirez, Tom Sargent, Martin
Schneider, and Jim Stock for very helpful comments. The author also thanks the NSF for support
and Kathy Rolfe and Joan Gieseke for excellent editorial assistance. Any views expressed here are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the
Federal Reserve System, or the NBER.

© 2006 by Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
How to Advance Theory with Structural VARs: Use the Sims-Cogley-Nason Approach
Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 12575
October 2006
JEL No. C32, C51, C52, E13, E17, E21, E27, E32, E37

                                           ABSTRACT


The common approach to evaluating a model in the structural VAR literature is to compare the
impulse responses from structural VARs run on the data to the theoretical impulse responses from
the model. The Sims-Cogley-Nason approach instead compares the structural VARs run on the data
to identical structural VARs run on data from the model of the same length as the actual data. Chari,
Kehoe, and McGrattan (2006) argue that the inappropriate comparison made by the common
approach is the root of the problems in the SVAR literature. In practice, the problems can be solved
simply. Switching from the common approach to the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach basically
involves changing a few lines of computer code and a few lines of text. This switch will vastly
increase the value of the structural VAR literature for economic theory.

Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
       Most of the existing structural VAR literature argues that a useful way of advancing
theory is to directly compare impulse responses from structural VARs run on the data to
theoretical impulse responses from models. The crux of the Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2006) (henceforth, CKM) critique of this common approach is that it compares the empirical
impulse responses from the data to inappropriate objects in the model. We argue that instead
of being compared to the theoretical impulse responses, the empirical impulse responses
should be compared to impulse responses from identical structural VARs run on data from
the model of the same length as the actual data. We refer to this latter approach as the
Sims-Cogley-Nason approach since it has been advocated by Sims (1989) and successfully
applied by Cogley and Nason (1995).
      CKM argue that in making the inappropriate comparison, the common approach
makes an error mistake relative to the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach. That error makes the
common approach prone to various pitfalls, including small-sample bias and lag-truncation
bias. For example, the data length may be so short that the researcher is forced to use
a short lag length, and the estimated VAR may be a poor approximation to the model’s
infinite-order VAR. In contrast, since the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach treats the data from
the U.S. economy and the model economy symmetrically, it avoids the potential problems of
the common approach.
      On purely logical grounds, then, the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach seems to dominate
the common approach.1 How well does the common approach do in practice using SVARs
based on long-run restrictions on data from a real business cycle model? CKM show that for
data of the relevant length, SVARs do miserably: the bias is large and SVARs are unable
to distinguish between models of interest–unless technology shocks account for virtually all
the fluctuations in output.
      Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson (2006) (henceforth, CEV), perhaps the most
prominent defenders of the common approach, seem to agree with CKM on the most impor-
tant matters of substance. Indeed, since there seems to be no dispute that the Sims-Cogley-
Nason approach dominates the common approach, there should be little disagreement over
how future research in this area should be conducted. Likewise, there seems to be no dispute
that when shocks other than technology play a sizable role in output fluctuations, SVARs do
miserably. The primary point of disagreement between CEV and CKM is thus a relatively
minor one about the likely size of the errors in the past literature that uses the common
approach. CEV argue that the errors are small because the evidence is overwhelming that in
U.S. data, technology shocks account for virtually all the fluctuations in output. CKM point
to both 20 years of business cycle research and simple statistics in the data that all lead to
the opposite conclusion about technology shocks and, hence, to the opposite conclusion as to
the size of the errors of the common approach.
       CEV also venture beyond the confines of the CKM critique and analyze SVARs with
short-run restrictions. They focus on SVARs applied to monetary models which satisfy the
same recursive identifying assumptions as their SVARs. CEV argue that the error in this
application of the common approach is small, and thus the technique can be used broadly
to distinguish promising models from the rest. Here the primary problem with their analysis
is that it is subject to the Lucas and Stokey critique (Lucas and Stokey 1987): only a tiny
subset of existing monetary models in the literature actually satisfies the recursive identifying
assumptions. That subset does not include even, for example, the best-known monetary
models of Lucas (1972 and 1990). Yet the technique has been used to reject these and other
such models. Clearly, comparing impulse responses from SVARs with a set of identifying
assumptions to those from models which do not satisfy those assumptions is problematic.
       Notice that the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach is immune to the Lucas and Stokey
critique. Under this approach, it is entirely coherent to compare impulse responses with a
set of identifying assumptions to those from models which do not satisfy these assumptions.
Under this approach, the impulse responses are simply statistics with possibly little economic
interpretation. Now, those statistics may not be interpretable as being close to the model’s
theoretical response, but so what? When Kydland and Prescott (1982) compare variances,
covariances, and cross-correlations in the model and the data, it does not matter whether
these statistics have some deep economic interpretation.
       Of course, it is not true that all statistics are equally desirable. What properties
lead certain statistics to be more desirable than others? One important property is that the
statistics vary across alternative models in such a way that, with samples of the lengths we
have, they can be used to point with confidence toward one class of models and away from
another. (If no such statistics exist, then the data have little to say about the theories of
interest.) A second desirable property is that the statistics depend on key features of theory
and not on inessential auxiliary assumptions. An important question for a serious assessment
of the SVAR literature is, in what sense are the SVAR statistics more or less desirable than a
host of other non—SVAR—related statistics? Regrettably, there seems to be little or no work
in the SVAR literature directed to this critical question.
       To reiterate: The CKM critique does not apply to all SVAR analyses, only those that
use the common approach rather than the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach. Switching to that
dominant approach would cost little–changing only a few lines of computer code and a few
lines of text. By making such a switch, researchers using the SVAR approach can vastly
enhance their role in guiding theory.
       In these comments, I begin by carefully describing the diﬀerence between the common

                                               2
approach and the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach. Then I describe four issues of perceived
disagreement between CKM and CEV about SVARs with long-run restrictions. Finally, in
terms of CEV’s analysis with short-run restrictions, I describe two critiques which need to
be addressed by researchers who steadfastly refuse to abandon the common approach.

1. Getting Precise
     Let me begin with some notation with which I can make the CKM argument precise.
       The first step in both SVAR approaches is to run a VAR with p lags on a data set
{Yt }Tt=1 , then apply the identifying assumptions to construct the impulse response matrices
Ai (p, T ) for i = 0, 1, . . . , where i denotes periods after the impact period and the notation
emphasizes that the impulse responses depend on the lag length p and the sample size T .
In applications using postwar U.S. data, it is common to set p = 4 and to have T = 180 or
numbers similar to these, and I will denote the resulting matrices by AUi S (p = 4, T = 180).
       The common approach emphasizes the interpretation of these matrices. For instance,
in the standard example, the data consist of a measure of labor productivity and a measure
of hours and the theoretical model has two shocks, technology and non-technology shocks.
The first column of the impact matrix AUS
                                       0 (p = 4, T = 180) is interpreted as the impact eﬀect
of the technology shock on productivity and hours, while the second column is interpreted
as the impact eﬀect of the non-technology shock on productivity and hours. The subsequent
matrices are similarly interpreted.
       In contrast, CKM and Sims, Cogley, and Nason view these matrices as moments of
the data that may be used in discriminating among models of interest.
       Now suppose we have a quantitative economic model in which the impulse responses
to the technology and non-technology shocks are the matrices Di (θ), i = 0, 1, . . . , where θ
denotes the model parameters. The second step of the common approach compares
(1)    AUi S (p = 4, T = 180) to Di (θ).
Sometimes this comparison is informal and implicit, as in the work of Galí (1999), Francis
and Ramey (2005), and Galí and Rabanal (2005), who find the labor falls after a positive
productivity shock and conclude that real business cycles are dead. Sometimes this compar-
ison is formal and explicit, as in the work of Altig et al. (2005), and is used to choose model
parameters θ.
        The second step of the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach is quite diﬀerent. To understand
this step, let Āi (p, T |θ) denote the mean of impulse responses found by applying the SVAR
approach with p lags in the VAR to the many simulations of data of length T generated from
the model with parameters θ. The second step of the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach compares
(2)    AUi S (p = 4, T = 180) to Āi (p = 4, T = 180|θ).

                                                3
At a conceptual level, we interpret the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach as advocating comparing
the exact small-sample distribution of the estimator of the impulse responses with p = 4 and
T = 180 to the estimated impulse response parameters. We view the simulations involved as
a simple way to approximate that small-sample distribution. If it were feasible to analytically
work out the small-sample distribution of the estimator, then so much the better.
     CKM interpret (2) as the correct comparison, which is firmly grounded in (simulated)
method-of-moments theory, and (1) as simply a mistake of the common approach.
     The whole point of the CKM work is to quantify when and why these two comparisons
will yield diﬀerent answers, that is, when and why the two objects computed from the model,
Āi (p = 4, T = 180|θ) and Di (θ), will diﬀer. Part of CKM’s analysis focuses on the two-
variable case with Yt (α) = (∆(yt /lt ), lt − αlt−1 )0 , where yt is the log of output, lt is the log
of hours, and α ∈ [0, 1] is the quasi-diﬀerencing parameter. The specification Yt (α) nests
three cases of interest: α = 0, the level SVAR (LSVAR) case; α = 1, the diﬀerenced SVAR
(DSVAR) case; and α = .99, the quasi-diﬀerenced SVAR (QDSVAR) case.
       When θ is such that technology shocks do not account for the vast bulk of fluctuations
in output, LSVARs do miserably: the bias is large and the confidence bands are so enormous
that the technique is unable to distinguish among most classes of models of interest.
       With such a θ, the DSVARs and QDSVARs also fare poorly: the bias is large enough
to flip the sign of the impact coeﬃcient of hours on a technology shock. While the confidence
bands are large, they don’t stop a researcher from rejecting that the simulated data came
from a real business cycle model, even though they did. CKM think that this result suggests
that researchers who have determined that real business cycle models are dead based on
SVAR evidence may have come to that conclusion simply because they were not comparing
the appropriate objects in the model and the data.
      Note that, at least for the long-run restriction branch, the issue is all about approxi-
mation error. If we had an infinite sample of data from a model that satisfies the identifying
restrictions and we estimated a VAR with an infinite number of lags, we would have (in the
relevant sense of convergence)

(3)    Āi (p = ∞, T = ∞) = Di (θ)

for both the LSVAR and the QDSVAR cases, where, for simplicity, we have assumed that
the identifying assumptions are suﬃcient as well as necessary. (As we discuss below, Marcet
(2005) shows why (3) holds even for the DSVAR case in which hours are “over-diﬀerenced.”)
       With (1)—(3) in mind, note that Āi (p = 4, T = 4) − Di (θ) can be interpreted as the
error in the common approach relative to the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach. CKM decompose



                                                 4
this error into

       [Āi (p = 4, T = 180) − Āi (p = 4, T = ∞)] + [Āi (p = 4, T = ∞) − Di (θ)],

where the first term is the Hurwicz-type small-sample bias and the second term is the lag-
truncation bias. It turns out that for both the LSVAR case and the QDSVAR case, most
of the error is coming from the lag-truncation bias. Intuitively, this truncation bias arises
both because the p = 4 specification forced terms to be zero that are not and that the
OLS estimator adjusts the estimates of the included lags to compensate for those that have
been excluded. CKM develop propositions that give intuition for when the error from the
lag-truncation bias will be large.2
2. The Common Approach With Long-Run Restrictions . . .
       The SVAR literature with long-run restrictions, in general, and CEV, in particular,
claim that the common approach is a state-of-the-art technique which is a useful guide for
theory. We disagree. Here I describe three specific points of disagreement relevant to CEV’s
discussion of long-run restrictions and one point in which CEV seem to think there is dis-
agreement when none really exists. Overall, here my point is that we all agree there exist
circumstances under which the errors from using the common approach are small; however,
as CKM have shown, these circumstances are not general. Moreover, regardless of the cir-
cumstances, this approach is dominated by what we consider the state-of-the-art technique,
the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach. This approach is at least as easy to use as the common
approach, and it has the advantage of a firm logical and statistical foundation.
       Consider now the four points.
       First, CEV argue that LSVARs are useful in guiding theory about fluctuations in the
U.S. economy because in U.S. data, they say, technology shocks account for almost all of the
fluctuations in output. We argue that while some reasonable statistics do point to technology
shocks playing an overwhelming role, a number of other sensible statistics, as well as much
of the literature, strongly suggest that their role is modest.
       Second, CEV argue that even if technology shocks do not account for almost all of the
fluctuations in output, there is a new estimator of impulse responses that virtually eliminates
the bias associated with the standard OLS estimator. We argue that while for some parameter
values this new estimator improves on the OLS estimator, for others it does worse. In this
sense, the new estimator does not solve all the problems facing this literature.
       Third, CEV ignore the DSVAR literature on the grounds, they say, that the DSVAR
is misspecified because it incorrectly diﬀerences hours. This misspecification, they say, leads
to incorrect estimates of impulse responses even with an infinite amount of data. We argue
that here, for all practical purposes, CEV are wrong about the DSVAR being misspecified.

                                                5
Instead the only error in the DSVAR literature is the same as in the LSVAR literature: using
the common approach rather than the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach.
      Finally, I consider a point on which there is actually no disagreement. CEV argue
that when more variables are added to an LSVAR, in special cases it can sometimes usefully
distinguish between classes of models. CEV somehow seem to think we disagree here, but we
do not. Indeed, part of the point of CKM is to provide a theorem as to when LSVARs can
and cannot perform this function. We emphasize, however, that the “can” circumstances are
somewhat narrow.

2.1 Do Technology Shocks Account for Virtually All of the Fluctuations in Output?
      CKM show that if technology shocks account for virtually all of the fluctuations in
output, then the errors associated with the common approach are relatively small. Much
of CEV’s work is devoted to arguing that the U.S. data definitively show that technology
shocks account for the vast bulk of the movements in output and non-technology shocks,
almost none. There is a vast literature on this subject, much of it contradicting that stand.
      Let’s take a closer look at the issues at stake. Using the notation of CKM and ignoring
means, we can write the stochastic processes for a technology shock, log Zt , and a non-
technology shock, τ lt , for both CEV and CKM, as

(4)    log Zt+1 = log Zt + log zt+1

(5)    τ lt+1 = ρτ lt + εlt+1 ,

where log zt and εlt are independent, mean zero, i.i.d. normal random variables with variances
σ 2z and σ 2l and ρ is the serial correlation of the non-technology shock. Note that these
stochastic processes are determined by three parameters (σ 2z , σ 2l , ρ). CEV estimate these
parameters to be σ 2z = (.00953)2 , σ 2l = (.0056)2 , and ρ = .986. CKM show that the impulse
errors in the SVARs increase with the ratio of the variances of the innovations σ 2l /σ 2z .
        CEV’s finding that LSVARs do well with U.S. data rests crucially on their estimate of
the variance of non-technology shocks. CKM and CEV agree that LSVARs do miserably when
this variance is large. The main disagreement between us here is whether we can confidently
assert that, when the U.S. data are viewed through the lens of a real business cycle model,
the variance of non-technology shocks is, indeed, small. CEV do not make clear that at a
mechanical level, the only source of their disagreement with us is the relevant values of that
one parameter σ 2l . Here, to demonstrate that point, I set all of the parameters, except σ 2l ,
equal to those of CEV.
       The question then is, What is a reasonable value for the variance of non-technology
shocks? Before confronting this question formally, recall a well-known fact: In real business

                                               6
cycle models with unit root technology shocks, the volatility of hours due to technology shocks
is tiny. The reason is that the unit root nature of the shocks diminishes the already small
intertemporal substitution eﬀects present in real business cycle models with mean-reverting
shocks.3 Indeed, based on unfiltered series in both the data and the model along with the
CEV estimates for σ 2z , we find that
       the variance of hours in the model with only technology shocks
(6)                                                                   = 1.8%
                    the variance of hours in the U.S. data
(where for the hours series we use the same Prescott and Ueberfeldt series as in CKM). Thus,
for the CEV model to reproduce the observed volatility of hours, the non-technology shocks
alone must account for over 98% of the volatility in hours. In this sense, the data clearly
suggest that non-technology shocks must be very large relative to technology shocks.
       How large? To answer that question, in the top panel of Figure 1, I plot the variance
of hours in the model and in the data against the variance of the non-technology shocks,
holding fixed σ 2z and ρl at CEV’s values. Clearly, under these conditions, as σ 2l is increased,
the variance of hours in the model rises. This figure shows that at CEV’s estimate for
σ 2l (.00562 ), hours are only about a third as volatile in their model as in the data. The figure
also shows that for the model to account for the observed variability in hours, σ 2l must be
substantially larger (about .00982 ).4
      The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows that when the parameter under dispute, σ 2l , is
chosen to reproduce CEV’s estimate, the bias is modest but the confidence bands are large.
When this parameter is chosen to reproduce the observed volatility of hours, the LSVAR does
miserably: the bias is large and the confidence bands are so enormous that the technique is
unable to distinguish among most classes of models of interest.
     I should be clear that we do not disagree that there exist some statistics, including some
maximum likelihood statistics, that would lead to the conclusion that non-technology shocks
are small. CKM find that the maximum likelihood estimates are sensitive to the variables
included in the observer equation, especially to investment. Under some specifications, the
variance of non-technology shocks is large while in others it is small. The reason for this
sensitivity is that a stripped-down model like ours cannot mimic well all of the comovements
in U.S. data, so that it matters what features of the data the researcher wants to mimic. In
such a circumstance, we think it makes sense to use a limited-information technique in which
we can choose the moments on which we want the model to do well.
      In that vein, in designing a laboratory to test whether the SVAR methodology works,
we asked, What would be some desirable features of the data for the model to reproduce?
We came up with three answers, all of which contradict the condition necessary for SVARs
to work well in practice; that is, all three suggest that non-technology shocks must be large.

                                                7
       One of our answers, which motivates the exercise just conducted, is that if the whole
point of the procedure is to decompose the movements in hours, then the model should
generate volatility in hours similar to that in the data. As CKM demonstrate, in the context
of the CEV model, to do that the model needs large non-technology shocks.
       A second answer is that the laboratory model should reproduce the key statistic that
both started oﬀ the whole debate and is the main result in the long-run restriction SVAR
literature: Galí’s (1999) initial drop in hours after a positive technology shock. CKM ask,
holding fixed the estimates of the variance of technology shocks and the persistence of non-
technology shocks, What must be the variance of the non-technology shocks in order to
reproduce Galí’s impact coeﬃcient on hours? We find that the variance of non-technology
shocks must be large, large enough so that the SVARs do miserably in terms of bias and size
of confidence bands.
       (Note here that under the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach, whether or not Galí’s DSVAR
is misspecified is irrelevant. Galí’s statistic is just a moment of the data that has happened
to receive a lot of attention, with possibly no more interpretation than those in the standard
Kydland and Prescott (1982) table of moments.)
      A third answer to the question of reproducible features is that if the SVAR procedure
works well, then the variance of the shocks should be consistent with the variance decompo-
sitions in the SVAR literature itself. Much of this literature, including Christiano, Eichen-
baum, and Vigfusson (2003), attributes only a small fraction of the fluctuations to technology
shocks. As CKM show, with the parameters set to generate any of these statistics, the SVAR
responses are badly biased and have enormous confidence bands.
       In sum, contrary to the argument of CEV, the U.S. data do not definitively show that
technology shocks account for virtually all of the movements in output. Most of the literature
agrees with us, including much of the previous work of CEV, both alone and in concert.

2.2 Does the Mixed OLS—Newey-West Estimator Uniformly Improve on OLS?
      Perhaps the most interesting part of CEV’s work is their proposed estimator of impulse
responses with long-run restrictions. They argue that this estimator, which splices together
the OLS estimator and a Newey and West (1987) estimator, “virtually eliminates the bias”
(CEV 2006, p. 3) associated with the standard OLS estimator and thus makes the errors of
their approach tiny. In this sense, CEV argue that it does not matter whether technology
shocks account for almost all of the fluctuations in output because their new estimator takes
care of the bias problem.
      We disagree. The results of Mertens (2006) show that actually the new estimator
does not even uniformly improve on the standard OLS estimator. Unfortunately, the new


                                              8
estimator is thus not a comprehensive solution for the problems with long-run restrictions.
      To understand these issues, use the notation of Mertens (2006) to write the standard
OLS estimator of the impact coeﬃcient matrix A0 as
                 Ã                       !
                         X
       AOLS
        0       = I−            BiOLS        Chol(SX (0)OLS ),
                            i

where BiOLS denotes the regression coeﬃcient matrices from the VAR and Chol(SX (0)OLS )
denotes the Cholesky decomposition of the OLS estimate of the spectral density matrix
SX (0)OLS of the variables in the VAR at frequency zero. Here
                        Ã                       !−1             Ã                   !0−1
                                X                                       X
              OLS
       SX (0)        = I−               BiOLS         Ω   OLS
                                                                I−          BiOLS          ,
                                    i                                   i

where ΩOLS is the OLS estimate of the covariance matrix of residuals from the VAR.
     CEV propose replacing SX (0)OLS with a spectral density estimator along the lines of
Newey and West (1987), with a Bartlett weighting scheme given by
                        b
                                Ã               !
                        X            |k|        0
              NW
       SX (0)       =            1−      ET Xt Xt−k ,
                        k=−b        b+1
where Xt is the data, T is the sample length, ET is the sample moments operator, and b is a
truncation parameter.5
      Figure 2, taken from Mertens (2006), displays the impact errors resulting from the use
of the OLS estimator and the mixed OLS—Newey-West estimator, with four lags in the VAR,
b = 150, T = 180, various values of σ 2l /σ 2z , and the rest of the parameters set as in CEV.
The figure shows that when non-technology shocks are small, the CEV estimator has a larger
bias than does the OLS estimator. As Mertens shows, if non-technology shocks are large
enough, the positions eventually reverse. Clearly, the mixed OLS—Newey-West estimator is
not uniformly better than the OLS estimator. (For more details, see Mertens 2006.)

2.3 Are DSVARs Misspecified?
      It is somewhat of a puzzle to me why, in their broad assessment of SVARs, CEV focus
on the LSVAR literature, which does not have economic results and has garnered neither
much attention nor many publications, and ignore the DSVAR literature, which both does
and has. (See CKM’s discussion of Fernald 2005, Gambetti 2006, and the LSVAR literature
for details supporting this assertion.)
       Both CKM and CEV argue that there are problems with the DSVAR literature, but
we disagree as to what they are. CKM argue that the only mistake in the DSVAR literature
is that it uses the common approach rather than the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach; that is,
this literature compares empirical SVARs to inappropriate objects in the model. In this

                                                                    9
comparison the lag-truncation bias is severe enough that it flips the sign of the estimated
impulse response. CEV argue that the DSVAR literature makes a diﬀerent mistake. In
particular, CEV argue that the procedure of diﬀerencing hours has “an avoidable specification
error” (CEV, p. 26). They seem to conclude that, even with an infinite amount of data, the
DSVAR impulse responses will not coincide with the model’s impulse responses. We disagree:
CKM address the issue of misspecification directly and argue that the DSVAR procedure has
no specification error of importance.
      CKM argue this result in two steps. The first step in our argument is that with a
QDSVAR, with α close to 1, say, .99, Galí (1999) would have obtained impulse responses
virtually indistinguishable from the ones he actually obtains in his DSVAR in which he sets
α equal to 1. In this sense, for all practical purposes, we can think of Galí as having run a
QDSVAR. The second step is that, for any α < 1 and a long enough data set, the QDSVAR
will get exactly the right answer. That is, with the lag length chosen to be suitably increasing
with sample size, the sample impulse responses in the QDSVAR procedure will converge in
the relevant sense to the model’s impulse response, that is, Āi (p = ∞, T = ∞) = Di (θ). In
this precise sense, contrary to what CEV claim, this procedure has no specification error of
importance.
      Marcet (2005) shows something subtler. He shows that with the DSVAR procedure
in which α equals 1, the sample impulse responses from a procedure in which the lag length
increases appropriately with sample size converge in the relevant sense to the model’s impulse
response. Marcet notes that his Proposition 1 seems to directly contradict the, at least
implicit, claims of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Vigfusson (2003).6
       So, with large samples, researchers have no a priori reason to prefer the LSVAR pro-
cedure to the QDSVAR procedure, and with α close to 1 in samples of length typical to that
in postwar data, the QDSVAR is indistinguishable from the DSVAR. Beyond that, small-
sample issues do lead one specification to be preferred. Quasi-diﬀerencing lessens the amount
of Hurwicz-type small-sample bias in estimating the parameters of a highly correlated series
like per capita hours. Thus, at least a priori, the QDSVAR seems to be preferable to the
LSVAR.
     Nevertheless, the QDSVAR turns out to actually do worse than the LSVAR. When
CKM decompose the mean impulse response error into small-sample bias and lag-truncation
bias, we find that even though the QDSVAR has smaller Hurwicz-type bias, it has a much
larger lag-truncation bias for reasonable parameters; the QDSVAR does worse. That is a
quantitative result, however. We are not sure that it holds in a large class of models with a
wide variety of parameters.



                                              10
2.4 Does Adding More Variables to the SVARs Help?
        CEV argue that, even though for a wide variety of circumstances, SVARs with long-run
restrictions are uninformative, they can be informative in special cases–for example, when
more variables are added to an LSVAR. Contrary to the impression we get from CEV, there
is no disagreement on this point. Indeed, part of the point of CKM is to prove analytically
exactly what the special cases are.
       A commonly cited example of an economy in which SVARs with long-run restrictions
work well is Fisher’s (2006) model. (See Fernandez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramirez, and Sargent
2005.) CKM show that Fisher’s model is a special case of our Proposition 4 of when LSVARs
can be informative. In this sense, we obviously agree with CEV about the validity of our
proposition. We do not think, however, that an approach that works only in special cases
has much to oﬀer researchers seeking a reliable, generally applicable tool.

3. . . . And With Short-Run Restrictions
       The use of the common approach on SVARs with long-run restrictions thus has little
to recommend it. What about using it on SVARs with short-run restrictions? CEV claim
that with this type of SVAR, their approach is a state-of-the art technique that is useful
for guiding theory. They focus on short-run restrictions that are satisfied in models which
satisfy certain timing assumptions, often referred to as recursive assumptions. CEV claim
to show that when a model satisfies such an assumption, SVARs with short-run restrictions
perform remarkably well in small samples. And CEV imply that, because of this finding, this
technique can be used broadly to distinguish promising models from the rest.
       Since the CKM work has nothing to do with short-run restrictions, I have not studied
the details of CEV’s claims about how well the short-run restrictions work in practice with
small samples and therefore have nothing to disagree with on these small-sample claims.
Nevertheless, I do disagree with CEV’s main message with respect to short-run restrictions
in this area. As other researchers do, CEV ignore some important critiques which seem to be
widely thought of as devastating for much of the literature that uses SVARs with short-run
restrictions. It is important to emphasize that these critiques are of a theoretical nature,
not about some problems with small samples. These critiques imply that, regardless of how
well the short-run restrictions work with small samples, they are of little value in guiding
the development of a broad class of monetary research. Hence, these critiques need to be
addressed with a precise theoretical argument, not with some small-sample results.
      The main critique of the SVAR literature with short-run restrictions is the Lucas and
Stokey critique of Lucas and Stokey (1987). The point of this critique is that the particular
class of short-run identifying assumptions made by CEV and related work in the short-run


                                             11
SVAR literature do not apply to a broad class of models and hence are of little use in guiding
the development of a broad class of research.
       The upshot of this critique is that some of the prominent work in the short-run SVAR
literature has drastically overreached the conclusions of their studies. The short-run identify-
ing assumptions in their work apply to only a tiny subset of monetary models, but the SVAR
results have been used to rule out models not in that tiny subset. This mismatch between
assumptions and models is a serious problem for this work.
       A simple way for researchers in the short-run literature using the common approach
to inoculate themselves from the Lucas and Stokey critique is to include in an appendix a
list of the papers in the existing literature that satisfy their proposed identifying assump-
tions. Unfortunately, for most of the identifying schemes that I have seen, that list would
be extremely short and would exclude most of the famous monetary models that constitute
the core of theoretical monetary economics. If researchers are able to invent new identifying
schemes for which this list is both broad and long, then this literature would have a much
greater impact on guiding the development of monetary theory than it currently does. Doing
so would constitute progress.
       To understand my claim that the current literature is subject to the Lucas and Stokey
critique, let us begin with the recursiveness assumption itself. As Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (1998, p. 68) explain, “The economic content of the recursiveness assumption is
that the time t variables in the Fed’s information set do not respond to the time t realizations
of the monetary policy shock.” To see how this assumption might be satisfied in a model,
note that if the monetary authority at time t sets its policy as a function of time t variables,
including output, consumption, and investment, as it does in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans (2005), then the model must have peculiar timing assumptions in which, in a quar-
terly model, after a monetary shock is realized, private agents cannot adjust their output,
consumption, and investment decisions during the remainder of the quarter. Whether or
not one agrees that this timing assumption is peculiar, it is irrefutable that this timing as-
sumption is not satisfied in the primary models in the monetary literature. I illustrate this
point in Figure 3, which depicts the typical classes of models studied in monetary economics.
(Technically, for all the models in the large rectangle, the impulse responses from the SVAR
procedure do not converge in the relevant sense to the impulse responses in the model, so
that Āi (p = ∞, T = ∞) 6= Di (θ).)
       As an illustration of the claim that some of the short-run literature overreaches, con-
sider the exposition by Christiano and Eichenbaum (1999) of the research agenda of the
monetary SVAR literature. This exposition draws on the well-cited comprehensive survey by
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1998) of the short-run SVAR literature, which is the

                                              12
clearest statement of the research agenda of the monetary SVAR literature that I could find.
       Christiano and Eichenbaum (1999) start with a summary of the so-called facts and a
brief note that some identifying assumptions have been used to establish them:

     In a series of papers, we have argued that the key consequences of a contrac-
     tionary monetary policy shock are as follows: (i) interest rates, unemployment
     and inventories rise; (ii) real wages fall, though by a small amount; (iii) the price
     level falls by a small amount, after a substantial delay; (iv) there is a persistent
     decline in profits and the growth rate of various monetary aggregates; (v) there
     is a hump-shaped decline in consumption and output; and (vi) the US exchange
     rate appreciates and there is an increase in the diﬀerential between US and for-
     eign interest rates. See CEE [Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans] (1998) for a
     discussion of the literature and the role of identifying assumptions that lie at the
     core of these claims.

       Christiano and Eichenbaum (1999) then go on to reject some models that, they say,
are not consistent with those facts. In particular, based on their SVAR-established facts,
they reject both Lucas’ (1972) island model and Lucas’ (1990) liquidity model. These claims
are clearly overreaching. Since Lucas’ two models in particular do not satisfy the peculiar
timing assumptions needed to justify the recursive identifying assumption in the SVAR, I do
not see how it is logically coherent to reject them based on the SVAR-established facts.
       A potential objection to the Lucas and Stokey critique is that the SVAR literature is
not overreaching because some of the models that violate the recursiveness assumption satisfy
some other identifying assumption that researchers have made, and for these other assump-
tions, SVAR researchers have found similar qualitative patterns. The second main critique
of the short-run literature, the Uhlig critique of Uhlig (2005), dismisses this objection. The
Uhlig critique is that the atheoretical SVAR specification searches are circular: “the litera-
ture just gets out what has been stuck in, albeit more polished and with numbers attached”
(Uhlig 2005, p. 383). Uhlig argues that the reason the other identifying assumptions find
similar answers is that the answers are essentially built into the search algorithm. Uhlig
suggests that the algorithm used to find some SVAR results is, perhaps unconsciously, to
pick a pattern of qualitative results and then do an atheoretical search over patterns of zeros,
lists of variables to include, and periods of time to study, so that the resulting SVAR impulse
responses reproduce the desired qualitative results. If this description is accurate, then I am
sympathetic with Uhlig’s conclusion that not much is to be learned from this branch of the
short-run SVAR literature.


                                              13
       Note, again, that neither of these critiques would apply if, when comparing models and
data, researchers simply followed the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach. Under that approach, the
issue of whether the identifying assumptions of an SVAR hold in a model doesn’t come up.
The impulse responses from the SVAR on the data simply define some sample statistics that
are coherently compared to the analogous statistics from the model. That is, now letting
AUi S (p = 4, T = 180) and Āi (p = 4, T = 180|θ) denote the impulse responses obtained from
an SVAR with short-run restrictions, using standard (simulated) method-of-moments logic,
it makes perfect sense to compare these two even though Āi (p = ∞, T = ∞) 6= Di (θ).
      In sum, if the SVAR literature with short-run restrictions followed the research agenda
advocated by Sims (1989) and applied by Cogley and Nason (1995), then it would be on firm
statistical and logical grounds.

4. Concluding Remarks
     Let me be clear about what I am advocating in practice. For researchers willing to
make a quantitative comparison between a model and the data, all I am advocating basically
is changing several lines of computer code–replacing the theoretical impulse responses, Di (θ),
with the more relevant empirical responses derived from applying the SVAR procedure to the
model, Āi (p = 4, T = 180|θ), in the relevant spots where the comparison between model and
data is being made. For researchers who just want to run SVARs in the data and chat about
what it means for a model, all I am advocating is a change in claims. Replace the claim about
having robustly discovered what happens after a particular type of shock with a more precise
claim about having documented what type of impulse responses should arise in a model when
an SVAR with 4 lags and 180 observations is run on the data from it. Changing these several
lines of code or text will vastly increase the intellectual impact of the approach.
      It is puzzling to me that CEV and CKM agree on most of the relevant facts; yet we
somehow disagree on their primary implication.
       We agree on these two facts about the common approach:

   • The common approach sometimes makes large errors relative to the Sims-Cogley-Nason
     approach. In particular, with long-run restrictions, SVARs do miserably unless tech-
     nology shocks account for virtually all of the fluctuations in output.

   • The common approach sometimes excludes most models of interest while the Sims-
     Cogley-Nason approach does not. For example, with short-run restrictions, the recursive
     identifying assumptions apply to only a tiny subset of the existing monetary models.

We disagree on one significant fact about interpreting the U.S. data:

                                              14
     CEV argue that the evidence definitively implies that technology shocks account for
     virtually all of the fluctuations in output. CKM argue that while one can find statistics
     supporting this view, 20 years of macroeconomic research and some simple statistics
     show that shocks other than technology shocks play a sizable role in generating fluctu-
     ations in output and other variables.

And we disagree on the overriding implication of these facts:

   • CEV argue that the common approach is a state-of-the-art technique that can be saved
     with a mechanical fix and analyst restraint:

        — For the long-run restriction branch of the SVAR literature, CEV argue that a
          mixed OLS—Newey-West estimator essentially eliminates the errors of the common
          approach.
        — For the short-run restriction branch, CEV think that, in order to avoid the over-
          reaching of some of the recent work in the area, researchers in this literature should
          be much more careful in delineating exactly to which work they claim their analy-
          ses apply. (This view is implicit in their conference discussions of early drafts of
          CKM’s work.)

   • CKM argue, to the contrary, that the common approach is not a state-of-the-art tech-
     nique and that it should be abandoned in favor of the approach used by Sims, Cogley,
     and Nason. The Sims-Cogley-Nason approach has firm statistical and theoretical foun-
     dations and thus avoids the type of statistical and logical errors present in the SVAR
     literature that uses the common approach.

      My bottom line is simple: Let’s stop worrying about how large are the errors in the
SVAR papers written in the past and start moving forward with the more promising Sims-
Cogley-Nason approach, which hopefully will become the dominant approach in the future.




                                              15
                                               Notes

      1
       The idea of the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach is to compare the exact small-sample
distribution of the estimator from the model (with short lags) to the small-sample estimate
(with short lags) from the data rather than the common approach, which makes no attempt
to deal with any of the issues that arise with a small sample. At a logical level, as long as the
small-sample distribution is approximated well, either by hand, which is exceedingly diﬃcult,
or by a computer, which is easy, it seems that it must dominate the common approach.
      2
        Note that, at least for the environment considered by CKM, since the Hurwicz-type
small-sample bias is small, the comparison of

          AUi S (p = 4, T = 180) to Āi (p = 4, T = ∞|θ)

would eliminate most of the error in the common approach and would allow the researcher to
use standard asymptotic formulas. We view this comparison as a rough-and-ready approxi-
mation to the one in the Sims-Cogley-Nason approach.
     3
       This reasoning helps explain why the bulk of the real business cycle literature has
not adopted the unit root specification. In this sense, technically, the SVAR results really
have little to say about this literature. But that point has already been forcefully made by
McGrattan (2005).
    4
      Note that, as other parameters in the model shift, so does the size of σ 2l needed to
produce a certain volatility in hours. In this sense, whether a certain value of σ 2l is small
or not should be judged by whether or not the model with this parameter can produce the
observed volatility of hours in the data.
                                                                         P              0
      The spectral density at frequency zero is defined as SX (0) = ∞
      5
                                                                     k=−∞ EXt Xt−k . The
estimator of Newey and West (1987) is a truncated version of this sum that replaces popu-
lation moments with sample moments and weights these sample moments to ensure positive
definiteness.
      6
      Part of the disagreement in this regard may come from a failure to precisely distinguish
between two types of noninvertibility problems. The type considered by Fernandez-Villaverde,
Rubio-Ramirez, and Sargent (2005) are nontrivial and diﬃcult to deal with without using
a detailed economic theory. As Fernandez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramirez, and Sargent (2005)
discuss and Marcet (2005) and CKM show, however, the type of knife-edge invertibility
issues that come from diﬀerencing a stationary series are much more trivial and are easy to
deal with.




                                                  16
                                        References

      Altig, D., L. J. Christiano, M. Eichenbaum, and J. Linde (2005). Firm-specific capital,
nominal rigidities, and the business cycle. NBER Working Paper 11034.
       Barro, R. (1977). Unanticipated money growth and unemployment in the United
States. American Economic Review 67(2): 101—115.
       Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999). The financial accelerator in a
quantitative business cycle framework. In Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1C, J. Taylor
and M. Woodford (eds). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
      Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002). Can sticky price models
generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates? Review of Economic Studies 69(3):
533—563.
      ––– (2006). Are structural VARs with long-run restrictions useful in developing
business cycle theories? Research Department Staﬀ Report 364, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis.
     Christiano, L. J., and M. Eichenbaum (1999). The research agenda: Larry Christiano
and Martin Eichenbaum write about their current research program on the monetary trans-
mission mechanism. EconomicDynamics Newsletter 1(1). Society for Economic Dynamics,
http://www.economicdynamics.org/.
     Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1998). Monetary policy shocks:
What have we learned and to what end? NBER Working Paper 6400.
       ––– (2005). Nominal rigidities and the dynamic eﬀects of a shock to monetary
policy. Journal of Political Economy 113(1): 1—45.
       Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and R. Vigfusson (2003). What happens after a
technology shock? NBER Working Paper 9819.
      ––– (2006). Assessing structural VARs. Northwestern University. Mimeo.
      Cogley, T., and J. M. Nason (1995). Output dynamics in real-business-cycle models.
American Economic Review 85(3): 492—511.
      Cooley, T. F. and G. D. Hansen (1989). The inflation tax in a real business cycle
model. American Economic Review 79(4): 733—748.
       Fernald, J. G. (2005). Trend breaks, long-run restrictions, and the contractionary
eﬀects of technology improvements. Working Paper 2005-21, Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco.
       Fernandez-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, and T. J. Sargent (2005). A, B, C’s
(and D’s) for understanding VARs. NBER Technical Working Paper 0308.



                                             17
       Fisher, J. D. M. (2006). The dynamic eﬀects of neutral and investment-specific tech-
nology shocks. Journal of Political Economy 114(3): 413—451.
      Francis, N., and V. A. Ramey (2005). Is the technology-driven real business cycle hy-
pothesis dead? Shocks and aggregate fluctuations revisited. Journal of Monetary Economics
52(8): 1379—1399.
     Fuerst, T. S. (1992). Liquidity, loanable funds, and real activity. Journal of Monetary
Economics 29(1): 3—24.
     Galí, J. (1999). Technology, employment, and the business cycle: Do technology
shocks explain aggregate fluctuations? American Economic Review 89(1): 249—271.
       Galí, J., and P. Rabanal (2005). Technology shocks and aggregate fluctuations: How
well does the real business cycle model fit postwar U.S. data? In NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2004, M. Gertler and K. Rogoﬀ (eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 225—288.
       Gambetti, L. (2006). Technology shocks and the response of hours worked: Time-
varying dynamics matter. Universitat Pompeu Fabra. Mimeo.
     Kydland, F. E., and E. C. Prescott (1982). Time to build and aggregate fluctuations.
Econometrica 50(6): 1345—1370.
       Lagos, R., and R. Wright (2005). A unified framework for monetary theory and policy
analysis. Journal of Political Economy 113(3): 463—484.
     Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1972). Expectations and the neutrality of money. Journal of
Economic Theory 4(2): 103—124.
       ––– (1990). Liquidity and interest rates. Journal of Economic Theory 50(2): 237—
264.
      Lucas, R. E., Jr., and N. L. Stokey (1987). Money and interest in a cash-in-advance
economy. Econometrica 55(3): 491—513.
       Marcet, A. (2005). Overdiﬀerencing VAR’s is OK. Universitat Pompeu Fabra. Mimeo.
       McGrattan, E. R. (2005). Comment on Galí and Rabanal’s “Technology Shocks and
Aggregate Fluctuations: How well does the RBC model fit postwar U.S. data?” NBER Macro-
economics Annual 2004, M. Gertler and K. Rogoﬀ (eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
289—308.
      Mertens, E. (2006). Shocks to the long run: A note on mixing VAR methods with
non-parametric methods. Study Center Gerzensee. Mimeo.
        Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedas-
ticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55(3): 703—708.
      Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1997). An optimization-based econometric frame-
work for the evaluation of monetary policy. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, B. S.
Bernanke and J. J. Rotemberg (eds.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 297—346.

                                            18
      Shi, Shouyong (1997). A divisible search model of fiat money. Econometrica 67(1):
75—102.
      Sims, C. (1989). Models and their uses. American Journal of Agricultural Economics
71(2): 489—494.
       Uhlig, H. (2005). What are the eﬀects of monetary policy on output? Results from
an agnostic identification procedure. Journal of Monetary Economics 52(2): 381—419.
      Yun, T. (1996). Nominal price rigidity, money supply endogeneity, and business cycles.
Journal of Monetary Economics 37(2): 345—370.




                                            19
     !#"$#%!&(')#*+&)%-,/.102&.3 4576/(                               ...

                                                        Fraction of U.S. Hours Variance Generated by Model
                                                                vs. Variance of Non-technology Shocks
                                                      200


                                                                                                    Model
                Fraction of U.S. Log Hours Variance




                                                                                                    Data
                                                      100




                                                       34


                                                        0
                                                                 CEV’s        Estimate Consistent       Non-technology
                                                               Estimate         With U.S.2 Data                    2
                                                               (.00562)            (.0098 )             Variance (σl )


...
      !8 9:(!<;=(>?@;AB(24CD&. !8<EF!GHI8!&%+45!8).
                                                       Impact Error and 95% Bootstrapped Confidence Bands
                                                      600

                                                      500

                                                      400

                                                      300                                       Impact Error
                Percent Error




                                                      200

                                                      100

                                                        0

                                                      -100

                                                      -200

                                                      -300

                                                      -400
                                                                 CEV’s        Estimate Consistent       Non-technology
                                                               Estimate         With U.S.2 Data
                                                               (.00562)            (.0098 )             Variance (σ2l )
@20 & 8 6 -" 9                5.3#CH                       ' 45@#
                                                                         .   =! GH C

             Impact Errors Using the OLS and Mixed OLS-NW Estimators
                              50


                                                                  OLS Error
                              25
              Percent Error




                               0



                              -25



                                                                  Mixed OLS-
                              -50                                 Newey-West Error


                              -75
                                    0      0.1             0.2             0.3            0.4
                                                                           2     2
                                         Ratio of Innovation Variances (σ /σ )
                                                                           l     z




                               Source: Mertens (2006)
FIGURE 3. CEV’S RECURSIVENESS ASSUMPTION DOES NOT APPLY
          TO MOST MONETARY MODELS

Representative Classes of Existing Monetary Models, Grouped by Whether They Violate or Satisfy
CEV’s Recursiveness Assumption




                                  Monetary Models




      Models that Violate the
      Recursiveness Assumption


       Misperceptions Models
       Lucas 1972
       Barro 1977


       Cash-Credit Models
       Lucas & Stokey 1987
       Cooley & Hansen 1989


       Liquidity Models
       Lucas 1990
       Fuerst 1992


       Sticky-Price/Wage Models
       Yun 1996
       Chari, Kehoe, & McGrattan 2002


       Search Models
       Shi 1997
       Lagos & Wright 2005

                                                                     Models that Don’t
       Financial Frictions Models
                                                                   Rotemberg & Woodford 1997
       Bernanke, Gertler, & Gilchrist 1999
                                                                        Altig et al. 2005
