                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND MARKETING

                                       Darius Lakdawalla
                                        Tomas Philipson
                                       Y. Richard Wang

                                      Working Paper 12577
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w12577


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2006




We are grateful for comments from seminar participants at The University of Chicago and NBER
Health Care Workshop, as well as Gary Becker and Casey Mulligan. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Darius Lakdawalla, Tomas Philipson, and Y. Richard Wang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intellectual Property and Marketing
Darius Lakdawalla, Tomas Philipson, and Y. Richard Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 12577
October 2006, Revised September 2007
JEL No. I11,L12,O34

                                             ABSTRACT

Patent protection spurs innovation by raising the rewards for research, but it usually results in less
desirable allocations after the innovation has been discovered. In effect, patents reward inventors with
inefficient monopoly power. However, previous analysis of intellectual property has focused only
on the costs patents impose by restricting price-competition. We analyze the potentially important
but overlooked role played by competition on dimensions other than price. Compared to a patent monopoly,
competitive firms may engage in inefficient levels of non-price competition -- such as marketing --
when these activities confer benefits on competitors. Patent monopolies may thus price less efficiently,
but market more efficiently than competitive firms. We measure the empirical importance of this issue,
using patent-expiration data for the US pharmaceutical industry from 1990 to 2003. Contrary to what
is predicted by price competition alone, we find that patent expirations actually have a negative effect
on output for the first year after expiration. This results from the reduction in marketing effort, which
offsets the reduction in price. The short-run decline in output costs consumers at least $400,000 per
month, for each drug. In the long-run, however, expirations do raise output, but the value of expiration
to consumers is about 15% lower than would be predicted by a model that considers price-competition
alone, without marketing effort. The non-standard effects introduced by non-price competition alter
the analysis of patents' welfare effects.

Darius Lakdawalla                                   Y. Richard Wang
The RAND Corporation                                Department of Medicine
1776 Main Street                                    Temple University Hospital
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                         Leonard Davis Institute
and NBER                                            of Health Economics
darius@rand.org                                     University of Pennsylvania
                                                    yize.wang@tuhs.temple.edu
Tomas Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
The University of Chicago
1155 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu
         A. Introduction

    Intellectual property spurs innovation by raising the rewards for discovery, but it does so by

granting a monopoly in the event of discovery. According to classical theory (cf, Nordhaus,

1969), the additional research and development (R&D) induced by a patent must be weighed

against the output loss from monopoly. This implies that patent expirations always lead to

increased competition, lower prices, and higher market output. However, Figure 1 suggests that

the predicted reductions in output do not always materialize. The figure depicts the percentage

change in quantity—comparing the month before patent expiration to the month after—for a

sample of US pharmaceutical products whose patents expired between 1992 and 2002.1 For

about 40% of drugs, output actually falls after patent expiration, and expands only modestly for

many others.

    The figure suggests there may be more to a patent expiration than a change in price-

competition alone, and consequently more to the welfare effects of intellectual property (IP)

protection. We argue that the standard price-competition theory of IP must be extended to

include non-price competition, which may induce monopolists to provide more or less quantity

than competitive firms. For example, while monopolists have incentives to restrict quantity

through higher prices, they may also have different incentives to promote their product through

advertising, to provide durability of goods, and to vertically integrate with upstream or

downstream firms. All these types of non-price competition can change the efficiency impact of

IP regulations.


1
  Specifically, the figure shows the percentage decline and growth in prescriptions filled,
between the month before and the month after expiration. More detail on the data is given in
Section C.2.



                                                 1
    Motivated by this idea, this paper examines the effect of marketing — a particularly

important form of non-price competition — on the static and dynamic efficiency of patents. For

example, patent expirations decrease returns to marketing by each individual firm. As a result,

they can actually reduce output, if they decrease marketing effort by enough to offset the impact

of price reductions. Therefore, unlike the standard theory of price-competition effects, a theory

of non-price competition implies that patent expiration has ambiguous effects on static welfare.

Moreover, output growth may not always be a good indicator of welfare gains from patent

expiration. If advertising is of value to consumers, overall welfare may be lower under

competition, even though output is higher.

    To assess the quantitative importance of the theory, we estimate the impact of marketing on

welfare using patent expirations in the US pharmaceuticals market, between 1990 and 2003. The

drug industry is a natural choice for empirical analysis of R&D and marketing, because it is

among the highest-spending industries in both categories. The industry spends approximately

15% of sales on marketing, and 16% of sales on R&D.2 By comparison, about 2% and 3% of US

GDP are allocated to advertising and R&D, respectively.

    We use the timing of patent expirations as instruments for the supply-price and marketing

incentives of a molecule. Changes in supply induced by patent expiration allow us to identify

the demand for drugs as a function of both price and advertising effort. The estimated demand

function implies that in the short-run (one-year), output falls after patent expiration, because the

reduction in advertising more than offsets the reduction in price. During this short-run period,

consumers are estimated to lose at least $400,000 of welfare each month, for each drug whose


2
  Many drugs have seen dramatic increases in direct-to-consumer advertising (DTC) since the
change in FDA guidelines on such advertising took place in 1997.



                                                  2
patent expires. Not until several years have elapsed does the price effect dominate the reduction

in advertising. In the long-run, patent expiration benefits consumers, but the reduction in

advertising reduces the total gain to consumers from patent expiration by about 15%.

   Our project integrates a great deal of work that has separately considered advertising and

intellectual property. Kaldor (1949) provides a seminal analysis of advertising, along both

positive and normative dimensions. Dixit and Norman (1978) and Telser (1962) provide an

initial discussion of the meta-preference approach to welfare analysis of advertising developed

formally and systematically by Becker and Murphy (1996). There are also summary treatments

of advertising in Tirole (1988), Shapiro (1982), Schmalensee (1996), and Bagwell (2005).

Several papers have studied the unique aspects of pharmaceutical advertising: Rosenthal et al

(2002) study direct-to-consumer advertising, while Bhattacharya and Vogt (2003) provide an

interesting analysis of how brand loyalty and patent incentives explain time-series patterns in

drug pricing and provision. In the economic analysis of intellectual property, an equally

extensive literature tackles the question of how to generate efficient R&D effort. There is a large

literature analyzing the effects and desirability of public interventions affecting the speed of

technological change, including: Nordhaus (1969), Loury (1979), Wright (1983), Judd (1985),

Gilbert and Shapiro (1990), Klemperer (1990), Horstman et al (1993), Gallini (1992), Green and

Scotchmer (1995), and Scotchmer (2004). Less effort has been devoted to studying the joint

problem of advertising and intellectual property, even though the interaction between these two

factors has many important normative and positive implications, particularly for the marketing of

pharmaceuticals in the US.

   The paper proceeds as follows. Section B considers the impact of non-price competition on

the welfare effects of patents, and outlines the full impact of patents on static and dynamic



                                                  3
welfare. Section C estimates demand as a function of price and advertising, and uses these

estimates to infer changes in consumer surplus from patent expiration. Section D concludes.


          B. Non-Price Competition and Intellectual Property

This section analyzes the positive and normative effects of intellectual property, accounting for

its effects on both price and marketing, which resembles other types of non-price competition in

its effects on static welfare.


        B.1 The Welfare Effects of Patents

Define WM and WC as the annual level of aggregate welfare (social surplus) under monopoly

and competitive provision of an invention, respectively.              The net present value of welfare

associated with a patent of length τ years is then given by:

                                 W (τ ) = v(τ ))WM + [v(∞) − v(τ )]WC

Here, v(τ ) is the date zero present value of a claim that pays one dollar for τ years. Similarly,

the net present value of profits associated with this patent is given by:

                                            π (τ ) = v(τ )π M

where π M represents monopoly profits. To represent technological investment induced by

intellectual property protection, define the increasing, differentiable, and strictly concave

function m(r) as the probability of discovering an invention, as a function of R&D investments

r . The privately optimal R&D associated with a patent of length τ maximizes expected profits:

                                   r (τ ) = arg max r m( r )π (τ ) − r                         (1)

This level of R&D induces the expected social surplus:

                                   ES (τ ) = m(r (τ ))(W (τ ) ) − r (τ )                       (2)


                                                    4
The dynamically optimal patent length that maximizes expected welfare is therefore given by the

following first-order necessary condition:

                                  rτ [mrW (τ ) − 1] ≥ m( −Wτ )                           (3)

The marginal gains from raising R&D levels through IP (left-hand side) are made up of the extra

R&D induced by the patent extension, rτ , times the net social value of that extra R&D,

mrW (τ ) − 1 , which consists of the marginal social gain from more invention net of research

spending. The optimal patent life equates this marginal benefit of an extension with the marginal

cost of the extension, which is the welfare cost of an additional year of monopoly (on the right-

hand side). The marginal cost of patent expiration, the loss of welfare once the technology has

been discovered, is given by the static welfare effect

                                      dW dv
                                         =    [S M + π M − SC ]
                                      dτ   dτ

where S M and SC are consumer surplus under monopoly and competition, respectively. As we

now show, introducing non-price competition into this problem may reverse the standard welfare

conclusions about patents, because it is no longer clear that S C > S M + π M .


       B.2 Quantity and Welfare Effects of Patent Expirations under Monopoly

Consider first the standard case of price-competition only. Quantity rises from the monopoly

                                                                                    dW
level x M to the competitive level xC and the welfare effect of patent expiration      is negative,
                                                                                    dτ

due to the deadweight loss from monopoly. In other words, patent-extension has a positive cost

that needs to be weighed against its dynamic benefits.

       Now consider monopoly provision under advertising, taking as a framework the

canonical Dorfman-Steiner model (Dorfman and Steiner, 1954), in which profits are


                                                   5
                                    π ( a, x ) = p ( a, x ) x − c ( x ) − a

In this model, profit-maximization implies equality between the share of revenues devoted to

advertising, and the ratio between the advertising and price elasticities, as follows:

                                                aM   ε
                                                    = a
                                                px M ε p

Defining c * as minimum average cost, this model implies the total effect of patent expiration on

quantity:

                                         x ( a M , p M ) − x (0, c * )

After patent expiration, there is perfect competition, under which advertising has no benefit for

any given firm. At this time, no advertising takes place, and pricing is cost-based. It follows that

patent expiration has two offsetting effects on quantity: expiration raises quantity due to lower

prices, but reduces quantity due to the reduction of advertising.

       If we denote by W (a, p) the welfare under a given level of advertising and price then the

welfare effect of patent expiration is

                                         W (a M , p M ) − W (0, c)

In this model, monopoly always provides too high a price, but it may provide a higher and more

efficient level of advertising. This is consistent with the empirical evidence, which suggests that

competitive drug manufacturers invest virtually nothing in marketing. In this case, patent

expiration has offsetting effects on social efficiency, and the welfare effect of patent expiration

becomes indeterminate. If the under-provision of advertising outweighs the price increase of

monopoly, then S M + π M > SC . If this is true for all points in time, patents are costless, and

optimal patent length is infinite. Moreover, welfare effects from IP cannot be determined by



                                                      6
quantity changes alone. Given price-competition alone, output growth after patent expiration is a

necessary and sufficient condition for a gain in static welfare. However, the introduction of non-

price competition breaks the equivalence in sign between output changes and welfare changes.

Though expirations always lower profits, the effects of expirations on consumer surplus are more

difficult to characterize generally, and will depend on the nature and function of advertising, as

we discuss below.

       B.2.1 Advertising as Information
We first consider the consumer welfare effects of patents when advertising confers no direct

utility upon consumers, but provides only information about a product. In this case, advertising

does not affect the true value of a good to consumers, but it does affect its perceived value. Let

p ( x, a ) represent inverse demand as a function of quantity (x ) and advertising (a ) . Price falls

in quantity, but rises in advertising. We denote by p(x) the full information demand curve

defined by

                                         lim a →∞ p( x, a) = p ( x), ∀x

The change in welfare due to patent expiration is given by the change in true social surplus —

that is, social surplus evaluated at the true, fully informed demand curve. We can define this as

Δ NC , according to:

                                                      xC
                          Δ NC ≡ SC − S M = ∫ p( q)dq − ( pC xC − p M x M )                   (4)
                                                  xM



Since advertising moves observed demand towards the true demand curve, we can use observed

consumer surplus as a lower bound on the true consumer surplus, according to:

                                 xC              xC
                             ∫xM
                                      p( q)dq ≥ ∫ p( q, a M )dq iff x C ≥ x M
                                                 xM




                                                           7
Based on this inequality, our empirical analysis uses the observed change in consumer welfare as

a bound on the true change in welfare. In particular, we construct the estimator:

                        ~                  xC
                        Δ NC ≡ SC − S M = ∫ p( q, a M )dq − ( pC xC − p M x M )                           (5)
                                              xM


~
Δ NC ≤ Δ NC if and only if patent expiration raises quantity. This allows us to infer the direction

of change in consumer welfare from our estimator.

               ~                                                       ~
    1. Suppose Δ NC < 0 . This implies that x C < x M . Therefore, 0 > Δ NC ≥ Δ NC .

               ~                                           ~
    2. Suppose Δ NC > 0 . This implies x C > x M , and 0 < Δ NC ≤ Δ NC .


     B.2.2 Advertising as Consumption
When advertising confers utility directly, the consumer welfare effect of patent expiration

satisfies

                                   xC                   xM
                Δ C ≡ S C − S M = ∫ p ( q, aC )dq − ∫        p ( q, a M )dq − [ pC xC − p M x M ]
                                  0                     0



Consider the case when a monopoly advertises more but at higher prices:

                                        a M ≥ aC , p M ≥ pC                                         (6)

Under these conditions, it is possible that patent expiration can raise output while still lowering

welfare: the decline in price raises output and welfare, but the reduction in advertising has a

direct negative effect on welfare. If the welfare cost of reduced advertising exceeds the gain

from extra output, ex post welfare can fall with patent expiration. On the other hand though, it

continues to be true that a reduction in output signals a reduction in (gross) ex post welfare,

because advertising always falls with patent expiration. Output growth is therefore a necessary,

but not sufficient, condition for a welfare gain.




                                                    8
       These results can be easily illustrated by Figure 2, which depicts the change in gross

surplus that occurs at patent expiration, when advertising provides utility. In that case, a patent

expiration lowers price and shifts demand inward. Regions G and L show the respective gain

and loss in gross social surplus attributable to a simultaneous reduction in advertising and price.

Note that region G exists only if output rises with the reduction in advertising and price.

Therefore, if output contracts upon expiration, welfare is always decreased. If output expands,

the welfare impact is ambiguous and depends on the respective sizes of G and L. When

advertising has value in itself, therefore, care must be taken when inferring changes in welfare

from changes in output. For example, it is possible that the optimal patent life is infinite, even

when patent expiration increases output.

       Another possibility raised by marketing and similar forms of non-price competition is

differential marketing to consumers with different willingness to pay.               While price

discrimination may be difficult, discrimination through marketing is much easier. This applies to

the promotion of drugs to doctors, called “detailing”, in pharmaceutical markets. Differential

advertising across may act as a form of price discrimination. Since advertising cannot be resold,

it is more easily implemented than traditional forms of price-discrimination. Thus, advertising

may shrink the pricing inefficiencies that arise because the monopolist cannot price-discriminate,

and thus lower the marginal cost of patent extension. Discriminatory advertising may lower or

even remove the dead-weight losses associated with patent monopolies.


       B.3 Quantity and Welfare Effects of Patent Expirations under Oligopoly

             Competition

The previous analysis assumed that patent expirations do not affect the prices for other goods, as

would be the case when other markets are competitive. This section analyzes the alternative case,


                                                9
where other markets may fail to be competitive. In this case, patent expiration can affect the

prices, quantities, and marketing of other, related goods.

      B.3.1 Positive Implications of Oligopoly
Consider imperfect competition between patented products, commonly referred to as

“therapeutic competition” for drugs. This type of imperfect competition represents an alternative

explanation for small or zero changes in quantity upon patent expiration.

         More precisely, consider demand functions x E ( p E , p N ) and x N ( p E , p N ) for the expiring

and non-expiring goods as determined by their two prices. Adopt the conventional assumption

that prices are strategic complements of the two firms, in the sense that the best-response

functions p E ( p N ) and p N ( p E ) are monotonically increasing, as shown in Figure 3.

        The figure shows the two upward sloping best-response functions of the firms. The

intersection is the Nash-equilibrium ( p *N , p E* ) prior to expiration.3 The horizontal function at

marginal cost represents the price of the expired good in a competitive market after the patent

has expired. After expiration, competition forces the price to marginal cost, regardless of the

other firm’s behavior. It follows that the Nash equilibrium moves to ( p N (c), c)) after expiration.

The strategic complementarity of prices implies that when one price falls due to a patent

expiration, then the price of the non-expired good will fall as well. More precisely, the effect of

expiration on the quantity of the expired good is

                                          x E ( p *N , p E* ) − x E ( p N (c), c)



3
  Substitutability is necessary but not sufficient for a lack of price response on the non-expiring drug. A
counter example to sufficiency is when demand is of constant elasticity, as in x N = A * ( p *N ) e ( p E* ) e ' . In
that case, the other price shifts the demand curve but does not affect the elasticity so that the optimal price
is the same. Best response functions are vertical and horizontal lines in pricing space of Figure 3 and
hence the price of the non-expired drug does not change at expiration.


                                                           10
Strategic complementarity limits the quantity response in the expired good, because the price of

the substitute good falls as well. Non-competitive markets for substitutes could thus represent an

alternative explanation of minimal quantity responses to patent expiration. In the extreme case of

perfect substitutes, competing goods would have to come down in price to the expired good in

order to be demanded in equilibrium. In that case, only prices would change, and quantities

would remain unchanged.

        The oligopoly model can be distinguished from the competing explanation of pure

monopoly with advertising. First, the oligopoly model implies that patent expiration always

raises quantity, but monopoly advertising implies that quantity may even fall with expiration, if

marketing falls by enough. Second, oligopoly implies that patent expiration will affect the price

and marketing effort of firms producing substitutable products. As discussed below in our

empirical analysis, we find evidence that pharmaceutical patent expiration sometimes lowers

quantity, even over very short time-horizons where demand is likely to be fixed. Second, we

find little evidence that expiration of one patent affects the price and marketing behavior of

competing firms.       Both these facts suggest that marketing may represent a more viable

explanation than oligopoly in the market for pharmaceuticals, even though it does not rule out

oligopoly as an important theory in other contexts.

      B.3.2 Normative Implications of Oligopoly
The welfare implications of oligopoly also differ somewhat from monopoly with advertising. In

the canonical case of pure monopoly, the welfare effects of patent expiration depended only on

the reduction in price of the expiring good. Under oligopoly, the welfare effect also depends on

the reduction in price of the non-expiring good. For instance, abstracting from marketing effects,

the welfare impact of patent expiration is given by W ( p *N , p E* ) − W ( p N (c), c) .




                                                      11
        Incorporating marketing creates additional links: the welfare effects of patent expiration

depend on the marketing efforts of the expiring firm and those of its non-expiring competitor.

The nature of this relationship depends on whether advertising is more or less efficient under

competition. Above, we developed the case where advertising is less efficient under perfect

competition than under a patent monopoly. An alternative, and often-considered case, is one in

which incomplete competition results in excessive advertising. Firms with patent monopolies on

therapeutic substitutes, for instance, may engage in wasteful advertising designed to steal market

share from their competitors. Patent expiration would eliminate this incentive, since firms would

no longer be able to capture the returns on their advertising efforts.              In this case, patent

expiration makes advertising more efficient.4


          C. Empirical Analysis

This section investigates the empirical impact of non-price competition on consumer welfare, in

the context of marketing in the pharmaceutical industry.              Our approach is to use patent

expirations as a means of identifying the demand curve for pharmaceuticals, where demand

depends on both price and advertising effort. These estimates are then used to calculate how

much patent expiration benefits (or costs) consumers.

        We focus on direct-to-physician marketing, which accounts for about 86% of all

pharmaceutical marketing (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2003). In this particular case, advertising

is unlikely to have direct utility benefits for consumers and is more likely to be purely

informative. As a result, we operate under the model presented in Section B.2.1.


4
  The opposite might be true if patent expiration moves the market from monopoly to oligopoly. This
would be true in the absence of therapeutic substitutes, but the presence of non-patent entry barriers that
preclude perfect competition after expiration.



                                                    12
       We begin by presenting our empirical model and approach to welfare estimation. We

then describe our data and present descriptive analyses of the relationships between patent

expiration, quantity changes, and marketing effort. Next, we discuss our approach to measuring

advertising and lay out our identification strategy. We finish with our estimated models and

welfare effects.


       C.1 Model and Approach to Welfare Estimation

The basic framework for this analysis will be the following demand function:

                          ln xit = β 0 + β1 ln pit + β 2 ln ait + φi + M (t ) + ε it           (7)

In this equation, p it is the price of molecule i in month t , x it is the corresponding quantity of

the molecule, and a it is a measure of advertising. There is also a molecule fixed-effect, φ i and a

polynomial time trend, M (t ) .

       We are particularly interested in using the demand function to ascertain the effects of

patent expiration on quantity and on welfare. It is straightforward to assess the quantity effects,

but estimating the welfare changes (in terms of consumer surplus) requires more discussion.

       The demand function (and its associated inverse demand) implies forms for the changes

in consumer surplus presented in Section B.2.1. Consider first the case without advertising,

where β 2 = 0 , and the empirical demand curve is exactly equal to consumer’s true valuations.

The change in consumer surplus is defined by:


                                  Δ≡   {∫
                                        xm
                                            xc
                                                                               }
                                                 p( q)dq − ( p C x C − p M x M )               (8)


Substituting in the logarithmic form for the inverse demand function, and integrating yields the

final expression:



                                                          13
                     ⎛ − β 0 − φi − M (t = −1) ⎞⎛ β1 ⎞⎛⎜ 1+ β1           ⎞
                                                               1       1

                                                                                             [              ]
                                                                    1+
             Δ = exp⎜⎜                         ⎟⎟⎜⎜       ⎟⎟ xC − x M β1 ⎟ − pC* xC − p M* x M                    (9)
                     ⎝            β1            ⎠⎝ 1 + β1 ⎠⎜⎝            ⎟
                                                                         ⎠

The time trend is evaluated at t = −1 , the last month of patent protection. This expression can be

calculated in the short-run and the long-run.

       Short-run consumer surplus is the gain that accrues from the increase in quantity

observed in the first few months immediately following patent expiration. The term x C is thus

defined as competitive quantity immediately after expiration.

       Long-run consumer surplus, on the other hand, is the total gain that would accrue if the

patent were never in place. Since long-run competitive quantity is unobserved, we estimate it by

assuming that the long-run competitive price is equal to marginal cost. The demand curve then

implies an associated long-run quantity, based on the estimated price elasticity of demand.

Further details on the methods for estimating short- and long-run consumer surplus appear in the

appendix.

       In the relevant case of purely informative advertising, the true expected change in

consumer surplus is given by:


                                 Δ NC =      {∫   xC

                                                  xM
                                                                                        }
                                                       p( q)dq − ( p C* x C − p M* x M ) ,                       (10)


Above, we defined the conservative bound on this quantity:

                               ~
                               Δ NC =   {∫xM
                                             xC
                                                  p( q, a M )dq − ( p C* x C − p M* x M )    }                   (11)


The functional form of the demand curve provides an explicit expression for this term:


             ⎛ − β 0 − φ i − M (t = −1) − β 2 ln a M            ⎞⎛ β 1 ⎞⎛⎜ 1+ β1                 ⎞
                                                                                  1       1
                                                                                       1+
  ~
  Δ NC = exp⎜⎜                                                  ⎟⎟⎜⎜        ⎟⎟ x C − x M  β1     ⎟ − [ p x − p x ] (12)
                                β1                               ⎠⎝ 1 + β 1 ⎠⎜⎝                  ⎟      C C   M M
             ⎝                                                                                   ⎠



                                                               14
       Finally, we can derive a measure for the value of monopoly advertising to consumers.
          ~
Define as Δadv
            NC the change in consumer surplus that would occur if the patent expired, but



advertising did not fall from its monopoly level. Define xC' as the competitive quantity that

                                                                              ~
would obtain under this counterfactual circumstance. Given these definitions, Δadv
                                                                                NC can be



calculated simply by replacing xC with xC' in the above expression. The value to consumers of

monopoly-level advertising can then be obtained as:

                                             ~      ~
                                  AdvValue = Δadv
                                               NC − Δ NC                              (13)


       C.2 Data

The IMS Generic Spectra database contains data on 101 unique molecules, whose patents

expired between 1992 and 2002.5 For each one, it reports 6 years of monthly data, which span

the interval from 3 years prior to 3 years after patent expiration. The monthly data include

prices, quantities, and advertising effort. Table 1 lists the variables we have available. Drug

quantity is available in grams. Prices (per gram) are estimated as total revenues from the drug

divided by grams of the drug sold; IMS collects both the revenue and grams data. Revenue data

are collected at the retail level (through both retail and hospital pharmacies). IMS then adjusts

the revenue data, using proprietary estimates of drug mark-ups, to estimate the implied wholesale

revenue. The result is an estimate of the wholesale price paid to the pharmaceutical company.

Therefore, in the case of a patented drug, this can be thought of as the price paid to the


5
  The full data include 106 molecules, but 5 are dropped. We drop Aventyl (Eli Lily, patent
expiry in July 1992), Prinivil (Merck, patent expiry in June 2002), and Betoptic (Alcon, patent
expiry in June 2000), because generic sales for these drugs include other branded products,
creating a measurement problem. We also dropped Bumex (Roche, patent expiry in January
1995), and Toradol (Roche, patent expiry in May 1997), both of which had a duplicate
formulation in the data.

                                                15
monopolist, rather than the price paid by insured or uninsured consumers. We also have three

measures of direct-to-physician advertising:          monthly expenditures on medical journal

advertisements, monthly visits to doctors by the company’s sales representatives (called

“detailing visits”), and the number of drug samples dispensed by representatives to doctors.

       Price, quantity, and advertising data are available separately for the branded and generic

producers of the molecule, and for the overall market. Total market price is constructed as total

revenues divided by total grams, and similarly for the branded and generic prices. In estimating

market demand, we use total market prices and quantities.

       Table 2 reports a breakdown of the 101 included molecules by therapeutic class and

advertising status. In our descriptive presentations, we call a drug “fully advertised” if it reports

some advertising activity in each of the three advertising categories we have, and vice-versa.

Not surprisingly, advertising effort is much higher for heavily used drugs: Drugs not fully

advertised account for about 28% of the molecules, but less than 10% of total revenues.


       C.3 Descriptive Analysis

An initial examination of the data reveals some interesting patterns that suggest the interplay of

quantity-restriction and advertising effects.

       C.3.1 Patent Expiration and Changes in Quantity
Figure 1 demonstrates that for about 40% of drugs, the total market quantity consumed falls in

the month immediately after patent expiration. The figure depicts the percentage change in

quantity from the month immediately prior to expiration to the month immediately following

expiration.   This suggests that patent expiration is doing more than simply removing the

monopolist’s incentive to restrict quantity. Over longer intervals of time, the proportion of drugs




                                                 16
with decreases in quantity rises, likely due to the additional effect of secular declines in the

demand for a molecule.

       Figure 4 depicts trends in price and quantity for the average drug, as a function of time

until (or after) the month of expiration. As others have noted, before expiration, price tends to

rise and quantity to fall over time. Bhattacharya and Vogt (2003) argue that this occurs because

a drug is an “experience good” in the sense that consumers have to use it before they can judge

its value. Therefore, inducing more use by lowering the price can lead to permanent increases in

consumption by creating “loyal customers.” The incentive to lure in more customers is highest

early in the life of the patent, and erodes as the month of expiration looms. This is consistent

with the trends in price and quantity prior to expiration.

       After patent expiration, the price of the branded drug remains largely unchanged, even

rising slightly, while the price of generic forms falls precipitously. Moreover, while total

quantity rises immediately after expiration, much of this gain disappears after the passage of

three years without a patent. These trends differ from those one might expect when quantity-

restriction is the only effect of monopoly, in which case prices can be expected to fall for both

branded and generic drugs, and quantity can be expected to increase.

       The deviations from the typical expectations we have about patent expiration seem at

least correlated with advertising. Drugs that are not fully advertised, according to the definition

above, tend to behave according to the standard theory of monopoly. Compare Figure 5 and

Figure 6, which show trends, respectively, for advertised and non-advertised drugs. Trends for

the less advertised drugs look fairly standard: after patent expiration, quantity rises and remains

at a permanently higher level. Moreover, the price of the branded drug falls after expiration,

although it always remains higher than the generic price. In contrast, for the more advertised



                                                 17
drugs, the brand price steadily rises after expiration, and total market quantity ends up falling

after expiration, after a brief initial rise.

        The effect of monopoly on advertising incentives is one way of understanding these

divergent patterns.      For drugs with weak or no incentives to advertise, patent expiration

eliminates the incentive to restrict quantity, but has no other effects. With advertising, however,

the patent expiration has competing effects, which can lead to ambiguous changes in total market

quantity.

       C.3.2 Trends in Advertising
Figures 7, 8, and 9 document trends in journal advertising, detailing visits, and samples

dispensed. Advertising expenditures decline throughout the life of the product, since the pay-off

to advertising falls with the length of the patent horizon. At the month of patent expiration, there

is a short-lived jump in advertising, as generic firms spend some effort publicizing their product.

In percentage terms, this jump is most pronounced in the case of journal advertising, but still

occurs for samples dispensed and detailing visits.


        C.4 Measurement of Advertising

        The nature of these three types of advertising activities differs considerably. Ideally, we

would like to estimate the impact of prices and the independent impact of all three forms of

direct-to-physician advertising.6 However, we lack enough identifying variation to estimate the

impacts of all three measures. Therefore, we focus on the estimates using samples dispensed,

which account for almost two-thirds of direct-to-physician advertising expenditures (Kaiser



6
  The IMS Generic Spectra database does not contain information on direct-to-consumer
advertising, which makes up approximately 14% of total advertising spending (Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2003).


                                                18
Family Foundation, 2003). In contrast, journal advertising accounts for roughly 2% of spending,

with detailing visits accounting for the rest.

          There are two additional empirical reasons in favor of studying samples, instead of

detailing visits, which are the other significant source of advertising spending. First, patent

expiration has less of an impact on detailing visits for a particular molecule (perhaps due to this

problem).      This makes it harder to identify the effects on demand.              In addition, samples

dispensed are more likely to be “purely informational” than detailing visits, which also provide

perquisites and gifts to individual physicians.

          To be sure, a drawback of focusing on a single advertising measure is the exclusion of

other marketing activities. However, analyzing a single marketing activity ought to provide

quantitatively generalizable insights. In a simple model, the marginal dollar spent on every

marketing activity ought to be equally valuable in terms of generating additional units of

demand.7 Therefore, the demand response generated by a dollar of spending on samples ought to

be roughly comparable to the response generated by a dollar spent on detailing, or a dollar spent

on dispensing samples.


          C.5 Identification

To identify the demand for drugs, our approach is to isolate movements along the demand curve,

as distinct from shifts of the curve itself.




7
    Specifically, if demand depends on two advertising activities, according to D ( p, A1 , A2 ) , where A1
                                                                            ∂D ∂D
and A2 are both denominated in dollars, profit-maximization implies that       =    .
                                                                            ∂A1 ∂A2



                                                     19
      C.5.1 Approach
The general strategy is to treat “large” changes in price and advertising sufficiently “close” to the

date of expiration as being related to the patent expiration, and not to shifts in the demand curve.

The trend breaks in price, advertising, and quantity are then used to calculate demand elasticities.

       To lay out this approach, consider first a formulation that treats advertising effort as

exogenous. This strategy involves estimating the following first- and second-stage equations via

instrumental variables:

                       ln pit = α 0 + α1 Expired it + α 2 ln(ait ) + φi + M p (t ) + ηit      (14)


                          ln xit = β 0 + β1 ln pit + β 2 ln ait + φi + M x (t ) + ε it        (15)


Price ( pit ) is a function of advertising ( ait ), a molecule fixed-effect ( φi ), and a polynomial in

month ( M p (t ) ). Quantity ( xit ) depends on price, advertising, a molecule fixed-effect, and a

possibly different polynomial in month ( M x (t ) ). The expiration variable identifies the break in

the polynomial trend that occurs at expiration for within-molecule changes in price and quantity.

These trend breaks, which imply percentage changes in quantity and price, are then implicitly

used to estimate the demand elasticity. Breaks in trend at the date of expiration are attributed to

the expiration itself; they are assumed independent of unobserved changes in demand and used to

estimate movement along the demand curve. Later, we will present some evidence in favor of

this identifying assumption.

       To identify the effects of endogenous advertising effort, we extend the strategy above,

which relies on changes in price and quantity at the precise moment of patent expiration. In

reality, however, the effect of expiration is not immediate. Competitors enter slowly and at an

uncertain pace, due to the vagaries of the FDA approval process, and to non-patent barriers to




                                                      20
entry like fixed start-up costs. If expiration has lagged effects, we can obtain more identifying

variation.   We adapt the expiration window strategy by considering the lagged effect of

expiration, in addition to the immediate effect. Formally, this is implemented by the following

model:

                     ln( pit ) = α 0 + α1 Expired it + α 2 ExpiredLag it + φi + M p (t ) + ηit       (16)

                         ln(ait ) = δ 0 + δ 1 Expired it + δ 2 ExpiredLag it + φi + M a (t ) + ηit   (17)

                          ln( xit ) = β 0 + β1 ln( pit ) + β 2 ln(ait ) + φi + M x (t ) + ε it       (18)

As before, Expired it is a dummy variable for the month immediately following expiration.

ExpiredLag is a dummy for the lagged effect of expiration: we consider specifications using

two months, three months, four months, and five months after expiration.

         C.5.2 Validity Tests
         The identification strategy rests on the validity of using patent expiration as an instrument

for estimating the demand for pharmaceuticals. The instrument will be valid if patent expiration

has no direct effects on the demand curve. It seems quite reasonable to assume that consumers

do not derive direct utility from a molecule being on- or off-patent, even if they may value using

branded drugs over generics. However, there may be indirect effects of patent expiration on

demand, if expiration causes competitors to respond strategically, as in Section B.3. As shown

in that section, monopolistic competitors may manipulate prices or marketing in response to a

patent expiration.

         To investigate the importance of this behavior, we run the following regression:

                               ln( S jm ) = η0 + η1 Expired im + M S (t ) + φi + κ jm                (19)




                                                           21
The dependent variable is a measure of strategic behavior — measured as competitors’ prices, or

marketing activity — either for the own-molecule, or the molecule’s competitors. We define the

set of competitors as molecules in the same (5-digit USC) therapeutic class. The explanatory

variable M S (t ) is a quartic in months until the expiration of the patent on molecule i ,8 and φ i is

a fixed-effect for molecule i . Intuitively, these regressions assess whether patent expirations

affect pricing or advertising decisions for a molecule’s competitors.

          Table 3 presents the results. Overall, patent expiration affects the pricing and marketing

behavior for a molecule itself, but has no discernible effects on the behavior of competitors in the

rest of the therapeutic class. Moreover, the class-level effects — including the molecule itself —

are smaller than the own-molecule effects, and also quantitatively consistent with the hypothesis

that competitors do not respond.

          The table has three columns: one for the molecule itself; one for the entire therapeutic

class, including the molecule itself; and one for the molecule’s competitors, where quantity is

defined as the class-level quantity minus the quantity for the molecule itself. Patent expirations

reduce price and marketing effort for the on-patent molecule, as expected. However, for price

and these three marketing measures, there is no effect on the behavior of competitors. With the

exception of the price regression, the effects for competitors are more precisely estimated than

the own-molecule effects, suggesting that the competitor regressions would be precise enough to

detect the own-molecule effects, and that wider confidence intervals cannot explain the

difference in significance. Finally, the molecules being studied comprise 30% of class-level

grams sold, on average. Therefore, if patent expiration had no effects on competitors, one would



8
    Similar results were obtained using cubic and quadratic specifications.


                                                  22
expect the class-level effects to be about 30% as large as the own-molecule effects. One can

never reject this hypothesis statistically, for any of the four measures; moreover, 6 of the 8 point

estimates are within half of one standard deviation from that 30% level.


       C.6 Naïve Estimates with Exogenous Advertising

We first present the 3-stage least squares coefficients that treat advertising as exogenous in Table

4, which reports results for 4 versions of the model. Here, we are estimating equations 14 and

15. The first two models include samples dispensed as a measure of advertising, and differ with

respect to the form of the polynomial time trend. The second two include all three measures of

direct-to-physician marketing in our data.

       The estimated price elasticities are just above 1.0 in the fully specified model and around

1.5 in the model with samples alone. The theory of monopoly predicts that the absolute value of

the demand elasticity is equal to the inverse of the monopoly markup. In the case of drugs, the

markup is approximately 80 to 90 percent, since the long-run price of generic equivalents tends

to be approximately 10 to 20 percent of the brand price at the date of expiration (Grabowski and

Vernon, 1992). This implies that the demand elasticity at expiration is predicted to be between

1.1 and 1.25. These numbers lie within one standard deviation of all four estimates.

       The first-stage estimates suggest that patent expiration immediately lowers price by six to

ten percent. This is predicted to raise quantity by slightly more. One month after patent

expiration, the model predicts that quantity will be about 9.5% higher. This number is largely

invariant across the four specifications. In the long-run, however, price falls by 80 percent.

Given the likely demand elasticities, patent expiration raises quantity by more than 80 percent.




                                                23
       In the models with only samples dispensed, the naïve advertising elasticity is around 0.12

to 0.13. Including the other measures of marketing lowers this number, but the combined effect

of increasing all marketing measures proportionally results in a similarly sized response.


       C.7 The Full Model of Advertising

The full model treats advertising as an outcome variable, as specified in equations 16, 17, and 18.

The results are given in Table 5. The table reports estimates from two different models, one

using a cubic polynomial in month, and one using a quartic. The results are reasonably stable

across the two specifications. The price elasticity of demand is estimated to be at or near unity,

while the advertising elasticity ranges from 0.32 to 0.36. Both sets of estimates imply that, for

the average molecule, total quantity falls by about 5% on net, after 5 months of patent expiration.

Our price elasticity estimates continue to be within one standard deviation of 1.1 and of 1.25.

       Theory also provides predictions on the size of the advertising elasticity; the ratio of

advertising to price elasticities ought to equal the share of advertising in sales.9 To calibrate the

elasticity, we need to calculate the share of advertising in sales for on-patent molecules.

Unfortunately, our data do not contain expenditures on samples, but we can calculate the

advertising share in revenues indirectly. The overall share of marketing expenditures in total

pharmaceutical revenue is approximately 14% (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2003). About 75% of

total revenues go to drugs that are currently on patent (Hughes, Moore, and Snyder, 2002).

Assuming that marketing is negligible for generics and off-patent drugs, this implies that

marketing is about 19% of revenues for the relevant drugs.




9
  This well-known result, often referred to as the Dorfman-Steiner Theorem, follows most simply
from the analysis of a static monopoly maximization problem (Dorfman and Steiner, 1954).


                                                 24
       Finally, our sample of drugs is more heavily marketed than the average drug, in part

because these drugs are selected to have sales throughout their product life-cycle. As such, they

will tend to be more successful than average.           To calibrate this difference, we compare

marketing expenditures on detailing in our data to that for the average on-patent drug. Overall,

29% of marketing expenditures go to detailing (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2003).                 Since

marketing expenditure is approximately 19% of on-patent drug spending, this implies that 5.5%

of on-patent drug revenues are spent on detailing. In our data, we estimate that 6.8% of revenues

are spent on detailing, while drugs are on patent.10 Along this dimension, marketing effort is

roughly 24% higher for our drugs. Applying this correction would imply that marketing is

roughly 23% of revenues for our drugs. Theory predicts the price elasticity ranges from 1.1 to

1.25. These price elasticities coupled with our rough estimates of the revenue share spent on

advertising implies advertising elasticities between 0.25 and 0.29. Our estimates are slightly

higher, but fairly close, and not statistically distinguishable from these crude predictions.

       C.7.1 Consumer Surplus from Patent Expiration
Estimating the full demand functions allows us to infer the changes in consumer surplus

associated with patent expiration, quantity restriction, and monopoly marketing. Conceptually,

we estimate three kinds of welfare changes: (1) Cost of quantity-restriction, (2) Cost of patents,

and (3) Value of monopoly marketing.




10
   We assume that each detailing visit costs $138 (Neslin, 2001). We then calculate total
spending on detailing as a fraction of total revenue for each month, and compute the mean
fraction for all on-patent drug-months.


                                                 25
          The cost of quantity-restriction is the consumer’s cost of the higher prices induced by

patents.11 The overall cost of patents, on the other hand, combines this cost with the consumer

value of increased output due to higher advertising.12 Theoretically, therefore, the cost of

quantity-restriction must always be positive, but the cost of patents may be positive or negative.

Finally, the value of monopoly marketing is the value to consumers of the marketing induced by

patents, holding price fixed.13

          We estimate each of these quantities in the short-run and the long-run. We define the

short-run as the first five months after patent expiration: the price and advertising changes that

take place over this initial period define short-run costs. The long-run welfare changes are the

total gains that would accrue to consumers in a long-run steady-state. These are computed using

the following observations: in the long-run, competition drives price to marginal cost and

advertising effort to zero. Since mark-ups in the pharmaceutical industry are 80-90%, we

assume that in the long-run, price falls by 90%, while advertising falls by 100%. More detail on

the calculation of these consumer surplus changes appears in the appendix.

          The consumer surplus calculations depend on the price and advertising elasticities, along

with the short-run impact of patent expiration on price. Our model estimates all three of these

quantities. Table 5 lists the estimated change in consumer surplus associated with each model

estimate.




11
  This is given by equation 12, evaluated at the value of xC that would obtain if patent
expiration had no impact on marketing effort.
12
     This is given by equation 12, evaluated at the actual competitive value of xC .
13
     This is given by equation 13.


                                                   26
       The per-molecule cost of quantity restriction to consumers is $2.1m to $2.5m in the short-

run. Conceptually, this means that 5 months after patent expiration, consumers receive $2.1m of

additional value per month (from one molecule) due to the reduction in price alone. This value

rises to $13.3m to $14.3m in the long-run. In other words, the price reduction delivered by a

competitive market, compared to the last month of a patent monopoly, would yield at least

$13.3m of value to consumers per month. Observe that these are all monthly costs.

       These calculations do not account for the effect of patents in encouraging advertising and

thus raising quantity. Accounting for the effects on advertising, patent expiration either has

small positive or even negative effects on consumers in the short-run.            In the long-run,

consumers still benefit from patent expiration, but by less than the cost of quantity-restriction

alone. In the long-run, competition creates $9.5m to $10m of additional value for consumers,

per month. This is approximately 30% lower than the value created by the price reduction alone.

The marketing induced by patents generates consumer surplus approximately equal to 20% of

total pharmaceutical spending. Earlier, we roughly estimated that firms spend about 23% of total

revenues for the marketing of on-patent drugs. Therefore, the value of marketing to consumers

alone — excluding the value to firms — is approximately equal to its cost.

      C.7.2 Class-Level Results
Both marketing and price reductions increase quantity for a molecule itself, but their welfare

benefits might be smaller if they “steal” business from competitors, rather than generate new

consumption among untreated patients. By replacing molecule-level quantity and price from our

earlier models with measures of class-level quantity and price, we can gain some insight into this

issue. We analyze both the entire therapeutic class, including the expiring molecule itself, and

separately analyze the “rest of the class,” excluding the molecule with the expiring patent.




                                                27
       Table 6 displays the results of this approach. It is analogous to the models reported in

Table 5. Table 6 shows that marketing effort and price reductions for a particular molecule

increase class-level consumption, but have no statistically detectable effect on consumption in

the rest of the class. On average, expiring molecules comprise 30% of class-level grams sold.

Therefore, if advertising only increases the consumption of the advertised molecule, and has no

impacts on competitors, the estimated advertising effects should be roughly 30% as large as they

were in Table 5. This would suggest a class-level advertising elasticity between 0.09 and 0.11.

Our point estimate is considerably larger than this, although we cannot statistically reject values

smaller than these levels, due to the width of the confidence interval. Taking the point estimates

at face value though would suggest positive spillovers from a molecule to its competitors.

Positive spillovers are consistent with the decrease in marketing effort, and the increase in

molecule-level price (as reported in Bhattacharya and Vogt, 2003), that occur as patent

expiration approaches. In any event, there is no evidence of market-stealing in our data. This

argues in favor of our welfare calculation approach, which treats own-molecule quantity growth

as a pure welfare gain, rather than “theft” of competitors’ market share.


       C.8 Sensitivity Analyses

We analyzed the sensitivity of our results to changes in the dynamics of patent expiration. The

models above were identified using the month of patent expiration and 5 months after patent

expiration as instruments. We also explored using 4 months, 3 months, and 2 months after

expiration as a second instrument. Using the shorter-run estimates tended to reduce the both the

size and precision of the price elasticity estimates, most of which were statistically

indistinguishable from zero. However, the advertising elasticities remained stable, as did the




                                                28
estimated welfare effects. If anything, these specification checks yielded higher estimates for the

consumer value of marketing, as a proportion of revenues. The results appear in Table 7.

       Second, we analyzed the impact of “line extensions,” or the launch of redesigned

molecules by the original patent-holder, in an effort to retain some patent protection.

Specifically, we limited our analysis only to those 37 molecules without any line extensions.

Both the price elasticity and advertising elasticity rise in absolute value, and the price elasticity

becomes borderline insignificant. However, the welfare calculations are little changed. The

value of marketing is about 19% of revenue. Considering monopoly advertising lowers the cost

of patents by approximately 30%. Both these numbers are extremely similar to our preferred

estimates.


         D. Conclusion

   Patents are generally believed by economists to be second-best methods of stimulating

innovation, because they reward it with inefficient monopoly power. However, this reasoning

neglects the impact of monopoly on non-price competition, of which marketing is a particularly

important example. Our empirical analysis of the US pharmaceutical market suggested that

considering advertising reduces the estimated long-run cost of patents by about 15%. Moreover,

in the short-run, patent expirations actually harm consumers, because the reduction in output

from decreased advertising to physicians is worth more than the increase in output from lower

prices. We estimate that the value advertising generates for consumers justifies its cost, before

even considering its value to firms. As a result of this considerable value, the costs of patents are

lower than previously believed in the long-run, and may even be negative in the short-run.

   The paper suggests several avenues of future research. First, our analysis can be generalized

to other forms of non-price competition. If the monopoly power induced by patents has effects


                                                 29
beyond price-competition — and its attendant restriction in quantity —those effects may offset

or reinforce the traditional costs of patents.    In particular, advertising—when viewed as a

complement to the good advertised—resembles quality provision more generally. Therefore,

quality competition might have similar effects on the analysis of intellectual property.

   Second, using patent-expirations as an exogenous increase in competition may prove useful

as a means of testing theories of market structure or estimating demand parameters in other

markets. For example, our data shed light on the often-debated question of whether increased

competition reduces advertising. Other predictions about the effects of market structure on

industry conduct may be tested in a similar manner.

   Third, our findings may alter the welfare interpretation of generic entry upon patent

expiration. Generic entry clearly lowers price, but it also lowers advertising. It is necessary to

consider both effects to capture the full value (or cost) of generic entry. At a minimum, our

analysis suggests that considering price reductions alone leads to an upward bias in the

estimation of welfare effects.

       In general, little is known about efficient patent design in presence of non-price

competition. More work is needed to better understand this issue, particularly in industries such

as the US market for pharmaceuticals, where output declines often result from patent expirations.




                                                 30
Appendix

This appendix describes the methods for calculating short-run and long-run consumer surplus.

Standard Consumer Surplus

In the text, we derived an explicit expression for standard consumer surplus, consistent with the

econometric specification of the demand curve:

              ⎛ − β 0 − φi − M (t = −1) − β 2 ln a m ⎞⎛ β1 ⎞⎛⎜ 1+ β1              ⎞
                                                                       1       1
                                                                            1+
      Δ = exp⎜⎜                                      ⎟⎟⎜⎜       ⎟⎟ xc 0 − x m  β1 ⎟
                                                                                    − [ pC xc 0 − p M x m ] (20)
              ⎝                 β1                    ⎠⎝ 1 + β1 ⎠⎜⎝               ⎟
                                                                                  ⎠

We define x m as the quantity in the last month of patent protection, at t = −1 .18 Conceptually,

x c 0 is the quantity that would obtain in the absence of a patent, but holding advertising fixed at

its monopoly level.

        For the short-run consumer surplus calculation, we use the change in price associated

with the short-run expiration of the patent, or α 1 from the first-stage estimating equation. This

leads to:

                                           x cshort − run = x m (1 + α1 β1 )
                                                                                                                (21)
                                            pCshort −run = p ( x cshort −run ; a m )

Operationally, p is calculated as the fitted empirical inverse demand function, evaluated at the

                                    short − run         ⎛ ln x cshort − run − β 0 − φi − M (t = −1) − β 2 ln a m ⎞
date of patent expiration, or p                   = exp⎜⎜                                                        ⎟⎟ . Note
                                    C
                                                        ⎝                              β1                         ⎠

that here, and elsewhere, we fix the inverse demand curve at its monopoly level when calculating


18
  Here and elsewhere, x c is defined as x m , multiplied by the percent change in quantity implied
by the expiration of the patent. This percent change is defined as the percent change in price
associated with expiration, multiplied by the price elasticity of demand.


                                                             31
pC . This is in order to focus on valuing the change in quantity, rather than changes in the

equilibrium inverse demand curve.                                 Our quantitative conclusions concerning the relative

importance of advertising, compared to revenues, are largely insensitive to this assumption,

which uniformly affects the levels of all the consumer surplus calculations.

                       The long-run consumer surplus uses the quantity and price that would be

associated with marginal cost production. Since marginal cost is 90% lower than the last

observed monopoly price, the long-run competitive values can be obtained as:

            xclong − run ≡ x m (1 − 0.9( β1 ) )
                                                            (22)
            pClong − run = p ( x clong − run ; a m )

Consumer Surplus with Informational Advertising

In this case, consumer surplus can be written as:

                                              ~
                                              Δ NC =   {∫
                                                        xm
                                                            xc
                                                                                                     }
                                                                 p( q, a m )dq − ( p c x c − p m x m )        (23)


The form of the demand function allows us to rewrite this as:

                     ⎛ − β 0 − φi − M (t = −1) − β 2 ln a m ⎞⎛ β1 ⎞⎛⎜ 1+ β1             ⎞
                                                                             1       1
                                                                                  1+
                                                                                          − [ pC x c − p M x m ]
          ~                                                                          β1 ⎟
          Δ NC = exp⎜⎜                                      ⎟⎟⎜⎜       ⎟⎟ x c − x m
                     ⎝                 β1                    ⎠⎝ 1 + β1 ⎠⎜⎝              ⎟
                                                                                        ⎠

This is similar to the expression above, but with a term for advertising added. We use samples in

the last month of patent protection in order to estimate ln a m ; since we are estimating the fitted

demand function, it is appropriate to use the advertising measure that is included in the

regression. We now define the short-run prices and quantities as:

xcshort − run = x m (1 + α1 β1 + α 2 β 2 )
pCshort − run = p ( x cshort − run ; a m )

The long-run prices and quantities are:


                                                                           32
xclong − run ≡ xm (1 − 0.9( β1 ) − 1.0( β 2 ) )
                                                  (24)
pClong − run = p ( xclong − run ; a m )




                         33
References

Bagwell, K. (2005). Economic Analysis of Advertising. Handbook of Industrial Organization,
      Volume 3. M. Armstrong and R. H. Porter. New York, North-Holland.

Becker, G. S. and K. M. Murphy (1996). "A Simple Theory of Advertising as a Good or Bad."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Bhattacharya, J. and W. B. Vogt (2003). "A Simple Model of Pharmaceutical Price Dynamics."
       Journal of Law and Economics 46(2): 599-626.

Dixit, A. and V. Norman (1978). "Advertising and Welfare." Bell Journal of Economics IX: 1-17.

Dorfman, R. and P. O. Steiner (1954). "Optimal Advertising and Optimal Quality." The American
      Economic Review 44(5): 826-836.

Gallini, N. (1992). "Patent Policy and Costly Imitation." RAND Journal of Economics 23: 52-63.

Gilbert, R. and C. Shapiro (1990). "Optimal Patent Length and Breadth." RAND Journal of
        Economics 21: 106-112.

Grabowski, H. and J. M. Vernon (1992). "Brand Loyalty, Entry and Price Competition in
      Pharmaceuticals After the 1984 Drug Act." Journal of Law and Economics 35(2): 331-
      350.

Green, J. and S. Scotchmer (1995). "On the Division of Profits In Sequential Innovation." RAND
       Journal of Economics 26, 20-33.: 20-33.

Horstmann, I., G. MacDonald and A. Slivinski (1993). "Patents as Information Transfer
      Mechanisms: To Patent or (Maybe) Not to Patent." Journal of Political Economy.

Hughes, J. W., M. J. Moore and E. A. Snyder (2002). ""Napsterizing" Pharmaceuticals: Access,
      Innovation, and Consumer Welfare." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
      Paper 9229. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Judd, K. (1985). "On the Performance of Patents." Econometrica 53: 567-585.

Kaiser Family Foundation (2003). "Impact of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on Prescription
       Drug Spending." Kaiser Family Foundation Publication 6084. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser
       Family Foundation.

Kaldor, N. V. (1949). "The Economic Aspects of Advertising." Review of Economic Studies
       XVIII: 1-27.

Klemperer, P. (1990). "How Broad Should the Scope of Patent Protection Be?" RAND Journal
      of Economics 21: 113-130.

Loury, G. C. (1979). "Market Structure and Innovation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 93(3):
       395-410.



                                              34
Neslin, S. (2001). ROI Analysis of Pharmaceutical Promotion (RAPP): An Independent Study,
        Amos Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College.

Nordhaus, W. (1969). "Invention, Growth and Welfare." Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Rosenthal, M. B., E. R. Berndt, J. M. Donohue, R. G. Frank and A. M. Epstein (2002).
      "Promotion of Prescription Drugs to Consumers." New England Journal of Medicine 346:
      498-505.

Schmalensee, R. (1996). Advertising. The New Palgrave. New York, McMillan Press.

Scotchmer, S. (2004). Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Shapiro, C. (1982). "Consumer Information, Product Quality, and Seller Reputation." Bell
       Journal of Economics XIII: 20-35.

Telser, L. G. (1962). "Advertising and Cigarettes." Journal of Political Economy LXX: 471-99.

Tirole, J. (1988). The Theory of Industrial Organizations. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Wright, B. D. (1983). "The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents Prizes and Research
       Contracts." American Economic Review 73: 691-707.




                                               35
      Table 1:    Monthly Molecule-Level Variables Available in IMS

Variable                       Definition
Quantity                       Grams of the drug sold by retailers
                                          1
Price                          Revenues divided by grams sold
Journal Advertising            Total cost of journal advertising space
Detailing Visits               Visits by pharmaceutical rep's to physicians
Samples                        Number of drug samples dispensed to physicians
Generic Competitors            Number of competing producers of the molecule
Note: All variables are available monthly, 36 months prior to and since expira
All data are taken from the IMS Generic Spectra database, except for "Generic
Competitors," which comes from the MIDAS database.
1
  Revenues are collected for both retail and hospital channels and converted to
reflect ex-manufacturer prices and quantities. No adjustments are made for
confidential rebates to health plans.




                                                36
Table 2:      Types of molecules represented in IMS

                                    Number of Drugs
                              Not Fully      Fully
2-digit USC Category         Advertised Advertised TOTAL
Analgesics                                         4         4
Anesthetics                             2                    2
Anti-arthritics                                    7         7
Hemostat modifiers                                 2         2
Antihistamines                                     1         1
Anti-infectives                         2          3         5
Anti-malarials                                     1         1
Neurological Treatments                 2          4         6
Gastro-Intestinal Drugs                            6         6
Bile Therapy                                       1         1
Beta-Blockers                                      2         2
Cardiac Agents                          2          4         6
Anti-neoplasm                           3          3         6
Ace-Inhibitors                          2         14        16
Anti-hyperlipidemic                                3         3
Anti-Fungal Agents                                 2         2
Diabetes Therapy                                   3         3
Diuretics                               1          1         2
Hormones                                1          2         3
Musculoskeletal                         2          1         3
Opthalmic                                          3         3
Psychotherapeutics                      4          6        10
Sedatives                                          2         2
Tuberculosis Therapy                    1                    1
Anti-viral                                         2
Immunologic                                        2
TOTAL                                 22          79       101
Notes: "Fully advertised drugs" have, at some point in their li
span, nonzero advertising in each of the three advertising
categories: journal advertising, contacts, and samples.




                                               37
Table 3: Effect of patent expiration on own-molecule, competitor molecules, and entire class.

                                 Molecule- Class-         Rest of
                                 Level     Level          Class
Dependent variable: ln(price)
         Patent expired for:
           1 month               -0.020       -0.016      0.160
                                 (0.009)**    (0.023)     (0.161)
            5 months             -0.079       -0.022      -0.071
                                 (0.018)***   (0.016)     (0.103)
         Observations            4063         6097        3766
Dependent variable: ln(samples)
         Patent expired for:
           1 month              0.010         -0.012      -0.044
                                (0.155)       (0.084)     (0.087)
           5 months             -0.342        -0.079      0.040
                                (0.155)**     (0.080)     (0.072)
         Observations           3313          5066        4487
Dependent variable: ln(visits)
         Patent expired for:
           1 month              -0.166        -0.038      0.073
                                (0.097)*      (0.080)     (0.095)
           5 months             -0.188        -0.124      -0.024
                                (0.100)*      (0.062)**   (0.055)
         Observations           4562          5912        5363
Dependent variable: ln(journal)
         Patent expired for:
           1 month              0.192         0.133       0.006
                                (0.169)       (0.092)     (0.093)
           5 months             -0.433        -0.131      0.026
                                (0.131)***    (0.075)*    (0.083)
         Observations           2364          5173        4529



Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Class-level"
regressions measure quantities in the same 5-digit USC therapeutic
class as the molecule with the expiring patents. "Rest of class"
regressions measure class-level quantities minus the molecul
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                   38
          Table 4: Estimated Demand Elasticities for Drugs.

                                            Model 1                 Model 2              Model 3              Model 4
                                  ln(price)     ln(grams)   ln(price)  ln(grams) ln(price)  ln(grams) ln(price)  ln(grams)
Expired for 1 month               -0.063                    -0.065               -0.096               -0.094
                                  (0.020)***                (0.020)***           (0.020)***           (0.020)***

log total price (revenues/gram)                -1.501                  -1.467                    -1.018                    -1.041
                                               (0.558)***              (0.534)***                (0.387)***                (0.399)***

Log total samples dispensed       0.062        0.130      0.061        0.126      0.031          0.051      0.028          0.049
                                  (0.003)***   (0.035)*** (0.003)***   (0.033)*** (0.005)***     (0.015)*** (0.005)***     (0.014)***

Log total detailing visits                                                          0.049        0.077      0.051          0.079
                                                                                    (0.008)***   (0.024)*** (0.007)***     (0.025)***

Log total journal advertising                                                       0.036        0.038        0.035        0.038
                                                                                    (0.004)***   (0.016)**    (0.004)***   (0.016)**

Time Trend                             Cubic in Month          Quartic in Month         Cubic in Month           Quartic in Month

Observations                       2276            2276         2276     2276     1034       1034       1034         1034
Notes: Table reports 3-stage least squares coefficients and standard errors using dummies for 1 month since expiration as an
instrument for ln(price). All equations include molecule-specific fixed-effects.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                             39
         Table 5: Effects of Price and Advertising on Pharmaceutical Demand


                                             Model 1                                  Model 2
                                ln(price)   ln(samples) ln(grams)        ln(price)   ln(samples) ln(grams)
Expired for 1 month          -0.015         0.313                     -0.027        0.257
                             (0.023)        (0.133)**                 (0.023)       (0.134)*
Expired for 5 months         -0.131         -0.566                    -0.100        -0.417
                             (0.023)***     (0.132)***                (0.024)***    (0.139)***
log total price (sales/gram)                             -1.004                                   -0.937
                                                         (0.480)**                                (0.530)*
Log total samples                                        0.318                                    0.360
                                                         (0.117)***                               (0.142)**
Time Trend                                Cubic in Month                          Quartic in Month

Observations                    2276          2276         2276            2276         2276         2276
Short-run cost of                         $2,500,000                                $2,100,000
 quantity restriction ($/month)
Long-run cost of                          $13,300,000                              $14,300,000
 quantity restriction ($/month)
Short-run patent cost                     -$1,000,000                                $300,000
  ($/month)
Long-run patent cost                      $9,500,000                               $10,000,000
  ($/month)
Value to consumers of                         20%                                      21%
 monopoly marketing (% of revenue)



Notes: Table reports 3-stage least squares coefficients and standard errors using dummies for months
since expiration as instruments for ln(price) and ln(samples). All equations include molecule-specific fixed-
effects. Costs of quantity restriction rep
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                            40
Table 6: Effect of price and marketing on class-level quantity.

                                     Therapeutic Class                 Rest of Class
                             ln(price) ln(samples) ln(grams) ln(price) ln(samples) ln(grams)
Expired for 1 months         -0.059     -0.003               0.267      0.298
                             (0.031)* (0.112)                (0.101)*** (0.143)**

Expired for 5 months         -0.029      -0.366                   0.015       -0.431
                             (0.033)     (0.121)***               (0.104)     (0.146)***

Log total samples of                                  0.209                                -0.055
 molecule                                             (0.123)*                             (0.455)

Log class-level price                                                                      -0.464
                                                                                           (0.721)

Log price in rest of class                            -1.348
                                                      (0.577)**

Time Trend                             Quartic in month                     Quartic in month

Observations                 3217        3217         3217        2024        2024         2024



Notes: All models include molecule-specific fixed-effects. 3-stage least squares standard
errors appear in parentheses. Class-level price is defined as total dollar sales per grams sold
in the class, and "samples" is monthly samples dispensed for the m
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                       41
Table 7: Robustness of demand analyses to dynamics of patent expiration effects.


                             ln(price)    ln(samp)   ln(grams)   ln(price)      ln(samp)    ln(grams)   ln(price)      ln(samp)     ln(grams)
 Expired for 1 months        0.041        0.395                  0.019          0.394                   0.001          0.331
                             (0.036)      (0.209)*               (0.027)        (0.160)**               (0.024)        (0.142)**
 Expired for 2 months        -0.120       -0.319
                             (0.036)***   (0.209)
 Expired for 3 months                                            -0.121         -0.413
                                                                 (0.028)***     (0.161)**
 Expired for 4 months                                                                                   -0.127         -0.426
                                                                                                        (0.024)***     (0.141)***
 log total price
 (sales/gram)                                       -0.817                                 -0.837                                 -0.802
                                                    (0.544)                                (0.529)                                (0.530)
 Log total samples                                  0.390                                  0.382                                  0.395
                                                    (0.206)*                               (0.163)**                              (0.163)**
 Time Trend                           Cubic in Month                         Cubic in Month                         Cubic in Month
 Observations                 2276      2276        2276         2276          2276        2276         2276          2276        2276
 Short-run cost of                     $2,300,000                             $2,300,000                             $2,400,000
  quantity restriction ($/month)
 Long-run cost of                   $12,900,000                               $12,800,000                            $13,000,000
  quantity restriction ($/month)
 Short-run patent cost               -$700,000                                -$1,400,000                            -$1,800,000
   ($/month)
 Long-run patent cost               $7,100,000                                $7,400,000                             $6,900,000
   ($/month)
 Value to consumers of                  35%                                       32%                                    20%
  monopoly marketing (% of revenue)

 Notes: Table reports 3-stage least squares coefficients and standard errors using dummies for months since expiration as
 instruments for ln(price) and ln(samples). All equations include molecule-specific fixed-effects. Costs of quantity restriction
 represent the gains to consumers from the short-run and long-run reductions in price resulting from patent expiration. Costs of
 patents represent the short-run and long-run gains to consumers from patent expiration, which includes the reductions in both price
 and advertising effort.
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                                        42
Figure 1: Distribution of quantity changes by molecule, from patent expiration to
one month after expiration
                100
 Percent Change in Total Grams
      0         -50 50




                                 0   20   40            60   80       100
                                               Drugs




                                                   43
Figure 2: Gross Welfare Effects of Patent Expiration




                                           44
Figure 3: Pricing Before and After Expiration




                               PN(PE)



                         Equilibrium                  PE(PN) before
                             before                   expiration
 Price of expired good




                          expiration
                             (PN* ,PE*




                                                               PE(PN) after
                         Equilibrium                           expiration
                         after
                         expiration
                         (PN(C), C)
                                                               PN

                          Price of non-expired good




                                           45
Figure 4: Trends in price and quantity for the average drug.
                                 20
 Percent Change from Expiry Date
   -60    -40     -20
                   -80    0




                                      -18   -15   -12    -9   -6   -3    0     3      6   9    12   15    18
                                                               Months Since Expiration

                                                  % Change in Total Price           % Change in Total Grams
                                                  % Change in Brand Price           % Change in Brand Grams




                                                                             46
Figure 5: Mean trends in price and quantity for fully advertised drugs.



                                   20
   Percent Change from Expiry Date
 -60     -40     -20       0




                                        -18   -15   -12    -9   -6   -3    0     3      6   9    12   15    18
                                                                 Months Since Expiration

                                                    % Change in Total Price           % Change in Total Grams
                                                    % Change in Brand Price           % Change in Brand Grams




                                                                               47
Figure 6: Mean trends in price and quantity for drugs not fully advertised.
                                    20
    Percent Change from Expiry Date
 -20     -10       0       10




                                         -18   -15   -12   -9    -6   -3    0     3      6   9    12   15      18
                                                                  Months Since Expiration

                                                      Change in Total Price            Change in Total Grams
                                                      Change in Brand Price            Change in Brand Grams




                                                                                48
Figure 7: Mean monthly spending on journal advertising.
              150
 Journal Advertising $1000
     50       0    100




                             -18   -15   -12   -9   -6   -3    0     3      6     9   12   15   18
                                                     Months Since Expiration

                                                         Total            Brand




                                                                   49
Figure 8: Mean monthly visits by pharmaceutical company representatives.



               40       30
 1000's of Detailing Visits
 10         20 0




                              -18   -15   -12   -9   -6   -3    0     3      6     9   12   15   18
                                                      Months Since Expiration

                                                          Total            Brand




                                                                    50
Figure 9:                          Mean monthly samples dispensed by pharmaceutical company



              600
 1000's Samples Dispensed
    200       0   400




                            -18   -15   -12   -9   -6   -3    0     3      6     9   12   15   18
                                                    Months Since Expiration

                                                        Total            Brand




                                                                  51
