                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            OPTIMAL LIABILITY FOR TERRORISM

                                          Darius Lakdawalla
                                             Eric Talley

                                         Working Paper 12578
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12578


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




This research was supported by the RAND Center for Terrorism Risk Management and Policy. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Darius Lakdawalla and Eric Talley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Optimal Liability for Terrorism
Darius Lakdawalla and Eric Talley
NBER Working Paper No. 12578
October 2006
JEL No. K13

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the normative role for civil liability in aligning terrorism precaution incentives,
when the perpetrators of terrorism are unreachable by courts or regulators. We consider the strategic
interaction among targets, subsidiary victims, and terrorists within a sequential, game-theoretic model.
The model reveals that, while an "optimal" liability regime indeed exists, its features appear at odds
with conventional legal templates. For example, it frequently prescribes damages payments from seemingly
unlikely defendants, directing them to seemingly unlikely plaintiffs. The challenge of introducing
such a regime using existing tort law doctrines, therefore, is likely to be prohibitive. Instead, we argue,
efficient precaution incentives may be best provided by alternative policy mechanisms, such as a mutual
public insurance pool for potential targets of terrorism, coupled with direct compensation to victims
of terrorist attacks.

Darius Lakdawalla
The RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
darius@rand.org

Eric Talley
Professor of Law & Co-Director
Berkeley Center in Law
Business and the Economy
UC Berkeley (Boalt Hall) School of Law
887 Simon Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-7200
etalley@law.usc.edu
1       Introduction

The four years since the September 11 terrorist attacks have wrought monumental changes. In

addition to its staggering human toll, 9/11 effected a profound transformation in America’s prior-

ities concerning national security, civil liberties, and the role of law. The attacks set into motion a

social and political reshuffling as dramatic as any that this country has witnessed in the post-war

era. Much of this upheaval continues to play out today.

    Early policy debates after September 11 addressed immediate exigencies, ranging from the

appropriate governmental role in compensating those suffering losses,1 to ensuring homeland se-

curity,2 to the appropriate trade-off between national security and civil liberties.3 While these

concerns remain significant today, a new issue has emerged: the proper role of liability. Approx-

imately 60 individual claimants have opted out of the victims compensation fund (VCF),4 and

are currently pursuing their claims in federal court (Tugend, 2004). Under the Air Transportation

Safety and System Stabilization Act (which also created the VCF itself), any court adjudicating

the cases of opt-outs must apply principles drawn from state common law.5 The historical rarity

of similar terrorist acts in the U.S. has placed significant strains on courts deciding how to extend

existing common law principles to the terrorism context, making the resulting litigation relatively

unpredictable. Despite this unease, a significant amount of terrorism-related litigation is currently

moving through the legal system. As recently as October 2005, for example, a civil jury in New

York found the Port Authority principally liable for deaths and injuries resulting from the 1993


    1
       See, e.g., the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002, 116 Stat. 2322, P.L. 107-297 (Nov. 26, 2002).
    2
       E.g., the U.S. Patriot Act, H. R. 3162 (2001) (codified in scattered sections of Title 18 of the U.S. Code).
     3
       Three recent (and important) Supreme Court cases have centered on this question. See Rasul v. Bush, 542 U.S.
466 (2004); Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507 (2004), and Rumsfeld v. Padilla, 542 U.S. 426 (2004).
     4
       See Virgilio v. City of New York, 407 F.3d 105 (2nd Cir. 2005) (holding that litigation and claims under the VCF
are mutually exclusive, and that any party who makes a claim under the VCF waives all potential civil liability claims,
except possibly against the terrorists themselves).
     5
       See Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act § 408(b)(2), Pub. L. No. 107-42, 115 Stat. 230
(2001) (codified at 49 U.S.C. § 40101). The Act also contained a provision capping exposure of airline defendants in
any civil action to the level of insurance carried by the airlines. Id at § 408(a). Later, similar caps were imposed for
the city of New York, aircraft manufacturers and persons with a proprietary interest in the WTC. See Aviation Security
Act § 201(b), Pub.L. No. 107-71, 115 Stat. 597 (Nov. 19, 2001).

                                                           1
truck bomb that detonated in the basement of the World Trade Center.6

    Consequently, the policy issues underlying post-terrorism litigation deserve immediate and rea-

soned consideration, particularly because they have so far received little attention in the emerging

literature on terrorism risk. This paper attempts to fill that void, exploring whether and how civil

liability might play an important policy role in the wake of the 9/11 attacks, and in anticipation of

others like them.

    At first blush, civil liability seems an odd vehicle for addressing the harms stemming from ter-

rorism, particularly since the agents most directly responsible—terrorists themselves—are usually

beyond the reach of civil and criminal courts. If the law is unable to provide effective incen-

tives for those who cause harm, common sense would suggest civil liability is a poor institutional

choice. Indeed, even though litigation is capable of accomplishing other goals such as spreading

risk, without a meaningful deterrence role litigation is a weak substitute for more direct insurance

mechanisms (which are capable of spreading risk more efficiently).

    Closer inspection, however, yields a more complex view of liability’s role. While the threat

of liability often cannot deter terrorists directly, it can shape the incentives of those who experi-

ence harm. For example, the threat of legal liability may induce various types of “targets” (such

as bridges, buildings, public fora, and attractions) to alter their precautions on behalf of licensees,

permittees, and other bystanders likely to be affected when a target is successfully attacked. More-

over, compensation through liability can influence individual “passers-by” in their decisions about

whether to venture out into public fora, where to congregate, and how to protect themselves if

exposed. Finally, the credible threat of liability may affect the strategic interaction among targets

that “compete” to avoid the attention of terrorists. Because terrorism is a central locus for numer-

ous precautionary activities in the face of a collective risk, it is perhaps less surprising that courts

are seriously entertaining the viability of these claims.

    In this paper, we ask whether and how civil liability can improve incentives to take precautions
    6
     The case is now proceeding to the damages phase, where the Port Authority will face joint and several liability
exposure. See New York Times, Port Authority Found Negligent in 1993 Bombing, Section A, Page 1, Column 6
(October 27, 2005).

                                                         2
against terrorism. To frame the discussion, we introduce a formal, game-theoretic model of be-

havior in which terrorists, potential targets, and other collateral victims all take the legal system

as a given and take actions that maximize their own individual expected welfare. (We assume

throughout that terrorists are beyond the reach of the civil courts.7 )

    Our analysis suggests that, while it is possible to envision a liability system that promotes fully

efficient precautionary incentives, its contours would tend to diverge substantially from existing

doctrinal templates in at least three ways. First, the “flow” of damages payments may differ con-

siderably from what seems plausible under existing tort law: for example, we demonstrate that

under relatively general assumptions, an ‘optimal’ liability regime would not allow bystanders to

recover against a damaged target for their injuries; however, such a regime might well allow the

affected target to recover against affected bystanders. Second, an optimal liability regime would

allow damaged targets and unaffected targets to sue one another, and, under plausible assumptions,

would allow unaffected parties to state a claim for damages against affected targets. Finally, under

an optimal liability regime, it is generically the case that the amount of damages defendants would

pay need not coincide with the actual harm suffered by the plaintiff, and might prescribe damages

even if the plaintiff has suffered no harm.

    From a pragmatic perspective, the unconventional forms of liability that our analysis suggests

likely render an efficient civil liability regime an unattractive and politically infeasible approach,

particularly if some alternative mechanism could provide similar incentives. Therefore, we argue

that a more direct and plausible mechanism for efficiency would be a form of social insurance

(not unlike the 9/11 victims’ compensation fund, but without the ability to opt out). Indeed, such

a scheme would more naturally decouple compensation from harm (Choi and Sanchirico, 2002),

and would have the added benefit of spreading risk more efficiently than liability.


    7
      We also assume that the state plays a limited role of establishing the applicable legal doctrines (and potentially
helping to underwrite public insurance). In particular, we do not inquire whether the liability/insurance landscape
affects governmental policy decisions that may affect terrorist activity. See, e.g., Levmore and Logue (2003), who
argue that such exposure, in the context of terrorism, is unlikely to have significant effects on governmental action ex
ante.

                                                           3
1.1 Basic Intuition

While the formal analysis appears later, it is worthwhile to explore the intuitive underpinnings of

our argument here. There are three sets of externalities presented by terrorism. Addressing them

all would create an unwieldy and likely infeasible liability regime, but failing to correct them all

leaves inefficient decisionmaking in place.

   The first externality is the conventional one that a target (such as the owner of an office building)

may not do enough to protect a collateral victim (such as a passer-by) who might be injured in

the event of an attack.    On its own, this motivates the most intuitive form of liability rule, in

which a target owes a duty to compensate a collateral victim. If the building is an efficient harm-

avoider, such a liability rule encourages the building to take due care in ensuring the safety of those

inside and around it. If this were the only incentive problem, the solution would be standard and

straightforward.

   However, the strategic behavior of terrorists subverts the effectiveness of this simple liability

rule. Since terrorists’ payoff likely increases in the number of casualties they inflict (see the discus-

sion on page 18), collateral victim patronage increases the risk faced by targets. Patrons, however,

do not account for the way their actions “draw fire” onto targets or each other. The result, even

in the absence of any liability rule, is inefficient over-patronage of targets by victims. Introducing

liability payments from targets to victims generally exacerbates this externality. Therefore, while

there may be corrective justice or insurance rationales for compensating individual passers-by, and

reasons to encourage targets to invest in safety, decoupling these transfers from one another may

well be efficiency-enhancing.

   Moreover, strategic terrorists also create incentive problems that involve targets’ interactions

with one another. The simple liability rule posited above does not correct this problem. If terrorists

are strategic maximizers, then the protection decisions of one target can significantly affect the

risk faced by others, even if thousands of miles away. For example, erecting a new building in

a high-risk zone will “draw fire” away from other structures, yielding benefits to their owners.


                                                   4
Conversely, a decision by an existing target to self-protect by hardening itself may make other

buildings more attractive targets. As a result, targets under threat from terrorism might either

overinvest or underinvest in protection. If liability is to address these incentive problems, it must

afford legal claims between affected targets and unaffected targets.

    Given these incentive problems, we find that the optimal liability regime8 has three key features.

First, it forces targets to internalize the losses of individual victims, but optimally redirects all of

those payments to a third-party (in the case of our model, unaffected targets). Redirection avoids

exacerbating the over-patronage problem. Second, it forces victims to pay for the risk they draw

onto targets and each other, but also redirects at least some portion of these payments toward third

parties. Finally, it requires targets to internalize any externality risk they impose upon one another

(and their respective populations of individual victims). The combination of legal actions that

would support the above set of transfers, as noted above, would present significant implementation

difficulties within our current court system.

    Our analysis contributes to the literature in a number of ways. Primarily, it builds on a grow-

ing literature concerning terrorism externalities and, more generally, crime externalities. Several

authors have observed that investments in observable crime-prevention or passive avoidance of

crime-ridden areas shifts crime risk onto others (Clotfelter, 1978; Shavell, 1991; Hui-Wen and

Png, 1994; Freeman et al., 1996; Hakim and Rengert, 1981; McNamara, 1994; Newman et al.,

1997). These negative externalities to protection are perhaps even more pronounced in the context

of terrorism (Woo, 2002b; Lakdawalla and Zanjani, 2005).

    Complicating this strand of analysis is the existence of important positive externalities. Ayres

and Levitt (1998) have pointed out that unobserved protection against crime may also have positive

spillovers, since others in a close proximity may also benefit from precautionary acts. Similarly,

Kunreuther and Heal (2003) have discussed the case of “interdependent security,” where self-

    8
      By optimal, we implicitly wish to convey something less than first best – in which the terrorist’s activity level
could be directly controlled by the courts/regulatory system. Our benchmark for social optimality, then, is whether
the liability system can implement activity levels by victims and targets that are socially optimal constrained by the
impossibility of regulating terrorist actors.

                                                          5
protection by one target directly reduces risk for others. For example, effective baggage screening

by one airline lowers risk for all other airlines to which a passenger might connect. In addition,

Keohane and Zeckhauser (2003) have noted that if terrorists prefer to strike densely populated

targets, avoiding such areas has positive externalities. While these and related observations have

also been applied to the study of terrorism insurance (Gron and Sykes, 2002; Lakdawalla and

Zanjani, 2005; Levmore and Logue, 2003) and public policies to deter terrorism (Powell, 2005),

the literature has not specifically considered the appropriate role for liability alongside (or in lieu

of) insurance. We attempt to fill that void here.

    Our analysis also contributes to another strand of literature in law and economics, which con-

cerns the difficulty of using liability rules to regulate non-contractible “cooperative” investments

among self-interested parties (e.g., Holmstrom, 1982; Che and Hausch, 1999). In such contexts,

it is frequently impossible for simple liability schemes to induce efficient investments absent some

mechanism that “busts the budget” between the investing parties – i.e., a joint tax in the event of a

loss and/or a joint subsidy in the event of a gain.9 Although a popular theoretical mechanism for

busting the budget in litigation contexts is through “decoupling” (e.g., Polinsky and Che, 1991),

where the defendant’s payment may be larger or smaller than the plaintiff’s recovery, it is often

difficult to implement in practice. Our analysis reveals that complex litigation may function as a

form of “stealth” decoupling without requiring additional apparatus to bust the budget. In settings

involving an overlapping series of multi-sided investments, complex litigation may provide a way

to “decouple” the rents created/destroyed within a particular multi-sided investment, redirecting

them in the form of damages to another party to the litigation (who plays no role in the joint invest-

ment problem at hand, but might in others). In some situations (such as the framework we study),

an optimal system of budget-balanced, strict liability payments exists, even though such a system

would be suboptimal were we to constrain our analysis to a single joint investment problem within

our framework.

    9
     See, e.g., Cooter and Porat (2002) (exploring the notion of “anti-insurance”), or Schwartz and Watson (2001)
(exploring renegotiation costs as a potential source of efficient commitment in contractual settings).

                                                       6
1.2 Caveats and Preview

There are two caveats to our analysis that deserve explicit mention before proceeding.                           First,

we abstract from the effects of risk-aversion by considering risk-neutral actors. Although this as-

sumption simplifies our technical analysis considerably, there are other, more substantively central,

reasons for it. If liability is to play a role independent of public and private insurance provision,

it must be by improving the incentives of actors who might otherwise externalize costs and ben-

efits onto others. Risk-aversion would produce an additional insurance “rationale” for a liability

regime, but it would be a spurious one, as this role is best played by an active insurance market.

In our estimation, then, the unique role of legal liability should be to shape incentives, while the

insurance market is the best vehicle for spreading risk.

    The second caveat to our analysis is that we assume terrorists to be beyond reach of the courts.

To be sure, there may be some situations where perpetrators of terrorism are subject to civil or

criminal litigation, such as the convictions of Oklahoma City domestic terrorists Timothy McVeigh

and Terry Nichols, or the recovery against the Libyan government for the PanAm bombing over

Lockerbie, Scotland. Although adding this possibility would be relatively simple, we have chosen

not to do it for three reasons. First, it is inconsistent with what most believe to be the most central

and salient characteristic of most (though certainly not all) terrorist acts: the lack of effective

jurisdiction over those most responsible for the harm.10 Second, even if some of the assets of

terrorists were reachable through the tort system, they are likely to be limited relative to the size of

the harm, effectively making terrorists judgment-proof. Finally, even if terrorists’ attachable assets

were significant, there would be little of interest left to study here, since the resulting framework

would lend itself to a more standard economic analyses of tort law (Shavell, 1987).

    Our analysis proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we briefly explore the relevant legal issues

   10
     It should be noted that currently, a civil lawsuit brought by survivors of the 9/11 attacks is moving forward
against alleged financiers Osama Bin Laden’s al-Qaeda terror network and Afghanistan’s former Taliban regime.
Those accused include the country of Sudan, three members of the Saudi royal family, various Islamic charities, along
with seven financial institutions and the Bin Laden family’s Saudi construction firm. Even if this suit ultimately
succeeds (on vicarious liability grounds), it is doubtful that in general the financiers of terrorism are well placed to
monitor and deter terrorists themselves.

                                                           7
surrounding terrorism litigation, and conclude that two sorts of civil liability claims seem at least

plausible (though still highly uncertain) under common law tort templates: Victims (such as by-

standers and owners of nearby structures suffering collateral damage) might sue attacked targets

for inadequate precaution; and attacked targets themselves might sue unaffected targets for “ex-

cessive” precautions. Other types of claims range from exceedingly speculative to absurd, and

therefore would probably be unavailable under existing tort principles.        In Section 3, we then

move to characterize the socially efficient liability regime in this environment. We demonstrate

that while there exists a scheme that replicates the social planner’s optimal allocation, it neces-

sitates transfers that are starkly inconsistent with the forms of liability that appeared plausible in

Section 2. We illustrate, nevertheless, that such transfers can be replicated (perhaps more plausi-

bly and efficiently) outside of the judicial system, through public and private insurance schemes.

Section 4 considers various caveats and extensions to our analysis, while Section 5 concludes. (An

Appendix to this article contains the proofs of the various claims).



2    Terrorism and Tort Law

As noted in the introduction, the 9/11 litigation has invited courts to play precedent-setting roles

in determining how to allocate private action recovery rights in the wake of a terrorist act. In

fulfilling this role, courts can be justifiably expected (and are indeed required by statute) to fit

plaintiffs’ claims into conventional tort law doctrines. This institutional constraint should not be

overlooked in our own analysis: For if an otherwise ”optimal” civil liability system contradicted

established doctrinal templates, then it is unlikely to be a serious policy candidate in practice. This

section, therefore, briefly explores exactly when and how pre-existing tort doctrine would likely

constrain the civil liability in practice.

    We consider four types of civil litigation: (1) suits brought by harmed individuals (such as

bystanders) against affected targets (such as buildings); (2) suits brought by targets against one

another; (3) suits brought by targets against harmed individuals; and (4) suits brought by unaffected

                                                  8
targets against affected targets.11 We conclude that (1) is easily justified and (2) may be plausible,

but that (3) and (4) are decidedly poor fits.



2.1 Harmed Individuals Against Attacked Targets

Likely the most standard form of civil liability claim following a terrorist attack would come from

harmed individuals (or their heirs) against the physical targets of terrorist attacks, alleging inad-

equate precaution. In such a claim (as with most tort actions), a successful plaintiff would have

to prove (a) that the defendant owed a duty to undertake reasonable steps to protect the safety and

well-being of victims; (b) that the defendant breached this duty; (c) that this breach actually and

“proximately” caused harm to the victims; and (d) that such harm can be reflected in provable

damages.12

    Some of these elements are likely indisputable in the wake of a terrorist act. For example,

the damages suffered by the various victims of the 9/11 attacks have been well-documented: the

Victims Compensation Fund alone has paid out more than $38 billion to victims (Dixon and Stern,

2004).     Moreover, assuming it were well-understood how (and whether) terrorists respond to

precautions, one could likely articulate a reasonable standard of care for target-level precautions,

and perhaps even make plausible inferences about whether a failure to undertake them caused the

victims’ injuries.

    Plaintiffs might face a less trivial challenge proving that a defendant’s “duty” extended to ex-

traordinary terrorist acts (as opposed to general issues of building safety). Although modern courts

interpret the duty requirement relatively broadly, a number of states have recently begun to con-

strain defendant’s ambit of duty in certain circumstances. For example, a number of courts limit

the application of duty to risks that are not reasonably foreseeable,13 and others have eliminated the


   11
      As noted above, we are excluding claims against terrorists themselves and the government. See supra TAN - .
   12
      The approach is slightly different for products liability claims (such as those filed against Boeing). The differ-
ences, however, are not material for our discussion.
   13
      See, e.g., Strauss v. Belle Realty Co., 482 N.E.2d 34, 36 (N.Y.C.A. 1985); Washington v. City of Chicago, 720
NE2d 1030 (Ill. 1999).

                                                           9
concept of duty from situations involving inherently risky activities by the victim (such as skiing,

attending baseball games, or operating a firearm).14 In principle, such limitations could apply to

terrorism claims as well.

    Another potential challenge that individual plaintiffs are likely to face is one of proximate cau-

sation. Unlike “actual” causation (which only inquires whether the defendant’s negligence played

a substantial factor in bringing about the harm), proximate cause limits exposure to situations

where there is a direct and natural connection between the defendant’s action and the resulting

harm.     One important proximate cause limitation in conventional tort cases occurs when an un-

likely or exogenous act by a third party intervenes in the causal chain between the defendant’s

actions and the plaintiff’s injury.15 Similarly, in the terrorism context, defendants would likely

contend that an interceding decision by a strategic player (a terrorist or rogue nation) would dis-

able individual victims from recovering from the targets of terrorist acts.16 Although “duty” and

“proximate cause” are conceptual cousins,17 there is a large procedural distinction between them.

The doctrine of duty is one that a judge usually rules on before a case ever reaches a jury (a so-


   14
       See Hamilton v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 750 N.E.2d 1055 (2001) (holding that gun manufacturers owe no duty to
victims of gun violence); see generally Esper and Keating (2005).
    15
       In a well-known products liability case, for example, a plaintiff sued an automobile manufacturer to recover on a
manufacturing defect that caused the plaintiff’s spare tire to fall off his SUV while driving on the freeway. Although
initially unharmed, the plaintiff was injured when a third party’s vehicle rear ended the plaintiff’s vehicle while he
was retrieving the tire. The New Jersey Court of Appeals reversed a trial court judgment for the plaintiff, holding that
the intervening act of negligence (both of the victim and of the third party driver) was sufficient to break the chain
of causation begun by the manufacturing defect. Yun v Ford Motor Co., Sup. 276 N.J. Super. 142, 647 A.2d 841
(1994); See also Brown v. United States Stove Co., 98 N.J. 155, 171-5, 484 A.2d 710 (1984) (manufacturer relieved
of liability if superseding intervening cause).
    16
       See, e.g., Port Authority of N.Y. and N.J. v. Arcadian Corp., 189 F.3d 305 (3d Cir.1999); Gaines-Tabb v. ICI
Explosives USA, Inc., 160 F.3d 613 (10th Cir.1998); In re Korean Air Lines Disaster of September 1, 1983, No.
83-3442, 1985 WL 9447, 1985 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17211 (D.D.C.1985).
    17
       Both doctrines frequently focus on unforeseeable occurances in the chain of events leading to a plaintiff’s injury.
Indeed, this spillover is evident in perhaps one of the most well-known cases in American tort law: that of Palsgraff
v. Long Island Railroad 162 NE 99 (1928), where a plaintiff’s injury had been caused by an unlikely chain of events
sparked by the defendant’s negligent actions. Writing for the majority, Justice Cardozo held that the case could not
go forward, since the type of harm suffered was not reasonably foreseeable, and thus there was no duty owed. Writing
in dissent, Judge Andrews viewed the case as one involving proximate causation. To this day, there is not general
agreement about how to classify this case.
   It is worth noting that Esper and Keating (2005) criticizes the spillover of the foreseeability doctrine on exactly these
grounds. One potential difference, cited by Judge Hellerstein, is that in the duty context the foreseeability inquiry is a
general one, while in the proximate cause context, it focuses on a specific chain of events that gives rise to a particular
type of injury.

                                                            10
called “issue of law”). The proximate cause determination, in contrast, is almost always submitted

to a jury to decide (an “issue of fact”). Consequently, prospective plaintiffs would almost certainly

rather litigate foreseeability issues at the proximate cause stage (with the benefit of discovery and

a jury).

    Over the longer term, would either the duty or the proximate cause doctrines create a significant

constraint on suits by individual victims against physical targets? Perhaps, but we are skeptical.

Indeed, neither doctrine seems to constitute a categorical barrier against post-terrorism litigation of

this sort. And moreover, the actual individuals making claims such claims (at least thus far) have

been permitted to put forth broad conceptions of duty and probable cause, and lawsuits against the

WTC towers are proceeding apace.18 While the trial court’s broad view of duty and coausation

will survive appeal is not clear, but at the very least American tort law appears to have the flexibility

to allow for such cases (at least in principle).

    A similar analysis pertains to “collateral” targets (such as buildings on juxtaposed parcels)

that suffer damage because of their proximity to the primary target.          Such cases bear a close

resemblance to the individual-on-target case described above. Indeed, in many respects, collateral

targets are indistinguishable from individual victims who find themselves at the scene of an attack.

Consequently, in our analysis below we will tend to treat suits brought by collateral targets as

equivalent.



2.2 Attacked Targets Against Unaffected Targets

A second conceivable tort cause of action might involve suits by damaged targets against other

undamaged targets, possibly even those thousands of miles away. Unlike the first set of cases, this

form of litigation is more of an ill fit within the modern tort regime. However, there is some limited

support in precedent for liability if the adversely affected target could establish that the unaffected

target’s precautionary acts imposed negative externalities by diverting terrorists to relatively less


   18
        In re Sept. 11 Litig., 280 F. Supp. 2d 279, 298 (S.D.N.Y. 2003).

                                                            11
protected targets. In particular, one area of law that allows for such claims is the doctrine pertaining

to liability for harm due to surface runoffs and flooding.                  Indeed, property owners have long

taken measures to protect their land holdings against flood damage (such as building culverts and

dykes). Such measures, however, are helpful largely because they externalize the risk of flooding

to adjoining properties, somewhat akin to the manner in which hardening of a target throws risk

onto less protected targets.

    In the context of surface water runoff, courts have created some limited rights of suit, though

such rights vary tremendously by jurisdiction. Some states adhere to something known as the

“common enemy” doctrine, which shields any landowner from liability from neighboring flood

damage and imposes all the risk on adjoining landowners to either self-protect or reach a com-

mon agreement.19 Another group of states, in contrast, have staked out the opposite side of the

spectrum (something frequently identified as the “civil law” rule)20 imposing strict liability to his

neighbors when his actions to protect his land cause harm to his neighbors.21 Finally, a third set

of jurisdictions have opted for the more moderate course (the “reasonable use” doctrine22 ), allow-

ing owners to take precautions to protect their land up to the point where their marginal expected

benefit is smaller than the marginal social cost of the protection.23 Although still a minority posi-

tion (embraced in just under ten jurisdictions), it is widely perceived to be growing quickly in its

influence.24

   19
      See, e.g., Keys v. Romley, 64 Cal.2d 396, 50 Cal.Rptr. 273, 412 P.2d 529 (1966); Yonadi v. Homestead Country
Homes, Inc., 35 N.J.Super. 514, 114 A.2d 564 (App.Div.1955), petition denied 42 N.J. Super. 521, 127 A.2d 198
(1956); Butler v. Bruno, 115 R.I. 264, 341 A.2d 735 (1975); Carland v. Aurin, 103 Tenn. 555, 53 S.W. 940 (1899).
   20
      The name emanates, apparently, from the fact that the only civil law jurisdiction in the US, Louisiana, is credited
with being the first state to embrace it. See Orleans Navigation Company v. New Orleans, 1 La. (2 Mart. [O.S.]) 214
(1812).
   21
      These two approaches, sometimes in modified variations, appear to have been adopted in just over twenty states
each each. See Keys v. Romley, supra (counting jurisdictions); and Annot. 93 A.L.R.3d 1193, 1207-11 (1979).
   22
      Though a relatively recent phenomenon nationally, the original seeds of the reasonable use doctrine can be found
in New Hampshire during the 19th century. Swett v. Cutts, 50 N.H. 439 (1870); Bassett v. Salisbury Manufacturing
Co., 43 N.H. 569 (1862).
   23
      See Enderson v. Kelehan, 226 Minn. 163, 32 N.W.2d 286 (1948); Armstrong v. Francis Corp., 20 N.J. 320, 120
A.2d 4 (1956); Pendergrast v. Aiken, 293 N.C. 201, 236 S.E.2d 787 (1977); Butler v. Bruno, 115 R.I. 264, 341 A.2d
735 (1975); Annot. 93 A.L.R.3d 1193, 1216-21 (1979).
   24
      It is also beginning to infiltrate the other two doctrines, which in some jurisdictions have begun to embrace some
components of fault.

                                                          12
   Thus, target-on-target liability claims – while probably a long shot – are at least plausible

sorts of claims, particularly in states that have embraced more liberal analogical counterparts in

riparian law. At the same time, however, courts in these states would have to be convinced to draw

these analogies, and plaintiffs would still have to surmount the duty and proximate cause hurdles

discussed above.



2.3 Attacked Target Against Harmed Individuals

A third potential sort of claim involves a suit brought by a damaged target against individuals (such

as bystanders) who were harmed by the terrorist act. Once again counterintuitive, such a claim is

at least conceivable in principle (in light of the discussion above): A large population of individuals

congregating at a target, the argument goes, presents a natural attraction for terrorist attention, if

terrorists care (inter alia) about how many individuals an attack might reach. While individual

victims recognize the fact that their presence at a site marginally increases the odds of a terrorist

act, they do not fully internalize the additional cost that their presence imposes on the target itself

(or on each other), which is also subject to enhanced risk of attack. Consequently, the argument

goes, affected targets argue that the risk of attack was substantially caused (or at least enhanced)

by the presence of victims at the site.

   Notwithstanding the conceptual analogy to target-on-target claims, target-on-individual claims

are much less plausible in practice, for a number of reasons. First, in order to proceed against in-

dividuals, it would probably be necessary to file a separate action against each one, a process that

imposes substantial fixed costs on the target plaintiff for each suit filed. The extent of damages that

the plaintiff has suffered as a result of each individual defendant’s actions are likely to be both

speculative and small in magnitude, since any individual victim imposes only incremental risks on

a target. It therefore seems plausible that the cost of filing suit against each bystander victim defen-

dant would greatly exceed the prospective damages that a plaintiff-target might reasonably expect




                                                  13
in such a suit.25 Second, to the extent that individuals are in a contractual relationship with the

targets (such as employees and lessees at the WTC), the target can use the terms of such relation-

ships to regulate her exposure by limiting the extent to which these contractual counterparties are

present on site.26 Finally, and perhaps most saliently, because of the human element of tragedy that

attends death and injury of individual victims, it would almost certainly be politically unpalatable

for a target-plaintiff to proceed against a population of sympathetic victims, notwithstanding what

optimal deterrence theory may dictate. It is telling that to our knowledge, no such actions have

actually been filed in the 9/11 litigation — yet another more direct indication of the implausibility

of such claims.27



2.4 Unaffected Targets Against Attacked Targets

Finally, and for the sake of completing the permutations at play, one might consider the possibil-

ity that unaffected targets could bring suit against attacked targets. Here, it is difficult to imagine

what tort theory an unaffected target might have at its disposal. Indeed, unaffected target-plaintiffs

would face a seemingly insurmountable burden demonstrating that they suffered any harm what-

soever (either actually or proximately); similarly, such a plaintiff would be unable – virtually by

definition – to prove damages. Add to this the politically unsavory notion of an undamaged target

collecting from a damaged one, and it seems relatively certain that actions such as this will fail.



2.5 Synthesis and Analytic Typology

Our analysis of existing templates in tort law has been necessarily brief, but it does generate a

general framework for thinking about the likely tort claims that harmed individuals and targets
   25
       These problems become even more intractable under a negligence standard. Indeed, because numerous victims
are likely to act independently of one another in an uncoordinated fashion, it would be difficult to determine which sub-
population of defendants was responsible for violating the negligence standard – i.e., that point at which the marginal
social cost of an additional victim at a site exceeds the marginal social benefit. See section , infra.
    26
       This argument, obviously, does not apply to bystanders, passers-by, and others not in contractual privity with the
target – a distinction we revisit below.
    27
       Although not discussed in the text, it also seems quite implausible (and self-defeating) for harmed individuals to
make claims against one another for overpopulating a site.

                                                          14
are likely to encounter after a terrorist act. First, for most courts wading into this terrain, it is

overwhelmingly likely that the terrorist actors themselves cannot be made to answer for their own

activities, limiting the court’s response to a type of “second-best” allocation of rights among the

terrorists’ victims and targets (actual or potential). Second, suits by harmed individuals against

affected targets appear to be the most viable jurisprudentially, but they are likely to face stiff

challenges on both duty and proximate cause grounds. Third, suits by damaged targets against un-

affected targets for alleged excessive precautions are unorthodox, but find at least some plausible

analogical templates within existing case law. Here too, though, duty and proximate cause argu-

ments may present significant obstacles, depending on jurisdiction. Fourth, it appears extremely

unlikely (for both practical and economic reasons) that damaged targets can sue individual victims

for “overpopulating” the site and drawing terrorists’ fire. And finally, it seems wholly implausible

that unaffected targets could bring successful claims against attacked targets.

   How, then, are courts likely to resolve the uncertainty regarding duty and causation? Based on

a doctrinal analysis alone, it is difficult to make predictions with absolute certainty. However, the

doctrines discussed above are thought to rest heavily on policy considerations about the nature and

effects of liability. And, one important set of policy considerations concerns how liability affects

individual incentives, and in turn allows policymakers to navigate a large set of trade-offs between

social costs and social benefits implicit in acts of terrorism precautions. In the section that follows,

then, we posit and analyze a formal model of behavior that makes these costs and benefits explicit.

   Before proceeding, however, we pause briefly to consider the role of contractual relations

among the potential parties.     As noted above, at least some individuals harmed by a terrorist

attack are likely to be in a contractual relationship with the target. In such situations, at least

where the contractual vehicle functions well, the terms of their contract may be able to deal with

at least some of the collective action problems between the aforementioned parties. Entry fees,

rental/lease terms, capacity restrictions, conditions of occupancy, office management, and other

contractual mechanisms allow the parties to affect – either directly or indirectly – a large set of



                                                  15
precautionary activities at a given target without the aid of tort law. In contrast, other parties,

such as bystanders, are not in a contractual relationship with targets (or one another), and tort law

is likely to be a more effective vehicle for completing the market. In addition, there may yet be

other parties (such as subway or food court patrons), who are in a limited contractual relationship,

which may not be sufficiently rich to allocate terrorism risk reliably.

     In what follows, then, we will tend to distinguish between (1) individuals who are in either no

contractual privity with targets or a relatively monolithic one, from (2) individuals who have a rela-

tively nuanced contractual relationship with targets. To the extent that the latter group specifically

contracts with terrorism risk in mind, courts may wish simply to effectuate those risk allocations.

We therefore treat this latter group in what follows as roughly coterminous with the “target” in the

analysis that follows, concentrating principally on the former group, who we label as individual

“victims.”28



3        An Incentive-Based Model of Terrorism, Precautions, and

         Liability

As noted in the previous section, an important goal of liability policy is to provide individuals with

efficient incentives in a “second-best” world where the perpetrators of terrorism are beyond courts’

jurisdiction. While pure incentive problems are not the only policy goals — problems of efficient

risk-bearing and the provision of public goods like national security are also significant factors —

incentive-provision is both important in the overall policy landscape and uniquely amenable to a

liability solution. In this section, we explore the incentive problems created by terrorism and how

a liability system could solve them.

     Our analysis considers a number of different types of actors: Actual or potential targets hit by

a terrorist attack; collateral targets (such as adjacent buildings) that are not targeted themselves but
    28
     Notably, to the extent that targets and their contracting parties do not account for the welfare of bystanders or
other targets, courts may still wish to impose liability on them as a collective unit.

                                                         16
suffer significant damage from their proximity to the affected target; individual victims (such as

vendors or employees) who are in contractual privity with targets; and victim by-passers who are

not in contractual privity with targets. To simplify, we group with “Targets” all agents in con-

tractual privity with the primary targets of terrorism, under the assumption that they will allocate

their joint risks efficiently amongst themselves.29 We also group collateral targets with bystanders,

since their legal claims would be similar (see above), and since neither is likely to be in contractual

privity with the targets. We will refer to these groups generically as “Victims.”30

    As already noted, a key assumption is the impossibility of reaching the terrorists themselves.

Also, and as already noted, we exclude as impractical any suits brought against an individual victim

for his/her incremental contribution to the likelihood of an attack. With these caveats in mind, our

formal analysis proceeds in three stages. First, we develop an economic environment in which

terrorists, targets, and victims interact with one another. Second, we characterize equilibrium

behavior within this framework in the absence of liability and describe its welfare effects. And

finally, we ask whether a prudently designed liability system could improve upon this equilibrium

in welfare terms. In order to focus solely on incentives (rather than insurance), we assume that all

players in our model are risk-neutral.



3.1 Framework

Consider a single terrorist group contemplating whether to attack one or more of N particular

targets. The targets are assumed to be evenly spaced along a circle of (normalized) circumfer-



   29
       This group includes owners of buildings, landmarks, shopping centers, government offices, well-known business,
and the like, that might be the locus of a terrorist’s targeting activities. It may also (depending on the nuance of their
contractual relationship) include lessees, employees, and the like. As noted in the text, there is perhaps less to be
gained by tort claims when complete contracts can be written by rational, welfare-maximizing agents.
    30
       This definition abuses terminology somewhat, since all affected individuals/groups/entities can be appropriately
thought of as ‘victims’; we have used a narrower definition here to distinguish between primary victims (“Targets”)
and secondary victims (our use of “Victims” stated in the text). The key distinction is that targets can directly control
the level of protection against terrorism, while victims cannot, save for relocating themselves away from high-risk
areas. Consistent with the discussion in note 29, victims are assumed unable to write complete ex ante contracts with
targets.

                                                           17
                                               ©1         N
                                                            ª 31
ence 1 and have respective locations of          N
                                                   , ..., N
                                                             . Successful attacks depend on planning and

preparation. To that end, terrorists invest in preparation against each target i, denoted as ri , where

i = 1, 2, ..., N. The terrorist group has total resources R to allocate among attacking targets, as

well as a non-violent activity (e.g., political rallies, bake sales, etc.) that yields an expected payoff

of Γ(A), where Γ is twice differentiable, increasing, and strictly concave. Terrorists allocate their

resources to maximize their expected utility, defined below.

    In the event of a successful violent attack, a potential target is assumed to suffer a loss L,

assumed (for simplicity) to be identical across targets. In addition, however, each target i may

also have vi victims present on site. From the attack, the terrorist group gains utility of B(L, vi )

for each target i that is successfully attacked, where B (.) is assumed to be increasing in both its

arguments.

    The assumption that terrorists value casualties can easily be reversed or relaxed, with pre-

dictable consequences for our analysis. However, assuming terrorists to prefer casualties is both

plausible and important in generating incentives that are difficult for courts to align. Even be-

fore September 11, terrorism experts observed modern religious terrorists’ lack of compunction at

mass murder, and tendency to much more extreme forms of violence than terrorists of earlier times

(Hoffman, 1998). This tendency has been reinforced by the hardening of government assets at

home and abroad, which has caused terrorists to turn their attention to “softer” targets where they

can inflict mass casualties (Woo, 2002a). The nature of modern extremist groups, coupled with

the decreased relative cost of hitting densely populated civilian targets, has resulted in terrorism

that seeks mass casualties as a means of gaining publicity and producing shock (Simpson, 2004).

Finally, it is worth noting the lack of evidence that modern terrorist groups take steps to minimize

casualties. Terrorists target crowded public areas like bazaars, public transit, and the like.32

    Targets can reduce their probability of loss by investing in self-protection, but their decision

problem is influenced by the behavior of terrorists and victims. In particular, the probability of
   31
     This distribution is not relevant to the terrorists, but is to the victims, as we describe below.
   32
     The only major exception to this pattern is the case of ethnic terrorists, who seek solidarity with their fellow
ethnic group and thus may avoid inflicting casualties on them (Hoffman, 1998).

                                                         18
a successful attack against target i is a function of terrorist preparation ri and target protection

si , as in ρ(si , ri ), where we make the intuitive assumptions that ρs < 0, ρr > 0, ρss > 0 and

ρrr < 0. We also assume that self-protection measures thwart the marginal effectiveness of terror

investments, so that ρrs < 0. Against a “harder” target, terrorists have to spend more resources to

increase their probability of success by a given amount. Victim behavior influences the incentives

of terrorists to attack a particular target. Given the anticipated decisions of victims and terrorists,

targets minimize the expected sum of protection costs, uncompensated losses, and damages (if

any) that must be paid to victims and/or other potential targets.

    Finally, “victims” also suffer in the event of an attack if they find themselves near (or inside) an

affected target. In contrast to targets, however, victims have no control over the on-site protection

decisions of targets. The only way victims can protect themselves is to locate in safer areas. Vic-

tims’ initial locations are assumed to be distributed uniformly around the unit circle, and indexed

by k ∈ (0, 1]. They can choose to “stay at home” or patronize one of the N targets. They derive

utility G0 > 0 from their outside option of staying home. The spatiality of the model reflects the

fact that victims might have heterogeneous preferences across location, even holding terrorism risk

constant. Patronizing any target i provides the payoff of G > G0 , but requires her to “travel” the
         ¯       ¯                                ¡¯       ¯¢
distance ¯k − Ni ¯ , and to bear travel costs of γ ¯k − Ni ¯ . We assume that γ (0) = 0, γ 0 > 0, and

γ 00 > 0. Consequently, γ is invertible, and we therefore define the function θ (y) to denote γ −1 (y)

.33 Subsidiary victims maximize the net payoff from their patronage decision, taking account of

both travel costs and uncompensated injury from possible terrorist attacks (described in more detail

below).34

    Figure 1 below captures the sequence of the game. Because target decisions are most likely

                                                                                                           ¡ 1 ¢
   33
       Note that θ (0) = 0, θ0 > 0, and θ00 < 0. We also make a technical assumption that G − G0 < γ 2N           , so that
the victims who are furthest away from any target will simply choose to stay home, even in the absence of terrorist
risk. Relaxing this assumption, we conjecture, has little effect on our results.
    34
       Our framework implicitly assumes that victims capture all the gross surplus (G) from their decision to patronize
a target. This assumption seems natural, since the lack of a contractual relationship makes it difficult for the target to
extract any of the victim’s surplus. Nevertheless, all of our results would follow if we assumed that the target captured
some portion of the victims’ surplus (so long as the patronizing victims as a whole retained some complementary
portion of it).

                                                           19
to be durable (e.g., building a skyscraper), we assume that primary targets move first, and that

they each install their self-protection level si upon moving. After observing target self-protection,

victims move second, setting aggregate patronage levels, vi , for each target. After observing both

self-protection measures and patronage at each target, terrorists move last. We assume that the

actions taken by each actor are observable to all involved. Note that this description fully defines a

sequential game under complete information.



3.2 Equilibrium and Welfare in the Absence of Liability

To analyze equilibrium behavior in this game, we begin by characterizing predicted play in the

benchmark case where no party can seek compensation through the tort system. This reveals the

externalities that an optimal liability regime must address, but it is also a plausible outcome in its

own right, as pending terrorism litigation may ultimately prove unsuccessful. To characterize the

equilibria of the game, we employ standard backward induction techniques, beginning with the

terrorists, then moving to the secondary victims, and then finally moving to primary targets.


3.2.1   Terrorists

Terrorists observe ~s = {s1 , ..., sN } and ~v = {v1 , ..., vN } , and allocate their own resources ~r =

{r1 , ..., rN } to solve the following problem:

                                                   N
                                                   X
                                  max Γ(A) +             ρ(si , ri )B(L, vi )
                                  {~
                                   r,A}
                                                   i=1
                                             N
                                                                                                  (3.1)
                                             X
                                  s.t. A +         ri ≤ R
                                             i=1


Given the concavity of ρ in ri , for any given {~s, ~v } the first order conditions of this problem are

both necessary and sufficient for a unique maximum, and are as follows:


                             Γ0 (A) = ρr (si , ri )B(L, vi ), ∀i ∈ {1, .., N }                    (3.2)


                                                    20
                                         Time


                            Victims
                            Victimsdecide
                                     decide                   Nature
                                                               Nature
                              whether
                               whethertoto                  determines
                                                             determines
Legal
LegalRegime
      Regime                   venture
                                venture                   which
                                                           whichtargets
                                                                   targets
 Determined
 Determined                  out/where
                              out/wheretoto              are successfully
                                                          are successfully
                                locate
                                 locate                      attacked
                                                              attacked
                                                                         Victims/targets
                                                                          Victims/targets
                                              Terrorists
                                              Terrorists
               Targets
               Targetsmake
                        make                                                may
                                                                             mayutilize
                                                                                   utilize
                                            decide
                                             decidewhere
                                                      where
                protection
                 protection                                              liability
                                                                          liabilitysystem
                                                                                     system
                                               totofocus
                                                    focus
                 decisions
                  decisions                                                   totoseek
                                                                                   seek
                                              attention
                                                attention                 compensation
                                                                           compensation

                                     Figure 1: Sequence of moves.

The interpretation of these conditions is fairly standard. The terrorists allocate resources so that

the expected marginal productivity of investments is equal across all targets and the non-violent ac-

tivity. Thus, for example, when one target increases its own protection, it becomes marginally less

attractive to terrorists. This shock to their rates of return then induces terrorists to shift resources

toward their other alternatives: attacking different targets and investing more in the nonviolent ac-

tivity. Similarly, if a specific target is patronized by more victims, then that target becomes more

attractive to the terrorist group, causing it to shift resources marginally away from other targets and

the nonviolent activity, and toward the more-patronized target.

    Formally, these intuitions can be summarized in the following lemma.

Lemma 3.1. Under an optimal allocation of resources by the terrorist group, and for a given

{~s, ~v } , ri is uniquely defined, strictly decreasing in si and v−i , and strictly increasing in s−i and

vi . Moreover, for all j, A is strictly increasing in sj and strictly decreasing in vj .

    The uniqueness follows directly from the global concavity of the terrorists’ decision problem,


                                                    21
conditional on victim and target decisionmaking. The effect of the underlying parameters on ter-

rorist behavior is proven in Lakdawalla and Zanjani (2004).35 Perhaps the most important aspect

of Lemma 3.1 is the fact that the resource allocation for a given location i can turn, in part, on

actions taken by victims and targets at different locations (−i). For example, enhanced protection

efforts by a remote target (s−i ) can shift risk toward target i as the terrorist group removes marginal

resources from the better-protected target and reallocates them to others. Similarly, greater patron-

age at a remote target (v−i ) can shift risk away from target i as the increased patronage makes the

remote target more attractive, and the terrorist group attempts to increase its resource expenditures

there.

    In what follows, we shall refer to these cross-target effects as “risk-shifting,” since activities

at one target tend to shift risk onto (or away from) other targets. In contrast, the changes that

patronage/self-protection have in channelling terrorist efforts into (or away from) nonviolent activ-

ities we will call “deterrence,” because it reduces the total level of investment in violent terrorism

that society must bear. Both target protection and victim precaution have risk-shifting and deter-

rence effects. Target self-protection both enhances deterrence on the margin (a positive externality)

and shifts some marginal risks onto other targets (a negative externality). Similarly, a reduction in

victim patronage contributes to deterrence (a positive externality) and shifts risk onto other targets

(a negative externality).

    Analysis of the terrorist’s first order conditions also yields the following result:

Lemma 3.2. Under an optimal allocation of resources by the terrorist group, and for a given
            ¯ ¯ ¯P               ¯     ¯ ¯ ¯P              ¯
            ¯ ∂ri ¯ ¯       ∂r−i ¯     ¯ ∂ri ¯ ¯      ∂r−i ¯
{~s, ~v } , ¯ ∂s i
                   ¯ > ¯ −i ∂si  ¯ and ¯ ∂vi ¯ > ¯ −i ∂vi ¯ ∀i.


    Essentially, Lemma 3.2 states that deterrence and risk-shifting are generally always present

simultaneously. Self-protection by a target reduces terrorist activity against that target by more

than the additional activity it diverts to other targets. Thus, while target hardening does shift

risk, it has a net deterrent effect in the aggregate. Similarly, victim patronage transfers risk to
   35
        Lakdawalla and Zanjani (2004) proves the result for si ; the result for vi is symmetric.

                                                             22
other targets, but it also draws resources away from the non-violent activity, and thus erodes net

deterrence in the aggregate.


3.2.2   Subsidiary Victims

Having characterized the unique optimal choice for the terrorist group, we now consider how

subsidiary victims behave in light of the terrorist’s anticipated strategy profile. It is important

to distinguish precisely between victims’ internal costs, and the costs that they externalize onto

targets. The latter externalities would form the basis for an optimal liability scheme, if one is to be

formed.

    Recalling the incentives and cost structure faced by each victim, each victim considers what

target (if any) she will visit during the period, an action we denote by h. For each victim at location

k, h (k) = i denotes a decision by that victim to spend time at target i. In addition, victims can

choose to spend time away from all targets (i.e., they “stay home”), an activity we denote by

h (k) = 0. Thus, the action set for victims is given by h (k) ∈ {0, 1, ..., N } . It is easily verified
         R
that vi = h(k)=i dk denotes the size of the sub-population patronizing target i, for i ∈ {1, ..., N } .

   As noted above, victims receive payoff G from patronizing any target (rather than staying
                                           ¡¯       ¯¢
home), but must also bear travel costs of γ ¯k − Ni ¯ , to patronize that location. In addition,

however, all victims suffer personal losses should their patronized target be successfully attacked

(in addition to any loss suffered by the target itself). Each subsidiary victim spending time at that

target suffers a negative shock D to her welfare. The expected payoff to victim k from patronizing

target i ∈ {1, 2, ..., N } is
                                       µ¯      ¯¶
                                        ¯   i ¯¯
                                        ¯
                                  G − γ ¯k − ¯ − ρ (si , ri ) D                                  (3.3)
                                            N

while the net payoff for the outside (safe) activity remains constant at G0 . Note, however, that

victims do not account for the losses of targets, even though they may be partly responsible for the

risk that targets face.

    Assuming that all targets have a positive number of victims (which will be confirmed in equi-


                                                  23
librium), the identity of the “marginal” victim, k ∗ , who is indifferent between patronage at target i

and staying at home, is given by the following expression:36

                              µ¯      ¯¶
                               ¯ ∗ i ¯¯
                               ¯
                    G − G0 = γ ¯k − ¯ + ρ (si , ri (v1 , ..., vN )) D, i = 1, ..., N                          (3.4)
                                   N


This expression implies that victims located within the radius θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri (v1 , ..., vN )) D)

of target i will patronize it. Note that the right-hand side of the above expression is strictly increas-

ing in k ∗ , so the interval [−k ∗ , k ∗ ] is uniquely defined. Aggregate patronage of each target i is

then given by37 :

                                  vi = 2θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri (−
                                                                →
                                                                s ,−
                                                                   →
                                                                   v )) D)                                    (3.5)

    All else equal, victims will tend to move toward more protected targets and avoid less protected

ones. Moreover, since an increase in protection by any one target decreases aggregate risk, it will

also increase the aggregate number of victims who patronize at-risk targets. Formally, we have:

Lemma 3.3. Under an optimal allocation of resources by the terrorist group and optimal choices

by victims, and for a fixed {~s} , the patronage of any target i, vi , is uniquely defined, strictly
                                                                                 ¯ ¯ ¯P              ¯
                                                                                 ¯ i¯ ¯          ∂vi ¯
increasing in si and v−i , and strictly decreasing in s−i . Moreover, for all i, ¯ ∂v
                                                                                   ∂si ¯ > ¯ −i ∂s−i ¯ .


    The results of Lemma 3.3 are analogous to the argument made by Lemma 3.2. An aggregate

reduction in risk increases the aggregate number of victims choosing to venture out to targets.

This reaction is likely to have a significant effect on target activities. While, as demonstrated

above, self-protection can shift risk onto other targets, these gains come at the cost of drawing in

additional subsidiary victims, who are attracted by the enhanced fortifications. On the margin,

   36
                                                                                                    PN
       The reader will note that this set of first order conditions leaves out the constraint that i=1 vi ≤ 1. This
constraint will tend not to be binding so long as victims find it optimal to spend at least some time in the outside
activity. We will constrain our analysis to parametric contexts where this condition is satisfied in what follows.
    37
       And consequently, the total number of potential victims who pursue the safe option is:
                                                  N
                                                  X
                          v0 = 1 − Σ · vi = 1 −         2 · θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri (→
                                                                                    −
                                                                                    s ,−
                                                                                       →
                                                                                       v )) D)
                                                  i=1




                                                           24
then, targets must weigh the private benefits they receive by shifting risks and effecting deterrence,

against attracting more victims (and thwarting their own precautions) on the other.


3.2.3   Targets

We now step back to the initial stage of the game, in which primary targets have the opportunity to

make self-protection decisions. Recall that in the event of a successful attack, target i suffers losses

L, but may invest resources si to dampen the probability of a successful attack. Like the other

parties, primary targets behave strategically, and understand the nature of the subsequent structure

of the game analyzed above: i.e., once targets’ investments are sunk and observed, victims will

then optimize across locational choices, and then the terrorists will optimize across investments in

attacking targets and carrying out nonviolent political activity.

   Consequently, each target i makes protection decisions that maximize its expected payoff, solv-

ing the following:

                                    min ρ(ri (si , s−i ), si ) · L + si                           (3.6)
                                      si


This problem has the first order condition for each target i :


                                                               dri
                           ρs (ri , si ) · L + ρr (ri , si ) ·     · L + |{z}
                                                                          1 =0                    (3.7)
                           |     {z        }                   dsi
                             Direct Effect     |          {z         }    MC
                                                  Indirect Effect



The intuition behind this condition is relatively straightforward. On the one hand, increasing si

imposes a direct marginal cost of 1 on the target, reflected in the final term on the left hand side of

(3.7). On the other hand, by enhancing self-protection, the target is able to affect the probability of

an attack in both direct and indirect ways. A larger value of si directly reduces the probability of

an attack by acting on the ρ (.) function, represented by the first term on the left hand side of (3.7).

In addition, however, a larger value of si has indirect effects by altering the strategies of victims

and terrorists, and changing the equilibrium value of ri in the continuation game, represented by

the second term on the left hand side of (3.7) .


                                                    25
    Note that the direct effect depicted in (3.7) is strictly negative, and thus there are always direct

benefits to investing in precautions. However, the indirect effect is somewhat more complicated to
                                                           dri
sign, since the equilibrium partial derivative             dsi
                                                                 has multiple, countervailing effects. The decom-

position of this derivative yields the following:

                                                   −             +               +
                                              z}|{ z }| { z     }|    {
                                        dri    ∂ri   ∂ri ∂vi X ∂ri ∂vj
                                            =      +        +                                                         (3.8)
                                        dsi    ∂si ∂vi ∂si j6=i ∂vj ∂si


Equation (3.8) represents the equilibrium impact of target 1’s own protection on its own risk. In

general, the sign of this term is ambiguous: For, on the margin, a target’s own protection may not

make it safer, because it may draw in enough victims to offset the effect of protection. In any

interior equilibrium, however, the marginal impact of self-protection on terror investments must be

negative, or targets would not expend valuable resources on it. The external effects of protection

on other targets though remain ambiguous in equilibrium.
                                                                                                              dri
    By placing on ρ sufficient technical regularity conditions,38 one can show that,                          dsi
                                                                                                                    < 0 for
                                 dri                             dri
all values of si , limsi →∞      dsi
                                       = 0; and limsi →∞         dsi
                                                                       = −∞. However, these conditions are merely

sufficient for the optimal choice to be finite and strictly positive. They do not guarantee the global

concavity of the target’s problem. To guarantee concavity (and a unique local optimum), it is

necessary to make one additional assumption:


Assumption A1: The following condition holds everywhere:


                                                                                dri                  d2 ri
                        ρss (ri , si ) + [2ρrs (ri , si ) + ρrr (ri , si )] ·       + ρr (ri , si ) · 2 < 0           (A1)
                                                                                dsi                  dsi


    Condition (A1) is merely the second order condition for global concavity. It is possible to

weaken this assumption, at the expense of complicating the analysis somewhat. In particular,

violation of (A1) implies that there may be multiple local minima from which to choose, and

   38
        The derivation is available from the authors.

                                                                 26
it may be possible that the optimal protection choice might “jump” from one local minimum to

another with a perturbation in the economic environment. Assumption A prevents such jumps

from occurring.


3.2.4   Equilibrium

By construction, we have shown that for a given ~s, the optimal strategies of the subsidiary victims

and targets are uniquely defined. Moreover, we have demonstrated that the optimal si for each

target is almost always unique. We now show that, under the conditions described earlier, there is

only one symmetric equilibrium, according to the following:

Proposition 3.4. If Assumption A1 holds, there is a unique symmetric equilibrium of the no liability

game, which is characterized by (3.7), (3.5), and (3.2).

    The symmetry comes from the even spacing of targets and victims, the equal value of each

target, and the symmetric position of the targets in choosing their strategies simultaneously. Let the
                                                                                        ©              ª
symmetric equilibrium described by the above system with no liability be denoted by sN L , v N L , rN L .

In what follows, we constrain our attention in all cases to this family of symmetric equilibria.

    Intuitively, we can make a few general predictions about the efficiency characteristics of the

symmetric equilibrium. First, in the absence of any liability regime, there are likely to be too

many victims at each target, since each victim does not internalize the cost of the risk she imposes

on targets. Second, targets are likely to misallocate self-protection resources, since they do not

account for external effects on other targets, and they do not fully internalize the welfare of on-site

subsidiary victims. Hence, targets may expend too much or too little on protection (depending on

which of these effects dominates).39

    Efficiency within our model most naturally reduces to maximizing the summed total expected

payoffs of victims and targets (net of loss), conditional on the incentive compatibility constraints
   39
     These intuitions will be important for our later analysis, since they suggest that the optimal liability regime
involves forcing net payments by victims to the population of targets, and payments among targets that depend on
the net externalities associated with protection.

                                                        27
of the terrorists.40 To simplify the notation, note that the number of victims at target i satisfies
vi
2
     = ki∗ −   1
               N
                 ,   and thus target i is populated by victims over the interval [− v2i , v2i ]. Therefore, total

surplus of all victims in the neighborhood of target i (whether they patronize or not) consists of the

sum of each victim’s individual surplus:

                                   µ           ¶                    Z        vi
                                          1                                  2
                      V S (i) =                        G0 + 2 ·                   (G − G0 − γ (x) − ρ (si , ri ) D) dx        (3.9)
                                          N                              0



Target surplus consists of expected losses net of protection:

                                                                   N
                                                                   X
                                                               −         (ρ(si , ri )L + si )                                (3.10)
                                                                   i=1


      A ‘socially optimal’ allocation of resources, then, would maximize the social surplus of victims

and targets, taking as given the optimal responses of terrorists:41

                          N
                                " Z       vi                                                                             #
                          X               2
                 max             2             (G − G0 − γ(x) − ρ(si , ri )D) dx − (ρ(si , ri )L + si )                      (3.11)
                 si ,vi               0
                          i=1


subject to the incentive compatibility constraint:


                                                             Γ0 (A) = ρr (si , ri )B(L, vi )                                 (3.12)


      Constraining our analysis to a symmetric equilibrium, this problem simplifies to one of choos-

ing {v̂, ŝ, r̂} to maximize surplus for a representative target, so that the social welfare function

becomes,
                                               Z       v̂
                                                       2
                      Ψ (r̂, ŝ, v̂) = 2                    (G − G0 − γ(x) − ρ(ŝ, r̂)D) dx − ρ(ŝ, r̂)L − ŝ                (3.13)
                                                   0


     40
       Note that this formulation does not include the welfare of terrorists, which seems most natural in this context. It
also does not include any other social benefits of reducing terrorist behavior that are not visited on prospective victims
or targets. We explore the relaxation of this definition below.
    41
       Recall that our definition of social optimality takes terrorists’ actions / reactions a constraint (as they are assumed
outside the regulatory structure). Thus, in reality, this is a type of constrained second best. Observe also that we are
implicitly according equal weight to the welfare of targets and victims.

                                                                                  28
and the social planner’s problem reduces to,


                                                     max Ψ (r̂, ŝ, v̂)                                  (3.14)
                                                      v̂,ŝ



    subject to

                                             Γ0 (A) = ρr (ŝ, r̂)B(L, v̂)

    One way to conceive of the terrorist’s incentive compatibility constraint is in reduced form, so

that the planner chooses both ŝ and v̂ knowing that terrorists will react optimally, according to the

functional r̂ (ŝ, v̂). The conditions for efficiency are:



                            µ             ¶
                                      dr̂
                        − ρs + ρr            (v̂D + L) = |{z}  1                                         (3.15)
                                      dŝ
                        |              {z                }   MC of ŝ
                           Marginal social Benefit of ŝ
                    µ                                    ¶   µ        ¶
                                    v̂                            dr̂
                      G − G0 − γ( ) − ρ(ŝ, r̂)D           =   ρr       (v̂D + L) > 0                    (3.16)
                                    2                             dv̂
                    |              {z                    }   |         {z       }
                           Marginal social Benefit of v̂                    Marginal social Cost of v̂



    where                                         "        #
                                            dr̂    X dri
                                                =                  > 0;
                                            dv̂     j
                                                      dv j   r =r̂  i
                                                                   vi =v̂

                                                   "        #
                                             dr̂    X dri
                                                 =                  <0
                                             dŝ     j
                                                       ds j   r =r̂ i
                                                                   si =ŝ


    The efficient protection decision accounts for the impact of protection on total social losses

(v̂D + L), which includes both victim and target losses. The efficient allocation of victims in

(3.16) results in strictly positive surplus for the marginal victim. Comparing (3.16) to the anal-

ogous condition (3.5) characterizing private decisionmaking in a symmetric equilibrium, we see

immediately that the socially optimal level of victim patronage is strictly less than the privately op-

timal level. Indeed, when the marginal victim makes her patronage decision, she does not consider


                                                              29
the effect her presence has on the risks of others. Analysis of the problem leads to the following
                                                                                 ©                   ª
proposition, where the symmetric equilibrium in the no-liability case is given by sN L , v N L , rN L .

    The efficiency properties of self-protection decisions by targets, on the other hand, are more

complex. Protection may be inefficiently high or low, because it involves both positive externalities

for potential victims, but negative externalities on other targets. Since the private marginal benefit
                   ³             ´
                             dri
of protection is − ρs + ρr ds  i
                                   L, the key comparison comes down to whether the social marginal

benefit (which equals unity) is less than the private marginal benefit evaluated at the social opti-

mum. If social benefit is less than private benefit, targets are engaging in too much protection.

This condition is equivalent to:

                                         µ           ¶¯
                                    1             dri ¯¯
                                      < − ρs + ρr                                               (3.17)
                                    L             dsi ¯{r̂,ŝ,v̂}


On the other hand, should this strict inequality hold in the opposite direction, the targets engage in

too little protection. Simplifying this condition, we have the following:

Proposition 3.5. Absent a liability regime, and if assumption A1 holds, victims always over-

patronize targets relative to the social optimum, so that v N L > v̂. Targets, on the other hand,

may overprotect or underprotect, and in particular they over-protect (sN L > ŝ) if and only if, at

the social optimum {r̂, ŝ, v̂} :
                                         µ           ¶¯
                                    1             dri ¯¯
                                      < − ρs + ρr                                               (3.18)
                                    L             dsi ¯{r̂,ŝ,v̂}

    The condition in the above proposition can be equivalently characterized as: the external

marginal benefits of protection in equation 3.15 are negative.



3.3 Liability, Behavior, and Welfare

We now explore the equilibrium with liability rules. In order to consider the effects of liability,

suppose that target i has been successfully attacked, and has suffered damages L. Moreover, the

vi victims at the target have also suffered damages D each. We now consider each of a family

                                                  30
of compensation schemes. In each case, all targets but the attacked target must make a transfer

payment to target i in the amount of τ −i (si , s−i ). Target i, in turn, is required to make a transfer

payment θi (si , vi ) to the injured victims. (We do not consider systems under which targets bear

liability for other targets’ victims, because these are subsumed by the system we consider).42

    Perhaps the simplest form of liability to consider is a form of strict liability – transfer payments

that are mandatory upon proof of harm. We will consider a family of liability functions, in which

each target bears some responsibility for liability of an attacked target, and each target bears some

responsibility for damages incurred by its own victims. Thus, unaffected targets’ liability to an

affected target i would be given by:


                                                τ −i (s−i , si ) = αL                                           (3.19)


where the policy parameter α captures the fraction of a target’s loss compensated by other targets.

Under this formulation, the total amount received by i is therefore:

                                              X
                                                     τ −i = (N − 1) αL                                          (3.20)
                                              j6=i



The liability of the attacked target to its own subsidiary victims is:


                                                 θi (si , vi ) = βDvi                                           (3.21)


where the policy parameter β represents the fraction of an individual’s damages compensated by

the target. Note that both of these parameters can be either positive or negative, at least in theory

(though, as noted above, there may be practical limitations on expecting that β would ever take on

negative values – a possibility we address below).

    The introduction of liability rules such as those above obviously distorts both targets’ and

   42
     A payment from target B to the victims at target A can be effected by a transfer from target B to target A, coupled
with one from target A to its victims.

                                                          31
victims’ choices. In the presence of these transfers, and in the case of 2 targets, the representative

target’s strategic choice becomes:

                        "                                                                               #
                                                                          X
                max − ρ(ri , si ) · ((1 − (N − 1) α) L + βvi D) +                ρ (rj , sj ) αL + si       (3.22)
                  si
                                                                          j6=i



Consequently, the target’s optimal choice has the following first order condition:43

   µ            ¶                                                        µ        ¶
            dri                                               dvi X           drj
  − ρs + ρr       ((1 − (N − 1) α) L + βv1 D) − ρ(ri , si )βD     −        ρr       αL − 1 = 0
            dsi                                               dsi   j6=i
                                                                              dsi

                                                                                          (3.23)

    Similarly, with victims, the market-clearing conditions also change to reflect the damage pay-

ments that victims might expect. Under the above liability regime, this market-clearing condition

becomes:

                                      ³v ´
                        G − G0 − γ       − ρ (si , ri ) (1 − β) D = 0 ⇔                                     (3.24)
                                        2
                                            ³v ´
                                 G − G0 − γ        − ρ (si , ri ) D = −ρ (si , ri ) Dβ
                                             2


The terrorist’s structural conditions for maximization remain unchanged, as terrorists are assumed

to be beyond the reach of the tort system.

    Under a liability regime, then, the social planner will now anticipate these distortions and solve

the following:

                                                 max Ψ (r̂, ŝ, v̂)                                         (3.25)
                                                  v̂,ŝ




   43
        Note that in the case of α = β = 0, this condition reduces to:
                                                  µ             ¶
                                                            dri
                                               − ρs + ρr          L−1=0
                                                            dsi

which coincides with the no-liability FOC derived above.

                                                          32
    subject to


                                              Γ0 (A) = ρr (ŝ, r̂)B(L, v̂)

                                          Equation        (3.23)

                                          Equation        (3.24)


Analysis of this problem yields the following proposition:

Proposition 3.6. If the policy choice of α and β is unconstrained, and if (A1) holds, then the opti-

mal strict liability regime (α∗ , β ∗ ) is unique and implements the constrained second-best allocation

of the social planner’s problem, {r̂, ŝ, v̂} . The optimal liability regime is given by:

              ¡ dr̂ ¢               ¯
             − ρr dv̂  (v̂D + L) ¯¯
  β∗ =                              ¯
                ρ (si , ri ) D      ¯
                                      {r̂,ŝ,v̂}
              ³                ´                                               ³          P dri ´           ¯
             − ρs + ρr ds dri
                                 (L +  β   ∗
                                             v̂D)    − ρ(r   , s   )β ∗ dvi
                                                                       D     +   ρ  + ρ           (v̂D + L) ¯
                                                           i     i       dsi      s     r   j dsj           ¯
  α∗ =
                             i
                               h ³                   ´                            ³       ´  i              ¯
                                                 dri
                                                                             P        drj                   ¯
                                − ρs + ρr dsi ((N − 1) L) + j6=i ρr dsi L                                   ¯
                                                                                                                {r̂,ŝ,v̂}



Moreover, under this regime, β ∗ < 0, and thus targets always would have potential cause of action

against their subsidiary victims, but not vice versa. The net transfer of resources from unaffected

targets to affected targets is ambiguous in sign, but increases with the extent of risk-shifting: that
                           drj            dvi
is, moving inversely in    dsi
                                 and in   dsi
                                              .

    Perhaps the most surprising aspect of the above proposition is its implications for victims.

Indeed, the socially optimal liability rules require that victims reimburse affected targets in the

event of an attack, and not vice-versa. This counter-intuitive result is due to the negative externality

victims impose on targets: as noted above victims tend to free-ride off the protection investments

of targets, failing to account for the enhanced risk their patronage places on other victims and the

target itself.

    As noted in Section 2, however, it is difficult to believe that allowing a cause of action against


                                                         33
subsidiary victims is a viable policy choice for regulators. Indeed, not only will those defendants

be more likely to be judgment-proof, but they will have also suffered significant injuries (or death)

themselves, a fact that makes it difficult (perhaps prohibitively so) for a cause of action against

victims to be politically palatable. To account for this tension, we introduce one more constraint

on the regulator’s problem, in which she is confined to choosing only nonnegative values for β.

Adding this constraint to the regulator’s problem immediately yields the following proposition:

Proposition 3.7. If the policy choice of α and β is constrained so that β ≥ 0, then the optimal

strict liability regime (α∗c , β ∗c ) does not implement the constrained second-best social planner’s

optimum, but instead implements {rc , sc , vc } , where vc > v̂ and rc > r̂. Here, the optimal liability

regime is given by


                     β∗ = 0
                                 ³               ´    ³        P           ´
                                           dri                       dri
                              − ρs +    ρr dsL + ρs + ρr
                                             i
                                                                    (v̂D + L)
                                                                   j dsj
                     α∗ =       ³           ´               P      ³         ´
                                        dri                              drj
                              − ρs + ρr dsi
                                              ((N − 1) L) +   j6=i   ρ r dsi L



Under this regime, targets neither have a cause of action against their subsidiary victims, nor do

victims have a cause of action against targets. The net transfer of resources from unaffected targets

to affected targets is positive if and only if, at the social optimum,

                                          µ           ¶¯
                                     1             dri ¯¯
                                       < − ρs + ρr
                                     L             dsi ¯{r̂,ŝ,v̂}

                                                                               drj            dvi
and increases with the extent of risk-shifting: that is, moving inversely in   dsi
                                                                                     and in   dsi
                                                                                                  .

   Note that the constraints above might be too generous, relative to existing legal templates. Since

transfers from a harmed target to unharmed targets seem legally infeasible, it may be appropriate

to impose the additional constraint that α ≥ 0. Under this added constraint, if the optimal α from

Proposition 3.7 were negative, the best feasible liability structure would be no liability rules at all

(α = β = 0).

                                                     34
   The next subsection discusses some of the core intuitions behind the above two propositions.



3.4 Intuition Behind Results

The optimal liability regime is built to solve three basic problems, each of which contributes to the

form of the optimal transfer payments described above. The easiest way to understand the results

in toto is to isolate each of three market failures: (1) Failure of targets to account for the interests

of victims; (2) External effects of targets on other targets; and (3) External effects of victims on

targets and other victims. Below we show how each of these factors is captured in the above results.

We concentrate on the two target case for expositional reasons (though the results carry forward to

the N target case).


3.4.1   Accounting for Victims

The first and most conventional source of market failure is the inability of targets to account for the

interests of their subsidiary victims, absent a liability regime. To focus attention on this problem,
                                                                            dr2
we will suppose that there are no external effects of target behavior,      ds1
                                                                                  = 0, and that victim
                                               dr
behavior has no external effects on targets,   dv
                                                    = 0.

   In this case, the optimal liability transfers reduce to:


                                           αL = −vD                                              (3.26)

                                                    β=0                                          (3.27)


   In the event of an attack, the target of interest pays the unaffected target the value of victim

losses, but no other transfers are made. Victim behavior has no external effects on targets, and

target behavior has no effects on other targets. The only inefficient margin of decisionmaking is

the target’s private return to protection, which excludes the expected losses of victims from an

attack and thus fails to match the social return to protection. To correct this problem, the optimal



                                                     35
liability rule requires that the target pay for victim losses.

   Note, however, that this payment does not go to victims. In this environment, victim decision-

making is exactly efficient: victims do not shift external risk onto targets. Transfers to victims

would only be distortionary. Moreover, note that the payment being made to the unaffected target

is largely incidental. We could just as easily have required that the target pay the government a

fine equal to victim losses. In this particular case, the money received by the unaffected target has

no impact on its incentives, because the unaffected target cannot manipulate the risk of attack. In

this case, the unaffected target functions as nothing more than a repository for the payment made

by the damaged target. Therefore, this liability rule can be equivalently implemented as a fine paid

by the affected target, where the fine is set equal to the value of victim losses. This reinforces the

importance of decoupling liability for victim losses from payments to victims.


3.4.2   External Effects Among Targets

                                                                                      dr2
We now consider external effects among targets, or the possibility that               ds1
                                                                                            6= 0. Without loss of
                                                                    dr2
generality, consider the case of target substitution, where         ds1
                                                                          > 0, so that protection expenditures

by one target cause terrorists to substitute to another target. In this case, the optimal liability

transfer becomes:

                                          −1≤·≤0                             1≥·≥0
                                  z         }|             {        z         }|             {
                                                dr1                             dr2
                                        ρs + ρr ds                           ρr ds
                    αL = vD          dr2
                                                  1
                                                    dr1
                                                               +L      dr2
                                                                                  1
                                                                                      dr1
                                  ρr ds1
                                         − (ρs + ρr ds 1
                                                         )          ρr ds1
                                                                           − (ρs + ρr ds1
                                                                                          )
                      β = 0


   Since victim behavior involves no external effects, there continues to be no reason to transfer

resources to or from victims. However, the fine paid by the affected target is now partially offset

by a transfer from the unaffected target. The logic here is that the behavior of the other targets

contributed in part to the losses experienced by victims. As a result, the bill for victims’ losses is

borne jointly. Similarly, there is also a transfer from the unaffected target to the affected one, to


                                                      36
compensate it for its own losses caused by risk-shifting. This transfer is a fraction of the target’s

own losses, and represents the way in which these losses are also borne jointly.

   This type of arrangement might be difficult to implement through the courts, because judges

might be reluctant to hold a target liable for being too secure. However, a mutual insurance pool

presents us with a feasible way of implementing this policy. The pool can be designed to exploit

the fact that the transfer from one target to another is always less than vD + L.

   To take the simplest structure—one that lacks any insurance features—suppose that all potential

targets of terrorism contribute vD + L, total damages in the event of an attack, to a pool. If an

attack does not take place, their money is refunded. If an attack does take place, the affected target

receives back the amount vD + (1 + α)L > 0; this results in a net transfer to the affected target

of size αL. The pool will necessarily have enough funds on hand to make this transfer, because

αL ≤ vD + L. Remaining funds in the pool are then refunded to the unaffected targets.

   If αL > 0, the affected target receives a net transfer, and the pool can also incorporate an
                                                                   vD+L
insurance feature. If there are N targets, each can contributes      N
                                                                          to the pool. In the event of an

attack, the affected target can then be paid αL, and the remainder can be refunded to the unaffected

targets. If N is large, this approximates the efficient outcome.


3.4.3 Externalities from Victim Behavior

                                                                                                    dr1
Finally, we analyze the externalities in victim behavior. If terrorists value casualties, so that   dv1
                                                                                                          >

0. This results in inefficiency, because victims do not consider the impact of their behavior on the

risk faced by targets.

   Adding the victim externalities introduces a transfer from victims to the affected target, to
                                                      ³                 ´¡     ¢
account for the risk they shift onto the target: β = − ρρr ∂v̂
                                                           ∂ r̂
                                                                (ŝ, r̂) v̂D+L
                                                                            D
                                                                                 . This transfer from

victims to targets aligns victims’ private margins with social margins, but it actually introduces

distortion into target decisionmaking. When β = 0, the private returns to protection are exactly

equal to the social returns. Nonzero β eliminates this result. As a result, equation 5.6 incorporates



                                                  37
a transfer payment that purges the effect of β from the target’s decision problem, by causing targets

to disgorge a component of this payment to other targets (capitalized within the transfer payment

going between affected and unaffected targets).

    In other words, payment by victims leads to efficient behavior for them, but channeling this

payment to targets can distort targets’ incentives. A better solution might be to impose payments

or fines—or, more realistically, offer only incomplete insurance to risk-averse victims—on vic-

tims, while at the same time maintaining a mutual pool among targets to correct problems in their

decisionmaking.



4    Caveats and Extensions

Before concluding, we turn briefly to two caveats and/or extensions of our model. First, we con-

sider alternative liability regimes (such as negligence). We then consider the effect of more general

“public good” dimensions of target hardening – i.e., the possibility that more impervious targets

may create a general benefit for society because people feel ‘safer.’



4.1 Alternative Liability Approaches

The discussion above has focused exclusively on relatively simple “strict” liability rules versus no

liability. In many ways, this makes sense, given the fact that these two options are well represented

among states (see Section 2 above). Moreover, so long as the regulator’s choice is unrestricted (i.e.,

β can be either positive or negative), we demonstrated that a strict liability system can replicate the

outcome of the social planner’s problem. However, other possible variations exist – particularly

variations on negligence rules.

    Consider first the possibility of a simple negligence regime governing both target liability to

other targets and target liability to victims. Under a target-on-target regime, liability of an un-

affected target to an affected one turns on whether the that targets have exceeded a prescribed



                                                  38
threshold level of precautions, sN . Only if an unaffected target’s expenditures exceed this level

will liability be found. Thus, with appropriately large sanctions, it is always possible to induce

targets to implement no more than the prescribed level of precaution.

    On the other hand, implementing a negligence regime for victims is extremely problematic.

Indeed, as has already been demonstrated, when victims respond to target-hardening by increased

patronage, the case for any liability at all becomes difficult to defend on efficiency grounds. Equiv-

alently, then, the optimal negligence scheme would place the negligence standard at zero, so that

all firms satisfied it.

    Nevertheless, one could envision – at least in theory – a negligence regime that was based on

liability of victims to affected targets. Under this view, victims would be liable to an attacked

target whenever their aggregate patronage of the target exceeded some prescribed threshold level.

But such an approach is even less satisfactory on pragmatic grounds than strict liability of victims

to targets. First, just as with strict liability, victims may be liquidity-constrained, and not in a

position even to make damages payments to targets. Second, because each victim contributes

only a portion of the overall congestion in a given target, it is virtually impossible to implement

a negligence rule for victims: indeed, this would require identifying the victim(s) that effectively

“caused” overall patronage to exceed the level that is prescribed by the negligence standard.

    Consequently, the optimal negligence rule in our model would look very much like the optimal

strict liability rule: victims would have no cause of action against attacked targets, but attacked

targets would have a potential cause of action against other targets if the degree of risk-shifting

were sufficiently high.44



4.2 Public Goods

In focusing on incentive effects, we did not discuss the role of public goods in protection against

terrorism (see Lakdawalla and Zanjani, 2005). If society is particularly interested in the patron-

   44
     A similar set of arguments would apply to other variations on negligence, such as comparative and contributory
negligence. We therefore omit them in our analysis.

                                                        39
age of certain landmark buildings or downtown areas, there may be social reasons to compensate

victims in the event of a terrorist attack. Similarly, if there is a public good associated with the

construction of landmark buildings that might be more heavily targeted by terrorists, society may

have incentives to encourage such building by providing additional protection against terrorism.

    These types of victim compensation plans can be deployed in conjunction with liability ar-

rangements. Perfectly insuring victims against losses has undesirable incentive effects, but partial

compensation from society to victims may promote the public good while still retaining efficient

incentives to avoid high-profile targets.

    Similarly, there may be public goods associated with building in high-profile downtown areas.

This may justify transfers, perhaps in the form of subsidized terrorism insurance, from society

to the targets of terrorism. Such transfers can be incorporated into the mutual insurance pool

described above, by allowing taxpayers to contribute to the pool and thus implicitly underwrite

insurance against terrorist attacks.



5    Concluding Remarks

This paper has considered the appropriate role of civil liability in the wake of a terrorist act, under

the assumption that terrorists themselves (and those controlling them) are beyond the reach of

courts. We have demonstrated that it is possible in theory to design a liability regime that induces an

efficient allocation of precaution. In practice, however, such a regime required would be extremely

difficult (if not impossible) to implement. In particular, under plausible conditions, the optimal

liability regime involves transfers from victims to affected targets, and possibly even from affected

targets to unaffected targets. Such transfers seem unlikely (and even absurd) under traditional

doctrinal templates within tort law. Moreover, they would offer few (if any) advantages over a

simpler approach involving mutual insurance for targets and direct compensation to victims.

    There are a number of relatively simple extensions to our analysis that, we conjecture, would

complicate it but not reverse our findings. Introducing risk-aversion into our model, for example,

                                                  40
would likely have only minor effects for our incentive story, but might make litigation a more

attractive insurance vehicle. At the same time, of course, introducing risk aversion would also

make insurance an even more attractive insurance vehicle, since it spreads risks more efficiently

across individuals.

    Similarly, introducing incomplete information would also likely have ambiguous changes on

our results. Indeed, if agents were widely uninformed or misinformed, liability probably would

have even less of a role to play, since (a) it is not clear what incentives agents will respond to,

and (b) judges are likely to be similarly afflicted by a lack of information, inhibiting their ability

to apply liability rules appropriately. On the other hand, asymmetric information might provide

some grounds for a liability regime that shifts much of the risk onto the party (or parties) with

the best information. A significant difficulty with such an approach in this context, however, is

the task of identifying a well-informed agent. Apart from the government, it is not clear which

agents in society have above average information about the risk of terrorism or the effectiveness of

protective investments.45

    There is, however, one crucial distinguishing feature of terrorism that we have not considered

at great length: the “public good” value of national security or prestige. Terrorism policy is made

in the context of a war effort, where terrorists seek to undermine national confidence and security.

Because defeating that goal may constitute a public good, victim compensation may be an appro-

priate and welfare-enhancing way to induce individuals to continue with normal life in the face of

terrorism risk. Moreover, as noted above, if security has a sufficiently large public good value, then

the optimal liability regime may align more coherently with existing tort law templates. But even

so, if one were convinced that the public good value of security were this important, it is difficult to

understand why targets alone should pick up the tab. Direct compensation from the government,

in fact, may still be preferable to liability. Contributing to this conclusion is the government’s own

   45
      Although not explored at length here, relaxing the assumption of symmetric distributions of targets and victims
would be unlikely to change our qualitative conclusions, which emanate exclusively from marginal optimization con-
ditions. Asymmetrically distributed targets, however, might imply the optimality of target-specific liability parameters
(α and β) however, but whose qualitative characteristics would still correspond to the propositions above.

                                                          41
set of terrorism incentives: although not analyzed above, government actions themselves often in-

fluence terrorism risk, perhaps more than any other private actor we have considered; payments

from the government may sometimes make general sense on pure incentive grounds as well.

   Viewed in this light, the September 11 Victims’ Compensation Fund was well-conceived, but

may not have gone far enough to preclude opt-out tort claims. In the end, more research is likely

needed on public goods provision as it relates to terrorism and liability incentives. This paper

hopefully provides a helpful first step.




                                               42
Appendix
This appendix derives comparative static results in detail and provides proofs that were omitted
from the text.

A.1 Terrorist Comparative Statics
In the two-target case (the N-target case is virtually identical), the terrorists’ first order conditions
can be written as:

                                  Γ0 (A) − ρr (s1 , r1 )B(L, v1 ) = 0                              (5.1)
                                  Γ0 (A) − ρr (s2 , r2 )B(L, v2 ) = 0                              (5.2)
                                            R − A − r1 − r2 = 0                                    (5.3)

Assuming a symmetric equilibrium with two targets (i.e., r1 = r2 = re ) and differentiating with
respect to s1 yields the relationships between terror investments and target protection:

                                  ∂r1    ρ B(Γ00 + ρrr B)
                                      = 00 rs2               <0
                                  ∂s1  (Γ ) − (Γ00 + ρrr B)2
                                  ∂r2       (−Γ00 )(ρrs B)
                                      = 00 2                 ≥0                                    (5.4)
                                  ∂s1  (Γ ) − (Γ00 + ρrr B)2
                                  ∂A           ρ ρ B2
                                      = 00 2 rs rr           >0
                                  ∂s1  (Γ ) − (Γ00 + ρrr B)2
                                                                                    ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯
                                                                                    ¯ ∂r1 ¯ ¯ ∂r2 ¯
These expressions also demonstrate the implication of deterrence cited in the text: ¯ ∂s 1
                                                                                           ¯ > ¯ ∂s1 ¯
    The comparative static relationships between victim choices and terrorist decisions are similar.
In the symmetric two-target case, differentiating with respect to v1 reveals that:

                                  ∂r1    ρr Bv (Γ00 + ρrr B)
                                      = 00 2                 >0
                                  ∂v1  (Γ ) − (Γ00 + ρrr B)2
                                  ∂r2      (−Γ00 ) (ρr Bv )
                                      = 00 2                 <0                                    (5.5)
                                  ∂v1  (Γ ) − (Γ00 + ρrr B)2
                                  ∂A         ρ Bv ρ B
                                      = 00 2 r 00 rr         <0
                                  ∂v1  (Γ ) − (Γ + ρrr B)2

   These expressions demonstrate that an increase¯ in ¯protection
                                                            ¯ ¯ by any one target increases the
                                                  ¯ ∂r1 ¯ ¯ ∂r2 ¯
aggregate number of victims exposed to terrorism: ¯ ∂v1 ¯ > ¯ ∂v1 ¯.




                                                   43
A.2 Victim Comparative Statics
Differentiating the equilibrium condition for the marginal victim yields the following expressions:
            dv1       d
                    =    [2θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri (−
                                                   →
                                                   s ,−
                                                      →v )) D)]
            ds1      ds1
                                                   µ                 ·             ¸¶
                       0                                               ∂r1 ∂v1 ∂r1
                   = 2θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri ) D) · −ρs D − ρr D              +
                                                                       ∂v1 ∂s1 ∂s1
                   ⇔                                 ³                      ´
            dv1       2θ0 (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri ) D) · −ρs D − ρr D · ∂s ∂r1
                                                                          1
                   =                                                    ³ ´ >0
            ds1             0                      →
                                                   −  −
                                                      →                   ∂r1
                     1 + 2θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri ( s , v )) D) · ρr D · ∂v1


                  dv1      d
                        =     [2θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri (−
                                                        →
                                                        s ,−
                                                           →v )) D)]
                  ds2     ds2
                                                         µ       ·             ¸¶
                            0                                      ∂r1 ∂v1 ∂r1
                        = 2θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri ) D) · −ρr D            +
                                                                   ∂v1 ∂s2 ∂s2
                        ⇔                                 ³           ´
                  dv1      2θ0 (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri ) D) · −ρr D ∂s
                                                                  ∂r1
                                                                    2
                        =                                    ³         ´ <0
                  ds2            0                                 ∂r1
                          1 + 2θ (G − G0 − ρ (si , ri ) D) · ρr D ∂v1

   These equations also imply the result given in the text, that:
                                    ¯     ¯ ¯       ¯ ¯       ¯
                                    ¯ ∂v1 ¯ ¯ ∂v1 ¯ ¯ ∂v2 ¯
                                    ¯     ¯ ¯       ¯ ¯       ¯
                                    ¯ ∂s1 ¯ > ¯ ∂s2 ¯ = ¯ ∂s1 ¯

A.3 Equilibrium for Victims
The victims’ first order conditions are:


                                γ (v1 ) + ρ (s1 , r1 (v1 , v2 , s1 , s2 )) D − ∆G = 0
                                γ (v2 ) + ρ (s2 , r2 (v1 , v2 , s1 , s2 )) D − ∆G = 0

which have an associated Jacobian:
                   · 0                                  ∂r1                            ∂r1          ¸
                      γ (v1 ) + ρr (s1 , r1 ) D ·       ∂v1
                                                                    ρr (s1 , r1 ) D · ∂v
               J=                            ∂r2
                                                                                         2
                                                                                              ∂r2       ,
                           ρr (s2 , r2 ) D · ∂v 1
                                                              γ 0 (v2 ) + ρr (s2 , r2 ) D ·   ∂v2

which in turn has determinant:

                        µ                          ¶ µ                                ¶
                            0                  ∂r1         0                      ∂r1
            |J| =  γ (v1 ) + ρr (s1 , r1 ) D ·      · γ (v2 ) + ρr (s2 , r2 ) D ·
                                               ∂v1                                ∂v1
                   µ                       ¶ µ                        ¶
                                      ∂r1                         ∂r2
                  − ρr (s1 , r1 ) D ·         · ρr (s2 , r2 ) D ·
                                      ∂v2                         ∂v1

                                                         44
     Evaluated at a symmetric equilibrium, we know that r1 = r2 = re ; s1 = s2 = se , v1 = v2 =
     ∂r1   ∂r2    ∂ri ∂r1   ∂r2   ∂ri
ve , ∂v1
         = ∂v 2
                = ∂v ;
                    i ∂v2
                          = ∂v1
                                = ∂v j
                                       . And thus we have:

                          µ                                     ¶2     µ                       ¶2
                               0                          ∂ri                            ∂ri
                |J| =         γ (ve ) + ρr (se , re ) D ·            − ρr (se , re ) D ·
                                                          ∂vi                            ∂vj
                      > 0
                                                                                            ¯ ¯
                                                                                            ¯ ∂ri ¯
     where i = 1, 2. We can sign this determinant as positive since, as demonstrated above, ¯ ∂v   ¯>
¯      ¯                                                                                         i
¯ ∂ri ¯
¯ ∂v−i ¯ .
     Now consider how a change in s1 affects equilibrium values of v.The vector of s1 derivatives
of the victims’ market clearing condition is:
                                          ·           ∂r1   ¸
                                            ρs + ρr ∂s  1
                                                          D
                                                  ∂r2
                                               ρr ∂s 1
                                                       D
   Note that both of these terms are positive. The substituted Jacobian is therefore:
                            ·           ∂r1                            ∂r1       ¸
                              ρs + ρr ∂s    D       ρr (s1 , r1 ) D · ∂v
                       J=           ∂r2
                                          1                              2
                                                                            ∂r2    ,
                                 ρr ∂s 1
                                         D    γ 0 (v2 ) + ρr (s2 , r2 ) D · ∂v 2

which, when evaluated at a symmetric equilibrium, has determinant:
                                                                                  
                                           (−)       (−)              (−)     (−)
                    (−)          (−)    z }| { z }| { (+) z }| { z }| {
                z }| { z }| {          0      ∂ri ∂ri      z}|{  ∂ri ∂ri ∂ri ∂rj 
                  0
        |J1 | = (γ (ve ) ρs ) + (Dρr ) γ (ve )    +    ρs + Dρr          −        
                                               ∂si ∂vi            ∂vi ∂si ∂vj ∂si 


   If the square bracketed term is weakly negative, then |J1 | < 0. But this is clearly satisfied, since
we know from above that the own partials on ri have higher absoluate value than the cross partials
on ri . Thus, we have:

                                             ³                               ³                     ´´
                       0                         0        ∂ri    ∂ri           ∂ri ∂ri     ∂ri ∂rj
    ∂v1    |J1 |    (γ   (ve ) ρ s  ) + Dρ r   γ   (v e ) ∂si
                                                              + ∂vi s
                                                                     ρ + Dρ r ∂vi ∂si  −  ∂v−i ∂si
        =−       =−          ³                                     ´2 ³                      ´        >0
    ∂s1     |J|                   0                            ∂ri                       ∂ri
                               γ (ve ) + ρr (se , re ) D · ∂vi − ρr (se , re ) D · ∂vj

Now consider comparative statics on v2 .The substituted Jacobian is:
                          · 0                            ∂r1           ∂r1    ¸
                            γ (v1 ) + ρr (s1 , r1 ) D · ∂v   ρs +  ρ r ∂s
                                                                            D
                   J2 =                             ∂r2
                                                           1
                                                                   ∂r2
                                                                          1     ,
                                  ρr (s2 , r2 ) D · ∂v 1
                                                                ρr ∂s 1
                                                                        D
which, when evaluated at a symmetric equilibrium, has determinant:




                                                      45
                               µ                          ·                   ¸¶
                                   0  ∂ri     ∂ri           ∂ri ∂rj   ∂ri ∂ri
                |J2 | = ρr D γ (ve )       −      ρ + Dρr           −
                                      ∂sj     ∂vj s         ∂vi ∂si ∂vj ∂si
                                                     
                                     (+)             (+)
                             z }| ∂r { z∂r}| {
                                         2      i 
                      = ρr D γ 0 (ve )     −       ρ 
                                       ∂s1   ∂vj s 


Thus, we have
                                                    ³                       ´
                                                         0    ∂ri   ∂ri
                                ∂v2    ρr D γ (ve )  −        ∂sj
                                                                        ρ
                                                                    ∂vj s
                                    =−
                                ∂s1              |J|

   This derivative is negative so long as:

                                                   ∂r2 ∂r2
                                       γ 0 (ve )     <     ρ
                                                   ∂s1 ∂v1 s
                                                     ⇔
                                              0        ρr ρs Bv
                                             γ (ve ) <
                                                        ρrs B
    The interpretation here is simple: So long as the “crowding” effect on a target is not “too”
large, victims will tend to flock away from targets that have lower relative protection. When
crowding effects are large, on the other hand, hardening a target will induce more victims to enter
the risky activities, so much so that some of them may choose to spend time at the unhardened
target (realizing that, in equilibrium, terrorists will be spending less effort to attack it).

A.4 Proof of Proposition 3.5
The proposition follows immediately from the textual analysis, and the proof is therefore omitted.

A.5 Proof of Proposition 3.6
The unconstrained liability problem can be solved in two stages. Victim behavior only depends on
β. Target behavior depends on both. So we proceed by fixing β optimally, and fixing α optimally
given β.
    Recall that the social optimum for v̂ is characterized by:
                                    µ ¶                   µ        ¶
                                      v̂                       dr̂
                        G − G0 − γ         − ρ(ŝ, r̂)D = ρr         (v̂D + L)
                                      2                        dv̂
whereas the market clearing condition for victims is:
                                    ³v ´
                       G − G0 − γ         − ρ (si , ri ) D = −ρ (si , ri ) Dβ
                                      2

                                                         46
Evaluating both expressions at the social optimum and substituting allows us to solve for β by
setting the RHS of the two above expressions equal to one another:
                                           ¡ dr̂ ¢
                                         −  ρr dv̂ (v̂D + L)
                                   β∗ =
                                              ρ (si , ri ) D

   Given this value of β, we consider the target’s optimal choice, similarly comparing it to the
social optimum, so that (after substitution):
           µ             ¶                                                        µ        ¶
                     dri                                               dvi X           drj
             ρs + ρr       ((1 − (N − 1) α) L + βv1 D) + ρ(ri , si )βD     +        ρr       αL
                     dsi                                               dsi   j6=i
                                                                                       dsi
           Ã                  !
                     X dri
       =     ρs + ρr            (v̂D + L)
                      j
                          dsj


   Solving the above expression for α yields:
               ³           ´                                      ³             P dri ´
                       dri                                  dvi
            − ρs + ρr ds i
                             (L + βv 1 D)  −  ρ(r ,
                                                 i is )βD   dsi
                                                                +    ρ s +  ρ r    j dsj (v̂D + L)
      α∗ =                h ³              ´                    P      ³         ´   i
                                       dri                                   drj
                           − ρs + ρr ds  i
                                             ((N  −   1) L) +     j6=i   ρ r dsi   L


   QED.

A.6 Proof of Proposition 3.7
Since the constraint on β must be binding, we know that β = 0. Substituting this value into the
target’s optimality condition, and comparing to the social optimality condition allows us to solve
for α as follows:
                              ³           ´    ³         P dri ´
                                      dri
                            − ρs + ρr dsi L + ρs + ρr j dsj (v̂D + L)
                      α=       ³           ´               P ³ drj ´                         (5.6)
                                       dri
                            − ρs + ρr dsi ((N − 1) L) + j6=i ρr dsi L
It is easily confirmed from the target’s FOC that
                                                dsi
                                                    <0
                                                dα
and thus the target will be a net recipient if and only if its level of protection was inefficiently high
in the absence of liability. This condition is tantamount to the inequality condition given in the
proposition.
    The first expression is straightforward: paying victims in the event of a loss makes them less
averse to such a loss. In the second expression, the effect of target transfers on victims depends
entirely on how these affect target protection. If target transfers increase the level of protection,
they draw more victims in, and vice-versa. QED



                                                   47
References
Ayres, I., and S. D. Levitt (1998). “Measuring Positive Externalities From Unobservable Victim
  Precaution: An Empirical Analysis of Lojack.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1):43–77.

Che, Y.-K., and D. Hausch (1999). “Cooperative Investments and the Value of Contracting.” Amer-
  ican Economic Review 89(1):125–147.

Choi, A. H., and C. W. Sanchirico (2002). “Should Plaintiffs Win What Defendants Lose? Liti-
  gation Stakes, Litigation Effort, and the Benefits of ’Decoupling’.” Research Paper C02-7. Los
  Angeles, CA: USC CLEO.

Clotfelter, C. (1978). “Private Security and Public Safety.” Journal of Urban Economics 5:388–
  402.

Cooter, R., and A. Porat (2002). “Anti-Insurance.” Journal of Legal Studies 31:203–32.

Dixon, L., and R. K. Stern (2004). “Compensation for Losses from the 9/11 Attacks.” Monograph
  264. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Esper, D. A., and G. C. Keating (2005). “Abusing ’Duty’.” Working Paper 05-4. USC Law School.
  Http://ssrn.com/abstract=678405.

Freeman, S., J. Grogger, and J. Sonstelie (1996). “The Spatial Concentration of Crime.” Journal
  of Urban Economics 40(2):216–31.

Gron, A., and A. O. Sykes (2002). “Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government
  as Insurer?” John M. Olin Law and Economics Working Paper 155. Chicago, IL: The University
  of Chicago Law School.

Hakim, S., and G. F. Rengert, eds. (1981). Crime Spillover. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.

Hoffman, B. (1998). Inside Terrorism. New York: Columbia University Press.

Holmstrom, B. (1982). “Moral Hazard in Teams.” Bell Journal of Economics 13(2):324–340.

Hui-Wen, K., and I. Png (1994). “Private Security: Deterrent or Diversion?” International Review
  of Law and Economics 14:87–101.

Keohane, N. O., and R. J. Zeckhauser (2003). “The Ecology of Terror Defense.” Journal of Risk
  and Uncertainty 26(2/3):231–249.

Kunreuther, H., and G. Heal (2003). “Interdependent Security.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
  26(2/3):231–249.

Lakdawalla, D., and G. Zanjani (2004). “Insurance, Self-Protection, and the Economics of Terror-
  ism.” Working Paper WR-171-ICJ. Cambridge, MA: RAND Corporation.

Lakdawalla, D., and G. Zanjani (2005). “Insurance, Self-Protection, and the Economics of Terror-
  ism.” Journal of Public Economics 89(9-10):1891–1905.

                                               48
Levmore, S., and K. Logue (2003). “Insuring Against Terrorism – And Crime.” Michigan Law
  Review 102:268–327.

McKinnon, R., and T. Nechyba (1997). “Competition in Federal Systems: The Role of Political
 and Financial Constraints.” The New Federalism: Can the States Be Trusted?. J. Ferejohn and
 B. R. Weingast, eds. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.

McNamara, R., ed. (1994). Crime Displacement: The Other Side of Prevention. East Rockaway,
 New York: Cummings and Hathaway.

Newman, G., R. V. Clarke, and S. Shoham, eds. (1997). Rational Choice and Situational Crime
  Prevention. Aldershot: Dartmouth.

Polinsky, A. M., and Y.-K. Che (1991). “Decoupling Liability: Optimal Incentives for Care and
  Litigation.” RAND Journal of Economics 22(4):562–70.

Powell, R. (2005). “Defending Against Terrorist Attacks with Limited Resources.” Working paper.
  UC-Berkeley.

Schwartz, A., and J. Watson (2001). “The Law and Economics of Costly Contracting.” Law and
  Economics Research Paper 264. Yale. Http://ssrn.com/abstract=295659.

Shavell, S. (1987). Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press.

Shavell, S. (1991). “Individual Precautions to Prevent Theft: Private Versus Socially Optimal
  Behavior.” International Review of Law and Economics 11:123–32.

Simpson, A. G. (2004). “Summer in the City: Terrorism, Political Conventions and the Olympics.”
  Insurance Journal .

Tugend,    A.    (2004).              “Making       Amends.”                      Govexec.com
  Www.govexec.com/features/0304/0304newsanalysis1.htm.

Woo, G. (2002a). “Quantifying Insurance Terrorism Risk.” Manuscript, Risk Management Solu-
 tions, Newark, CA.

Woo, G. (2002b). “Understanding Terrorism Risk.” Manuscript, Risk Management Solutions,
 Newark, CA.




                                              49
