                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE FEDERAL CIVIL SERVICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
            AN ANALYSIS OF ITS FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
                     uflflrilk




                         Herman   B. Leonard


                      Working Paper No. 1258




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1981k




Prepared for the NBER Conference on Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice.
Held March 23—26, 1983 in Dorado Beach, Puerto Rico. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Pensions and project in
Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #1258
                                                             January 1984



                     The Federal Civil Service Retirement System:
                      An Analysis of its Financial Condition and
                               Current Reform Proposals


 1
                                        ABSTRACT


     This    paper analyzes the financial condition of the Federal Civil Service
Retirement System. It begins by examining various official annual reports about
the system    published by the Office of personnel Management, discussing their
differing assumptions and resulting differences in estimates of the unfunded
liability.     It then   discusses the construction of a simulation model in which
the current unfunded liabilities can be estimated under an entry age normal
definition of pension obligations.

     The results suggest that, for reasonable estimates of salary increases,
inflation, and benefits indexing, the unfunded liabilities of the CSRS are
between $500 billion and $600 billion. (Even under the accrued benefits
definition of pension obligations, which I argue is more relevant to private
sector employment, the unfunded liability exceeds $400 billion). I argue
that this constitutes a debt similar in burden per dollar to that represented
by the explicitly recognized national debt, and nearly half as large.

     The last part of the paper considers current proposals to reform the
CSRS to reduce the unfunded liabilities. They are found (1) to reduce the
pension wealth of current federal workers by nearly one half, (2) to fall
rather dramatically on middle aged federal employees, and (3) to leave the
unfunded    liabilities of the system still in excess of $400 billion.

                                                             Herman B. Leonard
                                                             Kennedy School of Government
                                                             Harvard University
                                                             79 Boylston Street
                                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                             (617) 495—1117
             The Federal Civil Service Retirement System

              An Analysis of its Financial Condition
                                  and

                       Current Reform Proposals



                           Herman B. Leonard
                              March 1983


     When career civil servants discuss the pay differential

between government and private employment, they frequently remind
each other to allow for the effects of their rather generous

pension program. What has been a commonplace for federal
employees —   that   the nation has incurred substantial future
obligations to them —— has not, however, attracted much attention

from the public at large or even from commentators on government

spending until very recently. When "federal borrowing" is
discussed, the term almost never includes the borrowing implicit

in making promises to pay future pensions. Even when "off—
budget" spending is discussed, the failure to note promises of
future pension payments in current budget documents is rarely
mentioned.   And when commentators try to reconstruct the actual
deficit of the federal government, correcting for the absence of
I would like to acknowledge the helpful comments of Richard
Zeckhauser, Barry Nalebuff, Jeremy Bulow, Zvi Bodie, Larry
Kotlikoff, and the members of the NBER Pensions Project. Susan
Bender and Karen Handmaker provided excellent research
assistance; Susan Bender, who does not like the semicolon in this
sentence, also provided helpful editorial assistance. The
financial support of the NBER Pensions Project is gratefully
acknowledged. No matter what I say, I will be forced to accept
responsibility for any errors, so I will do so without protest.



                                   •1-
a capital budget and for credit and off—budget programs, accrual
of liabilities for federal pensions is virtually never proposed.
     The commitments embodied in the Federal Civil Service

Pension System exceed the currently and prospectively available
assets out of which they are supposed to be paid by over one half

trillion dollars. Comparable estimates for the net liabilities
of the military pension systems are of the same order of
magnitude, and those for the Social Security system indicate net
liabilities of over one trillion dollars. Thus, the three major
"retirement" programs of the federal government have net

liabilities of approximately twice the currently officially
recognized national debt. If the annual "deficit" and the size

of the "national debt" are major political issues, the "quasi—
debt" constituted by the net liabilities of federal retirement
systems should be an issue as well. Yet, because they are
shrouded in the mystical cloak of "actuarial estimates" and are
not treated in the standard budget documents considered by the

Congress, they have generally received little attention.

Recently, the Social Security system has come under greater
scrutiny, largely because it threatened to run out of cash.

Until the latest round of considerable attention and public
study, only a few of the most educated commentators were aware of
its long term actuarial position. The Civil Service Pension
System and its military counterpart are hardly noticed at all.
     An interesting example of the lack of enthusiasm for these

issues may be found in a recent compendium of papers from the

American Economic Association annual meetings. The Proceedings
volume   of the American Economic Review in May   of 1982 devoted



                                  2
considerable space to a variety of papers discussing various
aspects of the economics of government. A wide range of or-        and
off—budget programs were treated. Federal wages, tax
expenditures, credit programs, and entitlement programs were
scrutinized in detail. There is almost no mention of the Civil
Service Retirement System.

     This paper considers the fiscal condition of the Federal
Civil Service Retirement System and analyzes a major proposed
reform of that system embodied in the budget requests currently

before the Congress. The central findings of the study are:
     (1) The "unfunded liability" of the current system is
               approximately $540 billion in 1982 dollars.
     (2) Labor expenses recognized in the direct expenditures
               budget considered by Congress should be about 22
              percent higher than they currently are to account
              for full funding of pension obligations accrued in
               each year. In 1982, this would increase federal
              labor expenses by about $14 billion.

     (3)   The   existing system provides a strong financial
                  incentive for federal employees to continue
                  working up ——until they attain full retirement
                  eligibility    usually between ages 55 and 60.
                  It then provides a strong incentive for them to
                  retire.

     (4) The reform proposal advanced by the Office of Personnel
               Management would constitute a major overhaul of
               retirement benefits. It would close the current
              funding gap solely by cutting benefits received by
              and net wages paid to current federal employees
               It would constitute a 50 percent cut in the net
              pension wealth of current employees. It is
              comparable financially to a 15 to 30 percent cut
              in the annual compensation of federal employees
              over the remainder of their working lives.
    (5) The OPM reform proposal would reduce the cash outlays
              of the retirement system funded by taxpayers by
              about $4 billion per year for the remaining years
              of this decade, and by larger amounts in later
             years. It would cut the unfunded liability of the
              system by one—quarter, to $400 billion. It would


                                     3
                reduce the full funding rate from 36 percent to 20
                percent.
     (6) The OPM reform proposal would substantially alter the
               retirement incentives of the current system,
               completely eliminating the existing incentive to
               retire as soon as full eligibility is attained.
               This could have a considerable impact upon the
              age and experience composition of the federal
              workforce.




                               Section I

                          The Existing System

    The Office of Personnel Management annually presents a
number of reports on the status, changes, and prospects of the
Civil Service Pension System. These views are not entirely
consistent with one another. The differences among them reflect
differences in statutory requirements for how the system is to be

viewed and funded. None gives an adequate picture of the
condition of the fund.

Basic Characteristics of the Retirement System
    The only widely agreed—upon characteristics of the fund are

those having to do with the objective facts of its operation and
status ——   anything   involving projections of its future operations

is almost by definition a matter of controversy. The system is a

defined benefit pension plan providing retirement and disability
insurance benefits for a covered enrollment of approximately 2.7

million employees, 1.3 million retired employees, and 430

thousand survivors of employees or annuitants. The plan has
provided benefits that are generous compared to most private



                                   4
pensions. Employees can currently retire with full benefits at
age 55 with 30 years of service, at age 60 with 20 years of
service, and at age 62 with 5 years of service. The current
annuity formula provides benefits of:

       1 1/2 percent of average salary per year of service for the
             first 5 years of service;

       1 3/4 percent of average salary per year of service for the
             next 5 years of service; and

       2 percent of average salary per year of service for any
             remaining years of service, with a maximum of 80

             percent of average salary.
Full disability benefits are available to any employee with 5
years of service. Disability benefits are 40 percent of salary
or the retirement formula projecting service to age 60, whichever
is higher.

       A critical feature of the current system is that benefit
payments are indexed to the cost of living after retirement.

Moreover, the "average salary" used in the benefit formula refers
to the three highest years of earnings (generally the last three
years of employment). Thus, the level of benefits with which the
retiree starts is also indexed to inflation, provided that

federal salaries are increased to keep pace with the cost of
living. Both of these features have very large impacts on the
financial status of the pension system, and both are the subjects

of considerable controversy. Indeed, the appropriate treatment
of   these two features of the system is perhaps the most important
choice   involved   in the actuarial estimation of the financial




                                     5
condition of the system.
        The benefits of the retirement system have been increased
and the coverage extended to additional employees in a number of

major revisions of the system since its inception in 1920. Thus,
the system has accrued substantial unfunded prior service costs

over the years. The last major alteration in the system was in

1969,when the basis for the average salary calculation was
reduced from the highest five years of earnings to the highest

        In   theory, the system is funded out of contributions of 14
percent of payroll —— 7 percent each from employees and their
agencies. In fact, these payments are not adequate to cover the
current cash obligations of the system, and the federal Treasury
annually makes an additional contribution to the fund. This
contribution is computed on the basis of an analysis of the

"unfunded liability" of the system, and is supposed to constitute
a payment in lieu of the interest that would have been earned on
assets in the fund if it were fully funded. The actuarial
estimation of the obligations of the fund, and thus its unfunded
liability, is therefore an issue of current operating interest

both to the fund and to the Congress. Indeed, the Congresst
direct interest in the matter led it to specify its intentions
concerning how the fund's obligations were to be valued.

        In part because the issue is of such material importance to
the fund and in part because the Congress specified its preferred
form of valuation, a variety of different accountings of the fund
are rendered each year. Under any estimation procedure, the
present value of the obligations of the system substantially



                                       6
exceed the present value of its prospective income plus its

current assets. All valuations thus agree that the system has a
large "unfunded liability." But different valuation methods lead
to quite disparate estimates of what this liability is, and hence
to controversy about the appropriate methods of valuation.
[Appendix I discusses alternative methods of valuation of pension
obligations and evaluation of pension fund performance.]

"Economic" Assumptions and Fund Valuation
       In the actuarial valuation of any retirement system, a

series of interrelated assumptions about future economic
conditions are crucial. Among these are assumptions about the
future values of interest rates, rates of salary increase,
increases in retirement benefits, and so on.    In addition, the

estimates rely upon the future stability of existing patterns of
career promotions, promotion—related salary increases, and
retirement decisions.

       There is, however, one aspect of future economic conditions
that should not make much difference in valuing the pension
system. If inflation in general prices is treated consistently
in the actuarial valuation, its assumed rate will be of little
consequence. This is because any consistent valuation method
will present the estimated values in real terms ——   that   is, in
terms relative to the rate of general price increases. So long

as values are consistently expressed in real terms and the
assumed rates of increase (or decrease) of specific values ——
like   salaries or benefits after retirement —— are expressed as

real rates, the rate of inflation by itself is an unimportant



                               7
assumption •1

     What is crucial, then, is the assumed real rate of return on
fund assets and the real rate of increase (or decrease) in
salaries and benefits after retirement. There has been little
controversy concerning the appropriate real rate of return to
assume for fund assets. In contrast to a rather odd valuation in
the 1980 annual report in which the Board of Actuaries for the

fund assumed a five percent real rate of return on assets for the
indefinite future, recent official reports of the fund's
condition have presumed modest real rates of return in the range
of .5 to 2 percent. (In some cases real rates as high as 3 to 5
percent have been assumed for the next one or two years.) Given
the historical performance of the fund ——    invested   by law in
fixed interest special securities of the US Treasury ——      it may be
optimistic to presume that the real rate of return on fund assets
will exceed zero ——   that   is, that the fund will do any better

than just keep even with inflation. If, however, the fund were
somewhat more aggressively managed —— not an inconceivable
outcome of current criticism of its operations ——    it might well
be able to achieve a modest positive real return.

     The rate of return on fund assets is a crucial parameter

because it provides the rate of time discount that allows us to

compare the values of obligations in future periods with
currently and prospectively available fund assets. It is,
therefore, most appropriately interpreted as the rate at which we
should discount the pension obligations of the government. Since
we are trying to discern the value of these obligations on the




                                    8
theory that they constitute real governmental debts, there are
powerful arguments for using the real risk free rate of return in
the economy —— perhaps 1 to 2 percent —— as the appropriate

discount rate. This choice is independent of the actual

financial performance of the fund, as it should be since any
eventual deficit in the fund will have to be paid by the

Treasury. In the work presented here, all obligations have been
discounted at an assumed risk free rate of 1.5 percent in real
terms. 2

       Different official reports of the Fund are of different
minds about how to treat future inflation. Table 1 shows three

official estimates of the unfunded liability of the system. The
first estimate is from Fringe Benefit Facts 1980, a publication
of the Office of Personnel Management that provides an official

overview of the fringe benefits received by federal employees and
presents financial information associated with each plan. It
assumes that there will be no future increases in either salaries

or benefits other than those currently mandated. For purposes of
this valuation, OPM interprets this to mean that there would be
no future increases, even though benefits after retirement are
indexed by law to the cost of living. Even with these highly
restrictive   assumptions, the unfunded liability of the system is
over $160         about $62 thousand for each current employee.
            billion,

    The "normal cost" of the system under these assumptions is
worth noting. "Normal cost" is the percentage of an average
employee's salary that must be put aside in each year of service
in   order to fund the pension over the employee's career.

According   to the fund's actuaries, if there is   no future


                                  9
inflation in salaries or benefits, combined annual contributions
from    the employee and employer of about 14 percent of salary
would be adequate to prevent deterioration in the financial
integrity of the system. The current funding rate is consistent
with the continued financial health of the system only in the
absence of future inflation.

        In its 1982 annual report, the Board of Actuaries of the
fund presented an alternative set of estimates of the financial

status of the system based on the assumption that retirement
benefits would continue to be indexed to the cost of living and
that inflation would continue at the (Office of Management and

Budget estimated) rate of 5 percent per annum. They chose,
however, to    treat future increases in salaries as a   matter of
choice for the Congress, and therefore did not project any
"general schedule" increases in future salaries. The result is
shown in line 2 of Table 1; the unfunded liabilities of the

system are approximately $360 billion, about $130 thousand     per
current    federal employee. At current average wages, this amounts
to nearly six years of salary for each employee.
        This is still not an accurate measure of the condition of
the fund, because it ignores the effects of future salary
increases. Such increases will have two effects. First, they
will provide a larger source of incoming contributions. Second,
and more powerfully, they will raise the retirement benefits of
future retirees. The Board of Actuaries recognizes that ignoring

these   effects constitutes   a potentially serious misrepresentation
of the condition of the fund. Accordingly, they present an



                                 10
additional alternative set of calculations of the obligations of
the fund based on the assumption that both benefits and salaries

are likely to keep pace with future inflation. Specifically, the
Board assumed that salaries will rise in real terms by one—half
percent per year, and that benefits after retirement will stay
constant in real terms. The results are shown in line 3 of Table
1, taken from the 1982 annual report of the retirement system.
     The substantive difference between the results in lines 2
and 3 of Table 1 is in the estimated cost of future payments to

those who have not yet retired. If salaries continue to keep
pace with inflation (as is assumed in the calculations for line
3), benefit levels for employees who have not yet retired will be

considerably higher. The projections for those who have retired
already are unaffected, since in both valuations their benefits
were presumed to be constant in real terms. The change is

substantial; the unfunded liability rises by over $100 billion,
to $469 billion, about 7.5 years of salary for the average
federal employee.

     Under these assumptions, the current funding structure of
the retirement system is far from adequate. The "normal cost"
computed by the Board of Actuaries allowing for inflation in both
salaries and benefits after retirement amounts to 36 percent of

payroll. Since the employees' contribution is 7 percent, this
would leave 29 percent to be paid by the government ——   four   times
current agency contributions. Recognizing the inadequacy of the
current funding structure, Congress has moved to address the
issue of the unfunded liability, albeit through rather an
indirect method. As we shall see, even the device chosen by



                            11
Table 1. Official Estimates of the Unfunded Liabilities of the
           Civil Service Pension System, September 1980
           (All figures in 1980 dollars)




                                Total Unfunded       Unfunded Liability
                                   Liability            Per Employee

No future increases in          $    166.4 billion    $   62 thousand
 salaries or benefits


Future increases in
 benefits but not in                 357.3 billion        132 thousand
 salaries

Future increases in both             469.5 billion        174 thousand
 salaries and benefits




Sources: Line 1: Office of Personnel Mangement, Fringe Benefit
                    Facts 1980. US Government Printing Office,
                    1981, page 11.
         Line 2: Office of Personnel Management, "Statement of
                    General Information for the Civil Service
                    Retirement System Plan Year Ending September
                    30, 1980," mimeo, February 16, 1982, Table 1.
                    Assumes no future general schedule increases
                    in salaries; benefits after retirement are
                    assumed to be constant in real terms.

         Line 3: ______, Table 4. Assumes salaries grow in real
                    terms at 1/2 percent per year; benefits after
                    retirement are assumed to be constant in real
                       terms.



                                12
Congress will not long provide adequate coverage.

Current Treatiuent of the Unfunded Liability

       The inadequacy of the funding of the retirement system has
been a matter of more than academic interest for several years.

The Congress moved during the l970s to address the problem as a
consequence of projections indicating that the fund would not
only have a substantial and increasing unfunded liability, but
would also quickly run out of cash. The operating revenues of
the system —— the direct employer and employee contributions from
payroll —— were substantially less than fund disbursements in

1980. Table 2 shows the 1980 operating flows, the effect on
available funds in the absence of Congressional action, and the

supplemental payment appropriated by Congress to maintain the
cash basis integrity of the system.

       If Congress had not supplemented the funding of the
retirement system, the fund would have decreased by nearly $3
billion in 1980. This would have eroded the fund's earning
potential, and would have started a downward spiral leading
quickly to bankruptcy. This prospect motivated the Congress to
provide additional funding for the system during the 1970s. The

action Congress took does not, however, guarantee the integrity
of the fund. Congress chose a modestly rational and relatively
inexpensive expedient that insures only that the cash position of
the fund will not deteriorate precipitously in the near future.
       A standard solution to the problem that the retirement

system faced —— indeed,   the solution that the Congress   legislated
for   private pension funds in the Employee Retirement Income


                                13
Table 2. Operating Flows of the Civil Service Retirement System,
             1980. (All figures in billions of dollars)


ASSETS AVAILABLE AT YEAR START                       63.9


Investment Income

  Net capital gains      (     .3)
  Interest                   5.1

Contributions

  Employer                   3.6
  Employee                   3.7


TOTAL ADDITIONS                           12.1




Benefits paid                14.9

Administrative expense         .1


TOTAL DEDUCTIONS                          15.0


NET FLOW FROM OPERATIONS                  (   2.8)


PROSPECTIVE ASSETS AT YEAR END                       61.0

Supplemental Treasury Payment                        11.9


ACTUAL ASSETS AT YEAR END                            73.0



Source: Office of Personnel Management, "Statement of General
           Information for The Civil Service Retirement System
           Plan year ending September 30, 1980," mimeo, February
           16, 1982. Computed from figures in Table 2.




                                     14
Security Act of 1974 ——      consists   of two parts:

     (1) Raise the contribution rate to the fund to the "full
            funding" level. Based on the "entry age normal" cost
            concept, this would mean raising the level of
            contributions from the curreqt 14 percent rate to
            about 36 percent of payroll;' and
     (2) Adopt a funding schedule to pay off the principal and
            accumulating interest of the "unfunded liability" of
            the system.

In its 1980 annual report, the appointed Board of Actuaries of
the system argued at length for these reforms. Congress had
already chosen, however, to adopt a variant of the "interest"
portion of part 2 of this program, and not to adopt part 1 at
all. Congress chose to pay only the interest on the unfunded
liability, leaving the principal unamortized. The reason why its
method is a variant of this portion is that it chose to define

the interest and the unfunded liability without reference to
current or future inflation. The resulting construct is a
strange animal indeed.

     Why would the Congress choose not to amortize the principal
of the indebtedness? Obviously, it is less expensive ——

currently   ——   to   ignore it. One rationale for ignoring it is that
the current unfunded liability represents underfunded past
service costs incurred on behalf of past taxpayers for services
they received. These costs should have been borne at the time
the services were rendered to the taxpayers who received them,
but they were not. There is no obvious reason why current and
future taxpayers should make back payments against this debt.
According to this argument, there is no reason to retire the
accumulated unfunded debt as long as the fund remains solvent on




                                 15
a cash basis.
      This would make a good deal more sense if it were combined
with a commitment to end the practice of underfunding from now

on. The Congress chose, however, to continue adding to the
unfunded liability in addition to ignoring its current size. It
did, however, realize that the fund was losing interest because
it was not fully funded. The interest income from the
investments the system would make if it were fully funded would
be an important source of additional cash for current payments.
The Congress decided to "simulate" full funding: an annual
payment is made to the fund representing the additional interest
payments it would have received if it had been fully funded.

      This left the problem of determining the rate of interest to
be paid and the amount of the hypothetical funding on which to

pay it. The rate was relatively simple: the interest is paid at
the rate of other special issues of the Treasury, approximately
——   but   typically a little below —— the current long term Treasury
bond rate. As we have seen, however, the amount of the "unfunded
liability" is a matter of some controversy. The legislation
passed by the Congress establishing the "in lieu of interest"
payments has been interpreted to mean that the "unfunded

liability" of the system is to be evaluated under the assumption
that there will be no inflation in either salaries or in benefits
after retirement. This leads to a valuation like that shown in
line 1 of Table 1, which, as indicated above, gives far too
favorable a view of the financial condition of the system.

      There are three major conceptual flaws in the solution

adopted by the Congress. First, the financial integrity of the



                                  16
system cannot be insured by any means that does not eventually
bring the current funding into line with the current accrual of

liabilities. Second, while payment of interest on the "unfunded

liability" will keep the debt from growing any larger (if the
current practice of underfunding is discontinued), it will not do
so if the principal amount on which this interest is figured is

grossly underestimated. Finally, if the purpose is to keep the
unfunded liability from growing, this should probably be
4   r4-.-'-J. r   4-   ,1   4
                                1.   . c LL1L LL1O.L ILtJIILLLia..j. LJ. LIi.     "'
                                                                                J41Uy _1_._
                                                                                      Lflt    .LLL


lieu"         interest payment that the Congress should make should be
figured on the basis of the real liability and should be figured
at the real interest rate. By contrast, the Congress has chosen
to pay interest on what might be termed the "nominal" liability
——     which ignores inflation and is far too small —— and at the
"nominal" interest rate, which includes a charge for the
inflation erosion of principal.

            As it turns out, the current high nominal interest rates, in

conjunction with a substantially underestimated "debt" on which
to pay them, led the Congress to pay, by accident and not by
design, approximately the "right" amount of interest last year ——
about         $10      billion ——     and perhaps even a bit more than would be
required to pay the real interest rate on a more accurately

estimated liability. The current economic setting might,
therefore, provide a natural time to switch from the rather
awkward           method that has been employed to date toward one that has
a better conceptual and practical basis.



                                                    17
The Financial Condition of the Civil Service Retirement System:
   The Baseline Simulation for 1981
     To provide a baseline for comparison of the major reform
proposal for the retirement system, an analysis of the Civil

Service Retirement System for 1981 was prepared using a computer
simulation model that represented 1700 age—experience categories
of employees for each sex. Simulations were run for 120 years.
All computations were carried out in real terms, and all economic
assumptions were specified in terms of real rates. The rates of

promotional salary increases, voluntary, involuntary, and
disability retirement, and separation of employment due to
withdrawal or death were projected from recent experience of the

system, published in its annual reports.
     Critical Economic Assumptions The baseline simulation
assumes that the fund will earn a risk free real return of 1.5

percent on its assets. As indicated earlier, the fund could
conceivably be managed so as to earn a higher expected rate of

interest, but probably only by investment in higher risk assets.
On a risk—adjusted basis, this rate would appear to be

reasonable.   It simply assumes that there are no "bargains" ——

securities with higher than average risk—adjusted returns    ——

available in the capital markets. A lower rate would be
defensible, but in the spirit of erring on the side of
conservatism in estimating the unfunded liability, this rate was

chosen for the base case.4
     General schedule increases in federal salaries are assumed

to proceed at the rate of 1 percent annually in real terms. This
presumption is based on the notion that long term real national




                               18
economic growth will be sustained in excess of 1 percent per
annum, and the real wages of federal employees will not decline
permanently relative to the real wages of private sector

employees.
     Under existing law, benefits paid to retired employees are
indexed to the cost of living. In the past, the form of indexing
guaranteed growth of these benefits in real terms. Recently,
however, the indexing has been modified so that increases are
granted only once each year, and are related to the increase in
    A1L(I.           .LflU4 L?VL LLJ JL .UJ1I LLI —IUUflLL1.
                                                       ..L.t.


Accordingly,   the baseline simulation assumes that benefits after
retirement will be constant in real terms.

     Estimates of real values for the current retirement system
are nearly neutral with respect to the assumed rate of inflation.
The only aspect of the system that is defined in nominal terms is
the computation of "average" salary, which is used to establish
the annuity payment in the first year of retirement. This
average, which is taken over the highest three years of salary,

is lower relative to salary in the final year if inflation is
high than if it is low. Even this effect, however, is relatively
minor. The baseline simulation assumes continuing annual
inflation at the rate of 5 percent.

     Table 3 summarizes the fundamental assumptions of the
baseline simulation.

     Baseline Simulation Results A summary of the results of the
baseline simulation is shown in Table 4. The unfunded liability
of the retirement system as of October, 1981 was about $540
billion. This net liability results from a current present value



                                19
Table 3. Baseline Simulation Assumptions




                                       Annual Rate

Real rate of return on fund assets          1.5 %

Real rate of salary growth                  1.0

Real rate of benefits growth                0.0
  (after retirement)
Rate of general price increase              5.0




Retirement, Disability, Death, Separation Rates:
  As reported in Office of Personnel Management, Annual Report   of
                  the Civil Service Pension System, 1980. US
                  Government Printing Office, 1981.




                                 20
Table 4. Baseline Simulation Results for the Civil Service
           Retirement System, October 1981


Present Value of Projected Benefit Payments:

            Current Annuitants        $269 billion
            Future Annuitants         $625 billion


            Total                                                 $894 billion

Present Value of Projected Future Salaries:
            ('ii,-rcr4-
               — a '—4 *   S          71
                                      r I w a.,h11r'r
                                               a .i. a a. .,a a



Present Value of Future Contributions:
            Employees                 $   54 billion

            Employer (current         $   54 billion
              funding rate)

            Total Contributions                                   ($108 billion)
Current Assets:                                                   ($ 73 billion)

Excess of Liabilities over Assets                                 $713 billion
   (current funding rate)

Additional Employer Contributions                                 ($172 billion)
   (full funding rate)



Actuarial Unfunded Liability                                      $540 billion

Normal Cost as fraction of salaries                                36.2 per cent

Unfunded Liabiliy per Employee                                    $200 thou sand




Source: Simulation. See Table 3 and text for assumptions.




                                 21
of projected benefit payments of $894 billion, with projected
future collections (at a full funding rate) of $281 billion and
current assets    of   $73 billion. The estimated present value of
future benefit payments to employees now working or on the
annuity rolls exceeds the present value of projected total future
salary payments to current employees. Even if we used all of the
current funds, and contributed an amount equal to all future

salary payments to existing employees, we would be unable to pay
                      ——
LLIt L)ez1eLi..b LV Lilebe                                 — 1.ilC LUi.L.
                           CUt VYCCb I1O LLIVbC ULLCI1iY Vii

Cash solvency will only be maintained through supplemental
appropriations and the contributions made by and on behalf of

employees not yet employed.
       The actuarial unfunded liability effectively assumes that
future funding of the system will be at the full normal cost
rate. As Table 4 indicates, this amounts to an additional
contribution over the remaining working lives of current

employees of about $172 billion (in present value) more than is

currently contemplated under existing official employer
contributions. Thus, an alternative way to read the results of
the baseline simulation is to observe that if we make additional
contributions over and above the official 7 percent of salaries

in amounts equal toga present value of $172 billion, then we will

only be behind in funding the retirement of current employees by

$540   billion   (in present value) when they retire. If we continue
current underfunding, our net liability to these workers will be

over $700   billion,
       The full funding rate associated with the current employee,




                                   22
benefit, and economic structure of the retirement system is about
36 percent of payroll, roughly the same as that projected by the
Board of Actuaries on the basis of similar assumptions for the

preceding year. Since the contribution rate (exempting the

supplemental payment from the Treasury) is only 14 percent, the
annual underfunding of the current obligations of the system is
approximately 22 percent of payroll, or about $14 billion this

year.     In addition to this underfunding, the fund is depleted by
virtue of not receiving interest income on the investments it

would have made with the extra funds it would have if it were
fully funded. In 1981, with an unfunded liability of $540
billion and a presumed real rate of return of 1 1/2 percent, this
was an additional $8 billion loss.
        The condition of the retirement system would have

deteriorated by about $22 billion in real terms last year if the
Treasury had made no supplemental contribution to it. As it was,
with a supplemental contribution of about $14 billion, the
financial condition of the fund deteriorated by about $8 billion.

Thus, presuming 5 percent inflation, the current unfunded
liability can be expected to be about $575 billion in 1982
dollars.

        Under the baseline assumptions, the projected cash position
of the retirement system is not critical for the moment, due to

the projected continuing supplemental appropriations from the
Treasury. In the early years of the next century, however, the
situation can be expected to deteriorate. Following a decade of
relative stability in the level of fund assets, funds will begin
to flow out at the rate of about $3 billion per year. This trend



                                  23
will be exacerbated by the reduction in interest income received
as the invested funds decrease, and will not be offset under

current projections of the Treasury's supplemental payment. The
baseline simulation projects approximately $40 billion in
available funds in the year 2000 ——   roughly   half today's assets
—— and a zero cash balance in 2008.

     The financial condition of the current retirement system is
precarious. The system has an enormous net liability ——     roughly
half the size of the currently recognized national debt. In
nominal terms, the unfunded liability of the civil service
retirement system appears to be growing at roughly the same rate
as the national debt, and so is staying about half as large. The
nominal change in the national debt from year to year is referred
to as the "budget deficit," and it attracts widespread attention
in the Congress and in the media. The corresponding nominal
"deficit" of the federal pension system this year is

approximately $35 billion.
     As with the explicit national debt, great care must be

exercised in interpreting the quasi—debt represented by the
nation's civil service pension obligations. First, just as some
of the costs are passed along to future taxpayers, some of the

benefits may be also. If, for example, the pension obligations
were incurred as federal workers built physical assets to be used
in the future, some of the benefits will be received by future
taxpayers. Second, while their liability is a real one,
taxpayers presumably obtained some benefits in the form of
reduced wages paid to federal workers as a consequence of the




                               24
pension "compensation" those workers received. Indeed, there is

evidence that, excluding pension compensation, federal employees
receive lower pay than comparable workers in the private sector.
If part of the (political) purpose of having a federal pension

system    is to move some of federal worker's compensation off—
budget, the political goal of reducing the apparent   cost of

government services to taxpayers is only met if the   on—budget
portion   of compensation (wages) is in fact reduced. We would
thus expect that pension obligations were incurred in exchange
for some reduction in wages. However, this exchange is likely to
be inefficient, because both workers and taxpayers appear to view
$1 of present value of pension benefits less than $1 of current
wages. If, for example, workers value $1 of pension benefits at
50 cents, then total compensation must be increased as wage

reductions are achieved by granting pension benefits.
     Moreover, many would argue that public debts should be a
source   of alarm only when they grow as a fraction of gross
national product —— that is, when the burden of taxes they
represent grows as a fraction of taxpayers' incomes. Even      on
this standard, however, the nation's civil service pension
obligations are growing, albeit rather slowly. Unlike the
explicit national debt, which consists of nominal governmental
obligations whose real burden is eroded by inflation, federal

pensions are fully indexed, so that inflation does not materially
alter the real size of the taxpayers' debt. In addition,
continuing underfunding adds to the real unfunded liability each
year. In 1982, a contribution of about $19 billion more than the
official employee and employer funding would have been required



                                25
to keep the pension obligation constant as a fraction of GNP (at
about 20 percent). Ever after the Treasury's supplement payment
of $14 billion, an additional $5 billion would have been
required. Thus, even viewed against the rather weak standard
that public debts should not be permitted to rise faster than the

economy is expanding, federal pension obligations constitute a
material problem.
        The magnitude of the pension debt might best be viewed in
j_t..
LUC L Oil          .r ..i...,.
            Lt AL 'JL   LLIC
                                 .c...
                                 .L   a i_           ti                        A.Ll..
                                        L L Lll L WIlL i.e LIIC iia LI. UllaJ. L.4CIJ L .1.

ostensibly on behalf of and for the benefit of 230 million
taxpayers, the pension fund is mainly for the benefit of 2.7
million current employees and 1.7 million annuitants. (The
benefits to the taxpayer of accruing the fund —— the services of
the employees as they earned these pensions —— have already been
received.) This net liability is increasing at the rate of

roughly $10 billion per year in real terms. Including the
inflation adjustment in the outstanding principal, this year's
increase is about $35 billion in nominal terms —— $13,000 for

every current employee.
        Some observers regard the public's pension obligations as
less binding than the explicit national debt. There is no
contractual obligation, they argue, and the rules are subject to
change at any time. Thus, this argument concludes, we should be
less concerned about pension obligations than about other federal
commitments. There is clearly some force to this logic; as we

will discuss in the next section, there is currently before

Congress a proposal that would substantially alter the existing



                                                    26
system. This should not, however, persuade us too easily to
ignore the scope of the existing commitments. Precisely because
they are a less visible and less directly costly form of

compensation, it seems unlikely that they will disappear as a
feature of the federal employment landscape.




                             27
                          Section II

                   The Current Reform Proposal


     The financial condition of the Civil Service Pension System

has finally begun to attract significant policy notice in
Washington. The marked increase in attention is due in part to a
spreading recognition and understanding of estimates like those

presented in the last section, and in part to the more intense

scrutiny given to all government retirement programs in
connection with studies of Social Security reform. The Office of

Personnel Management is currently drawing up proposals for
substantial reform. While they have not yet been formally
presented to the Congress, their general outline is beginning to
emerge. Administration budget requests for the new fiscal year
base estimates for receipts and disbursements of the retirement
fund on a system of benefits considerably different from that

currently in place.
     This section provides an analysis of the proposed new
retirement system embodied in the President's proposed FY 1984

budget. While this may not be the final form of the reform

proposal eventually presented to the Congress, it does represent
one seriously contemplated revision of the current system. It

provides an intriguing counterpoint to the existing structure.




                                 28
The Perceived Problem

     Why   should the present system be reformed? A simple answer
would be that it   eventually   will not be able to meet its
obligations. As    we saw in the last section, however, this is not
an immediate problem. The current system can continue to meet
its cash obligations until at least the turn of the century.

Why, then, go to the trouble of reforming the system?
     Officials involved in the reform process give two answers to

this question. First, they observe that the system must be
reformed at some point, and that now is as good a time as any to

begin dealing with the fund's long term problems. Second, they
observe that the system simply appears too costly, too generous,
and too easy to abuse. It is costly in the sense that its normal
funding cost is approximately twice that of a typical high

quality private sector pension plan. It is generous in that it

provides a relatively high level of benefits to many employees
who retire at an early age —— some can retire as early as age 55

and qualify for pensions replacing nearly 60 percent of their
pre—retirement incomes. Over half of federal employees retire
before the age of 60; the   comparable figure for the private
sector   is only 7 percent. The average replacement rate of
pensions for pre—retirement income for federal retirees is over
55 percent, considerably higher than for their private sector

counterparts. Finally, the system is easy to "abuse, in the
view of some, because after retiring on an already generous

federal pension at a young age, many former federal employees
will take private sector jobs that will qualify them for at least
the minimum benefit under Social Security. Indeed, about 75



                                   29
percent of federal retirees receive Social Security benefits.
This so—called "double—dipping" appears to many to be an
excessively generous feature of the combined civil service

retirement and the Social Security systems.
       One way to characterize this perceived problem is to examine
the value of pension benefits received at different retirement

ages. While this will differ for each employee, depending upon
when    employment began, how long he or she will live after
retirement, and so on, the general pattern will be similar across
employees. As an illustration, we can look at the pension
"entitlements" of a typical employee.
      Figure 1 shows the capitalized value of the pension received
under   the current system by an employee who joins the system at
age 25 and who receives "typical" longevity salary increases over
his or her lifetime. General schedule increases compensate for a
5 percent annual rate of inflation and provide for a 1 percent

real growth in salary. The figures are presented for an employee

who would attain a nominal salary of $25,000 at the age of 58.
In order to make the figures for the value of pension benefits to
employees retiring at different ages comparable, the values are

shown in terms of their equivalent capital values at age 65. For

example, if the employee retires at age 40, s/he would receive
pension benefits equal in value to a $21,000 check received at

age 65; if s/he retired at age 62, the benefits received would be
equal in value to a $290,000 check received at age 65. Both the
government and the employee are assumed to value assets and

obligations    at a 1 1/2 percent real rate of discount, and the


                                  30
      $ 350,000
-a

0      300,000
'U
N
1

       250,000

z'U
-J     2OO

0
'U

       150,000



        100,000




                 25           30                         40        45         50         55            60   65
                                                                                    AGE AT RETIREMENT

                                Figure   I   Equivalent Capitalized Value of Pension Benefits at Age   65
                                             (computed for an illustrative federal employee)
                  Source Cccutations See text for ossumptons
employee is assumed to live until age 74.
    ,As Figure 1 shows, there is a substantial discontinuity in

the value of pension entitlements when the employee becomes
eligible f or an immediate pension. Up to this point, the system
provides for a deferred pension that starts at age 62. Deferred
pension benefits are defined in nominal terms. Their present
value is reduced by deferral, and is also eroded by inflation
between the time of retirement and the start of the annuity. By
contrast, once the pension benefits start they are indexed to
inflation, so that they stay constant in real terms. The twin
effects of deferral and inflation erosion of the deferred pension
benefits keep the value of the pension entitlement small until
the employee becomes eligible for full retirement and an

immediate pension.
    The discontinuity in the entitlement system comes from the
shift in the entitlement's value as the employee crosses this

combination of age and experience boundary. As Figure 1 shows,

the value of pension entitlements for our illustrative employee

accumulates slowly across his or her working life, reaching by
age 54 an amount equivalent to about $130,000 given on his or her
65th birthday. The next year, when the employee qualifies for
full retirement, the value suddenly jumps to the equivalent of
$323,000. It stays at this level for approximately three years,
and then begins to fall, reaching $248,000 if the employee
retires at age 65.
     It is clear from Figure 1 that federal employees have a
substantial, increasing incentive to work until they reach

eligibility for full retirement. At that point, the equivalent



                              32
value of their entitlement peaks; if they continue working, it
starts to fall. This is because the period of retirement gets
shorter, an effect which outweighs the increase in pension
benefits resulting from higher average salary at retirement and
credits for additional service years. If the system is in fact
too costly, it almost certainly has something to do with the
level of entitlements attained at the ages of 55 to 60, and less
to do with the entitlements thereafter.

     To see this last point more clearly, we can examine the
relationship between the age at retirement and the funding rate
that would be required to set aside sufficient assets over the
employee's working life to cover these pension benefits. Figure
2 shows that fraction of salary that would have to be set aside
in order to fund the retirement obligations of the illustrative
employee discussed above. The required funding rate rises slowly
across the employee's working life; if he or she retires before
age 54, the funding rate is below 15 percent. At the age of

eligibility for full retirement, however, the required rate jumps
sharply, to about 36 percent. If the employee retires later, the
rate drops steadily, reaching about 19 percent at age 65. If the
cost of the pension system ——    in   the sense of its normal cost

funding rate       is regarded as too high, it is likely to have

more to do with the problem of providing benefits for employees
who retire in the early years after they become entitled to a
full pension, rather than with those who retire before age 55 or
at the   normalH   retirement age of 65.




                                 33
        40

W
4
    4
        30
z
0I-
-
WV)     20




        '0%




                                                                      50         55         60
                                                                              AGE AT RETIREMENT


                            Figure 2 Fund,ng Rates Required for Retirement for Illustrative Employee

              Source: Calculations. See text   for assumptions.
The Proposed Reform Package
     The reforms embodied in the Presidents FY84 budget request
include four basic revisions in the pension benefits provided by
the retirement system:

     o A change in the definition of average salary on which
the pension is based. Currently, the average is based on the
highest three years of earnings; the new system would base it on
the highest five years. This would be a return to the definition
used up until 1969;
     o A modification of the credits for service years.

Currently, the system gives credits totaling 16.25 percent for
the first 10 years of service and 2 percent for each year of

service thereafter; the new system would give credits of 1.5

percent for every service year. This provision will only be
invoked in FY89 and after, arid then only if the calculated normal
cost of the system continues to exceed 22 percent;
     o A reduction in the adjustment of pension benefits for
inflation for those who are under 62 years of age. Currently,

all pension benefits are fully indexed. Under the new system,
those under age 62 would receive cost of living adjustments equal

to one—half of the increase in the general price level; and

     o A penalty for early retirement. Pension benefits would
be reduced by 5 percent for each year of age at retirement under
65. Thus, an employee retiring at age 58 would have benefits
reduced by 7 times 5 percent. This penalty would be phased in by
age cohort over a 10 year period. Thus, an employee who is 54
when the system is instituted would have benefits reduced by 1/2
percent for each year he or she retires before age 65; an



                                 35
employee who is 53 would have benefits reduced by 1 percent per
year, and so on. Employees under the age of 45 would retire
under a system with the full early retirement penalty.

     In addition to these alterations in the benefits formulas
and cost of living adjustments, the proposed package would alter
both employee and employer contributions. In the first year,
contributions for both employees and the Treasury would be raised

from the current 7 percent of salary to 9 percent; in the

following year and thereafter both would be set at 11 percent.
     These "adjustments" in the benefit package are quite
substantial, both individually and in combination. Table 5 shows
the effect of shifting the definition of average salary from a 3
year to a 5 year basis. Since the average salary calculation is
defined in nominal terms, this effect is a function of the

underlying rate of inflation. As Table 5 indicates, the
adjustment will reduce pension entitlements for all employees by
roughly 4 to 9 percent, depending upon the rate of inflation.
     For those retiring after more than 10 years of service,

changing the credit for service years also represents a
substantial reduction in pension benefits. Table 6 shows the

current and new annual pension entitlements as fractions of

'average" salary, and the resulting percentage reduction in
benefits. As Table 6 shows, those who retire with more    than 20
years of service face reductions of roughly 20 percent in their
pension benefits relative to those received under the current

system.
     The benefit reductions from the proposed change in the cost


                              36
Table 5. Reductions in Pension Entitlements from Change in
           Definition of Average Salary


                                      Inflation Rate
                          2%               5%           8%


Three year average       .957              .931        .906
   Final salary


Five year average        9l6               868         e824
   Final salary

Reduction from using
 five year instead        4.3%             6.8%         9.1%
 of three year average




Source: Calculations based on average rates of salary increase
due to seniority plus an assumed real growth of 1 percent per
year in federal wages.




                                 37
Table 6. Reductions in Pension Entitlementsfrorn Change in the
           Credit for Years of Service




                      Pension as a Fraction of
Service Years           "Average" Salary              Reduction
at Retirement
                      Current         Proposed

    5                    7.5%            7 • 5%              0.0%
   10                   16.3            15.0                 7.7
   15                   26.3            22.5             14.3
   20                   36.3            30.0             17.2

   25                   46.3            37.5             18.9
   30                   56.3            45.0             20.0

   35                   66.3            52.5             20.8
   40                   76.3            60.0             21.3




Source: Calculations based on current and proposed pension
benefit formulas.




                                38
of living indexing for pensioners under age 62 and the early
retirement penalty affect only those who retire between age 55

and 65. Lowering the cost of living adjustment for early
retirees reduces the value of the benefits that will be received

for the rest of the employee's life. The net reduction in
benefits therefore depends on pensioner longevity. If the
employee were to die shortly after age 62, the reduction would be
a smaller percentage of the total value of the pension than if
the reduced pension is received for a long period. An
illustration using our illustrative employee may be helpful.
Table 7 shows the reduction in the present value of pension
entitlements from adopting the proposed change in the cost of
living adjustment for a retiree under the age of 62. The
employee is assumed to live to the age of 74 and to discount at a
rate of 1.5 percent in real terms. As Table 7 indicates, early
retirees may face an overall loss of over 10 percent of the
present value of their pension entitlements even if the rate of

inflation is only 5 percent per year.
     The effect of the early retirement penalty is, of course,
the easiest to describe; it simply amounts to a 5 percent penalty
for each year of 'early" retirement, where 'early' is defined as
under age 65. Once this feature is fully phased in, it amounts
to a loss of one half of the pension entitlements (relative to
the old system) for anyone retiring at age 55.
     Taken together, the proposed reforms amount to a
considerable overhaul of the pension entitlements embodied in the
Civil Service Retirement system, particularly for those who



                             39
Table 7. Percentage Reduction in Present Value of Pension
           Entitlements from One Half Instead of Full Cost of
           Living Indexing to Age 62



                                Inflation Rate
Age at Retirement
                          2%          5%          8%


     55                  5.6%        13.3%       20.2%

     56                  5.0         11.8        18.0

     57                  4.3         10.2        15.7

     58                  3.5          8.5        13.1

     59                  2.7          6.7        10.4

     60                  1.9          4.6         7.3

     61                  1.0          2.4         3.8

     62




Source: Calculations based on typical longevity salary increases
and assuming real salaries increase at 1 percent per year in real
terms. Based on an employee who will live to age 74 and who
discounts at 1.5 percent in real terms.




                                40
retire between the ages of 55 and 60. Table 8 shows the
percentage reduction for various retirement ages from each of the
changes separately and for the package as a whole for the
illustrative    employee discussed above. These calculations assume
a rate of inflation of 5 percent. As Table 8 indicates, even for
the    least affected group retiring at age 65, the package of
reforms amounts to a reduction in benefits of more than one
quarter. For those who choose to retire as early as age 55, the
entitlement is reduced almost 70 percent.

       Figure 3 shows the effect of these reductions on the rate of

funding (as a fraction of salary) that would be required to
support the resulting pension benefits for our illustrative

employee. The most dramatic reductions are from the changes in
the service years credits and from the early retirement penalty.
The combined effect of the reductions is heavily concentrated on

ages 55 to 60, as Table 8 indicated. Figure 3 shows that the
combination of the proposed reductions results in the virtual
removal   of the anomalous discontinuity under the current system
that   occurs when the employee attains eligibility for full

retirement. Reducing the anomaly of the old system is attained
through a series of changes that decrease the level of benefits

at every age, selectively targeted so that the reduction is
greatest where the anomaly of the current system is largest.




                                   Al-I-
      40%

                           Current system.
WV,
                 —-—-—     System   ofter change   in "overage   salary"
   0                       definition.
'- 2 3O%         ————— System       after above reduction and change in
                                                                                                                  N
                           benefits formula.
                 —---——--- System after oH above reductions and change
                           in COLA.

                           System after oil above reductions ond
                           early retirement penalty.
      20%




                                                                                                        —
                                                                                                    —
                                                                                                —

                                                                                           .—
      10%                                                                        -.


            25                           3'S              4'O              4'S        50                    5'S       6   65
                                                                                            AGE AT RETIREMENT

                            Figure 3' Funding Rates Required for Retirement Benefits for
                                      illustrative Employee, Before and After Benefit Reductions

            Source Calculations. See text for assumptions.
Table 8. Reductions in the Present Value of Pension Entitlements
           from Proposed Reforms for Illustrative Employee


                       Reduction in Present Value of Pension
Benefits
                                        from change in
 Age at
Retirement      Defn of      Service       1/2     Early     Entire
                uAveragefl    Year         COLA    Retmt     Package*
                Salary       Credits       <62     Penalty
                  (%)          (%)           (%)    (%)        (%)


    30             8            0                               8

    40             7          14                              20
    50             7          19                              25
    55             7          20            13      50        68
    56             7          20            12      45        64
    57             7          20            10      40        60
    58             7          21             9      35        56
    59             7          21             7      30        52

    60             7          21             5      25        47
    61             7          21             2      20        42
    62             7          21                    15        37
    63             7          21                    10        34
    64             7          21                     5        30
    65            7           21                              27




* Individual reductions do not add to combined reduction because
effects are multiplicative, not additive.


Source: Calculations. See text for assumptions.



                                   43
Effects of the Proposed Reductions in Benefits
    The proposed changes would substantially reduce the costs

associated with the federal pension system under any but the most
perverse assumptions about the impacts of the reductions on
retirement behavior. The funding rate associated with full
retirement under the proposed system is less than that under the

current system at practically any age. Almost irrespective of
retirement behavior under the two systems, the new system will be

less expensive than the old.
    Examination of the detailed simulation results for the

proposed system confirms this impression. Table 9 presents
results for the new system under the (rather strong) assumption
that retirement and other experience rates in the system are
invariant to the regime of benefit formulas. The proposed
benefit cuts would reduce the unfunded liability of the system by
about $140 billion, to about $400 billion, and would reduce the

full funding rate from about 36 percent to about 20 percent of
salaries. Given the changes in the contribution rates embodied

in the reform proposal, contributions would be approximately at
the level of normal service costs, effectively putting the system

on a full funding basis. By any standard, this would be regarded
as a significant alteration in the long term position of the

fund. What is perhaps surprising, however, is that, sizable and
significant as these proposed cuts are, the system still has an
unfunded liability of about $400 billion. These alterations will
not come close to eliminating the long term net liabilities of

the pension system.
     If these reductions are not sufficient to eliminate the



                                44
Table 9. Simulation Results for the Civil Service Retirement
           System with Proposed Benefit Reductions, October 1981



Present Value of Projected Benefit Payments:

            Current Annuitants        $256 billion
            Future Annuitiants        $366 billion

            Total                                       $622 billion

Present Value of Projected Future Salaries:

            Current Employees         $776 billion

Present Value of Future Contributions:

            Employees                 $ 84   billion

            Employer                  $   66 billion


            Total Contributions                        ($151 billion)
Current Assets:                                        ($   73 billion)

Actuarial Unfunded Liability                            $398 billion

Normal Cost as fraction of salaries                     19.5 percent

Unfunded Liabiliy per Employee                         $147 thousand




Source: Simulation. See text for assumptions. Assumes no change
          in disability and retirement rates from baseline case.




                                 45
unfunded liability of the system, just what do they do? One
answer comes from comparing the current and proposed systems in
terms of the overall entitlements of current participants. Table
10 shows the net pension wealth of current federal employees

under the two systems. The effect of the benefit reductions on
the entitlements of current participants is dramatic, even if the
impact on the unfunded liability is not. Under today's system,

existing federal employees will receive benefits whose present
value exceeds their future contributions by about $570 billion,
or about $211 thousand per current employee. Under the proposed
modifications to the system, this would be reduced to about $280

billion, or by almost $107 thousand per current employee. This
is a reduction of over one half in the net entitlements of
current federal employees. If the federal government had been
putting aside funds to cover its pension obligations on a full
funding basis in bank accounts with its employeest names on them,
then the proposed modifications of the system would remove half
of the amounts in those accounts. For the advantage of a $53,000
per employee reduction in unfunded liability and reduced

requirements for taxpayer contributions, existing employees lose
$107 each in net pension entitlements.
     What cut in annual pay would be financially comparable to
these benefit reductions? The answer for any particular employee
depends on his or her current age, the age at which he or she
joined the system, current salary, and the age at retirement. We

can, however, easily compute the average for new employees
entering the system. Over the course of their working lives,




                             46
Table 10. Net Pension Wealth of Current Federal Employees Under
            Current and Proposed Retirement Systems
            (All figures in 1981 dollars)


                              Current         Proposed       Change
                              System           System

Present Value of Pension
Benefits to Future             $625 B          $366 B       ($259 B)
Annuitants

Present Value of Future
Contributions by Current      ($    54   B)   ($    84 B)   ($ 30 B)
Employees


Net Pension Wealth                 $571 B          $282 B   ($289 B)
Per Employee Pension Wealth        $211 K          $105 K   ($107 K)




Source: Simulations. See text for assumptions.




                               47
employees within the current system receive pension benefits
equal in value to 36.2 percent of the value of their salaries;

they make a contribution of 7 percent of their salaries toward
these benefits, so the current retirement system constitutes, on

average, a 29.2 percent supplement to wage income. The proposed
system has a funding rate of 19.5 percent, and employees would
contribute 11 percent of this; it thus constitutes an 8.5 percent

supplement to wage income. Stated in terms of its impact on
total compensation by employees over the course of their working
lives, then, the proposed system represents a reduction from
129.2 percent to 108.5 percent of current wage income. This is
equivalent to a 16 percent reduction in total compensation for
employees with the bulk of their working lives ahead of them.
    For employees who have already been in the system for a
number of years, the annual pay cut equivalent to these pension
entitlement reductions is substantially larger. The size of the
pension entitlement cut is similar, but there ate fewer working

years remaining over which to amortize it. Consider, once again,
the employee discussed above, and assume that he or she is

currently 40 years old and has 15 years of service. In working
from age 40 until retirement, the employee will be "paid" in two
ways. First, s/he will receive an annual salary. Second, the
value of his or her pension benefits will rise. Column 1 of

Table 11 shows the percentage of such an employee's total
compensation that would be expected to come in the form of

increases in the value of pension benefit entitlements from the
age of 40 up to various retirement ages. Column 2 shows the
percentage reduction in the value of these entitlements. Column



                              48
Table 11. Pension Reductions as an Equivalent Percentage
            Reduction in Total Compensation for the Remainder of
            the Illustrative Employee's Working Life
            (All figures in percent, to nearest percent)

                  (1)             (2)        (3=1*2)   (4)   (5)

  Age at   Pens Comp Pens Cut  Pens Cut  Wage Cut  Toti Cut
Retirement Toti Comp Pens Comp Toti Comp Totl Comp Toti Comp

   55               37            73            27       2    29

   56               35            68            24       2    27

   57               34            64            22       2    24

   58               32            60            19       2    22

   59               31            55            17       2    20

   60               28            51            14       2    17

   61               27            46            12       2   15

   62               25            40            10       3    13

   63               24            37             9       3    12

   64               22            32             7       3   10

   65               20            29             6       3     9


Column 1: Pension compensation as a percentage of total
     compensation, age 40 to retirement, current system
Column 2: Percentage reduction in pension compensation, age 40
     to retirement, from proposed changes in pension entitlements
Column 3: Percentage reduction in total compensation, age 40 to
     retirement, from proposed reduction in pension benefits
        (column 1 * column   2)

Column 4: Percentage reduction in total compensation, age 40 to
        retirement, from 4 percent decrease in net wages due to
        increase in employee contribution
Column 5: Total percentage reduction in total compensation
        (does not equal column 3 + column 4 because effects are
    multiplicative)
Source: Calculations. See text for assumptions.



                                        49
3 shows the resulting percentage reduction in total compensation
stemming from entitlement cuts; it is the product of columns 1
and 2. Column 4 shows the percentage reduction in total
compensation stemming from the increased employee contribution to
the retirement system. This represents a 4 percent cut in net

wages; it is a smaller fraction of total compensation. Column 5
shows the combined effect of the reduction in pension benefits
and the reduction in net wages as a percentage of compensation
that would have been received under the current system. This
gives the impact of the pension reductions, measured as a pay
cut. As Table 11 indicates, the proposed reforms reduce annual

compensation by nearly 30 percent for an employee currently aged
40 who planned to retire at 55. Even if the employee does not

plan to retire for another 25 years, the proposed pension
adjustments reduce annual pay by about 10 percent over his or her
remaining working life. Viewed in terms of its equivalent in the

form of a general salary reduction, the proposed reform package
clearly constitutes a sizeable alteration from current policies.

       The proposed modifications close the gap that currently
exists between the contributions to the fund and the normal

service costs of the system. Resources to close the gap must

have   come from somewhere. How much was involved, and where did
it come from? A simple way to examine this issue is to compare
the hypothetical "balance sheets" of the current and proposed
systems through a "sources and uses" analysis. Table 12 presents
the balance sheets, and Table 13 shows the "sources" of funds
involved in the change from the current to the proposed system,




                                50
Table 12. Comparative Actuarial Balance Sheets, Current and
                   Proposed Retirement Systems
                   (All figures in billions of 1981 dollars)



                                                   Current     Proposed
                                                   System       System
ASSETS
   Current Assets                                    $ 73        $ 73
   Present Value of Future Contributions

      Current Employees                                54          84

      Employer (at full funding rate)                 227          67


   Total Assets                                      $354        $224

L lAB IL IT I ES

   Present Value of Future Benefits
      Current Annuitants                             $269        $256

      Current Employees                              625         366


     Total                                            894        622

   Fund Balance (Unfunded Liability)                 (540)       (398)


   Total Liabilities and Fund Balance                $354        $224




Source: Simulations. See text for assumptions.




                                      51
Table 13. Sources and Uses Analysis of Proposed Pension System
            Modifications
            (All figures in present value, billions of
            1981 dollars)




Sources of Funds:

  Increases in future contributions by current      $ 30
      employees
  Reductions in benefits to current annuitants       13

  Reductions in benefits to current employees       259


  Total Sources of Funds                            $302



Uses of Funds:

  Reduction in future contributions by employer     $160
       (at full funding rate)
  Reduction in Unfunded Liability                    142


  Total Uses of Funds                               $302




Source: Calculations based on Table 11.




                                52
and the "uses" to which these funds have effectively been put.
        Table 13 indicates that all of the "sourcest' are effectively

from    current or former employees, while all of the "uses"    of
funds   are   to reduce obligations or payments of taxpayers.

Employees pay more and receive less. Taxpayers are projected to
pay less, and are responsible for a smaller unfunded liability.
The proposed package of plan revisions amounts to a very
considerable reduction of taxpayer obligations. Faced with a
"gap" between obligations and income, the Office of Personnel

Management proposal "balances" the system solely by cutting
taxpayer obligations. As Table 13 shows, this would constitute a
$300 billion shift from current federal employees and annuitants

to taxpayers.

The Cash Implications of the Proposed Reforms

       Though they would reduce the net pension wealth of current
employees by over one half, the proposed reforms have a
relatively small impact on the cash outflow from the retirement

system over the next few years. Table 14 shows estimates of the

excess of benefit payments over employee contributions under the
current and proposed systems for 1983 to 2050. This represents
the annual cash deficiency of the fund, before employer

contributions, interest on fund assets, and supplemental payments
from the Treasury. It is the amount that must be made up out of
some combination of payments from the Treasury and reductions in

fund assets. As Table 14 indicates, the cash deficiency of the
fund under the current system is approximately $20 billion per
year (in 1981 dollars) over the next seven years. Under the




                                  53
Table 14. Estimated Annual Cash Deficiencies of the Current and
            Proposed Retirement Systems, 1983 to 2050
            (All figures in billions of 1981 dollars)

                 Current         Proposed         Change
                 System           System
   1983          $   18.2         $   14.8       $    3.4
   1984              19.4             15.9            3.5

   1985              20.4             16.8            3.8
   1986              21.4             17.1            4.3

   1987              22.2             17.4            4.8

   1988              22.9             17.6            5.3

   1989              23.5             17.6            5.9
   1990              23.9             17.7            6.2

   2000              26.3             15.7           10.6
   2010              27.4             13.5           13.9
   2020              22.8              9.7           13.1


   2050              12.8              4.0            8.8




Source: Simulations. See text for assumptions.




                            54
proposed system, this would be reduced to about $16 billion per
year, or by about 20 percent. Thus, the net cash outflow from

the Treasury (including the employer contribution, interest on
the fund, supplemental payments, and so on) is reduced by about
$4 billion per year in the early years of the reform. For the
years from 2000 to 2050, the annual cash deficiency will have

been reduced by between $10 and $15 billion per year. Thus, the
major gains of the proposed reforms —— viewed from the Treasuryts
perspective on a cash basis —— are not realized for many years.

Incentive Effects of the Proposed Reforms
     In addition to changing the level of pension benefits that
will be received by federal workers, the proposed reforms

dramatically change the time pattern of benefit accruals. Since
the annual increments in pension entitlements are a considerable
fraction of total compensation under the current system, the

proposed system will have a strikingly different set of
incentives for retirement behavior. The incentives for any given

worker depend upon his or her personal salary history, years of
experience, age, and prospective lifespan. For purposes of
illustration, we can examine the incentives implicit in the

current and proposed systems for the employee used in the
examples discussed above. Table 15 shows the annual salary and
annual increments to pension entitlements (both in real terms)
under the current and proposed systems for an employee who enters
the system at age 25 and who receives the average annual

longevity salary increases as well as general schedule increases
averaging 1 percent in real terms. In assessing the value of




                             55
Table 15. Annual Salaries and Increments to Pension Entitlements
            (In Excess of Normal Return to Accrued Entitlement),
            Illustrative Employee
            (All dollar figures in thousands)


                     Current System              Proposed System

Age    Real          Incr in           Toti      Incr in         Toti
      Salary          Real            Annual      Real          Annual
                     Pension Compstn             Pension        Compstn
                     Entitlmt                    En t it 1 mt
        (1)               (2)         (3=1+2)       (4)         (5=1+4)


45     $17.1         $     3.0        $   20.2   $ 2.3          $   19.4

50     20.1                5.5            25.6       4.0            24.1

51     20.7                6.1            26.7       4.5            25.2
52     21.3                6.8            28.1       5.0            26.3

53     21.8               7.7             29.5       5.6            27.4

54     22.5                8.6            31.1       6.3            28.8
55     23.0              117.0         140.1         3.6            26.6

56     23.7               0.0             23.7       7.6            31.3
57     24.4           — .8                23.5       7.7            32.0

58     25.0           — 1.8               23.2       7.6            32.6

59     25.6           — 3.0               22.7       7.3            33.0

60     26.3           — 4.1               22.2       7.3            33.6

61     27.0           — 5.5               21.4       6.7            33.6

62     27.6              — 6.9            20.7       6.1            33.7

63     28.3           — 8.4               19.9       1.7            30.0

64     29.0           — 9.9               19.1         .2           29.1
65     29.6           —11.6               18.1     —1.7             27.9




Source: Calculations. See text for assumptions.



                                 56
pension benefits, we assume that the employee uses a discount
rate of 1.5 percent in real terms and that he or she will live to
age 74. To make it comparable to an annual salary figure, the
annual increase in pension entitlements is measured as the change
in the present value of future pension benefits above a 1.5

percent real return on the existing entitlement. It can be

interpreted as the amount that was added in a given year to the
pension entitlements in addition to crediting an annual interest
payment of 1.5 percent in real terms.5
     There is a sharp contrast in retirement incentives between
the current and proposed systems. Under the current system,
annual increments in the pension (in excess of the normal rate of
return on what had already been accrued) are roughly 30 to 35
percent of salary in the years from age 50 to age 54. As the
employee works from age 54 to 55, the pension entitlement jumps
markedly, as we saw in Figure 1; in this year the increment to
pension wealth is over 5 times the salary. After age 56,
however, the pension wealth falls with additional years of work;

the pension system actually constitutes a negative component in
total compensation after employees become eligible for full
retirement. By the time our illustrative employee reaches age
60, the pension system is acting as a 15 percent cut in salary;
by age 62 it has become a 25 percent cut. The net effect of this

pattern of pension entitlement increases together with longevity
and general schedule increases in wages is to make total annual

compensation climb steeply in real terms in the years before full

eligibility and to make it drop dramatically when full

eligibility is reached. Thus, under the current system federal


                              57
workers have a strong incentive to continue working in the last

few years before they become eligible for full retirement; in the
years thereafter, they have as strong incentive to retire.
       In contrast, the pension entitlements in the proposed

retirement system provide a relatively large supplement to
salaries for continued work through age 62. As our illustrative
employee works from age 52 through 61, the increment to pension
entitlements (in excess of the real return on the portion already
accrued) represents the equivalent of a 20 to 30 percent salary

supplement. The only anomaly is at age 55, when the early
retirement penalty of the new system has a particularly strong
effect. Under the proposed system, total compensation for a

year's   work rises in real terms relatively smoothly up to about
age 62. No sudden jumps in effective annual compensation would
give   the employee a strong incentive to retire early. Moreover,
the reduction in the level of pension benefits may provide an

additional incentive to keep working; many employees may not feel
they can afford to retire.
       As a consequence of these alterations in the retirement

incentives, the adjustment in retirement behavior and in the age
structure of federal employment could be dramatic if the proposed

system were adopted. This may well be desirable, if, for
example, too many highly experienced workers are retiring too
early under the current system. On the other hand, its
implications for the flexibility of the system and the
opportunities for advancement for younger workers are obvious.

Since this change may have a material impact upon the workings of



                                58
the entire federal employment system, its implications should be
carefully reviewed.




                               59
                               Section III

           Reforming the Funding of the Retirement System

       The Civil Service Retirement System is in need of reform.

The current funding system is not fully coherent and is far from

adequate. It represents neither full funding of current
obligations nor a conceptually sound means of coping with past
underfunding. There is a large and growing gap between the
assets and obligations of the fund.      It can be closed only by

putting more money in or by taking less money out.
       The reform proposal embodied in the President's FY84 budget

request goes a long way toward closing the existing gap through a
series of benefit reductions. The unfunded liability would be
cut by some $140 billion to about $400 billion, and the funding
rate would fall from 36.2 percent to 19.5 percent. The
government's required cash payments would be reduced by     about $4
billion per year for the rest of this decade, and by larger
annual   amounts thereafter.

       Reducing the government's liabilities —— which ultimately
reduces funds taken in one form or another from taxpayers ——    is
one side of the story. The other side consists of a series of
substantial benefit reductions for current federal employees.
The present value of their pension entitlements (net of the value

of their future contributions) would be cut by approximately one—
half, or by about $105 thousand for each current federal

employee. This is equivalent to a general schedule decrease of
about 15   percent   on average for employees who have joined
recently; the effective reduction in annual compensation for some



                                 60
employees who have been in the system for more than 15 years is
over 30 percent.

     Whether such a substantial reconfiguration of the
compensation of federal workers is wise or fair is eminently
debatable. The issue cannot be settled with reference to the
retirement system alone; pension benefits are one component of a
total compensation package that includes wages and other fringe
benefits. A full review of the level of total federal

compensation is well beyond the scope of this paper; it should be
obvious that no conclusions about "fairness" can be reached in
the absence of such an analysis.
     Some observers have argued that the level of federal pension
compensation is simply too high on an absolute scale. Such
arguments are often raised on the basis of comparisons with

private sector pension plans. Most private plans provide
benefits substantially less than those of federal retirees, and
have full funding rates that are correspondingly lower than that
of the federal   system. Without a similar comparison   of the wage

compensation   received   by federal and private workers, it is
impossible to draw any inference from such observations.
     There is another reason to believe that such a comparison
may be misleading. It is by no means obvious that private
workers are appropriately providing for their retirement through

their pension plans or through personal saving, even allowing for
their access to Social Security. Most private pensions and other

personal savings plans may not provide adequately for
increasingly long retirements.
    Consider, for example, an employee whose income rises by 2



                                 61
to 3 percent in real terms across a working life of 40 years.
Suppose s/he will live for 18 years after retiring, and desires a
retirement income that is constant in real terms at a level of 70

percent of income before retirement. If the rate of return on
assets put aside to provide this retirement income is 1.5 percent
in real terms, then s/he should be saving about one third of

income during the working years. Because of our increasingly
long lifespans and the low real rates of return on invested

assets (particularly on low—risk investments, after allowing for

taxes), retirement is an extremely expensive consumption item.
     Rather than criticizing the federal system for providing
more than private plans, one might instead ask whether the

retirement benefits those plans provide are adequate. It is
commonly alleged that the provision of benefits fully indexed to
inflation is bankrupting the federal pension system. But who
among us would care to retire on a pension that provided a fixed
annuity in a world where we might live as long as 25 years in
retirement and where we have recently witnessed periods of
unexpected inflation that in 5 years cut the purchasing power of

fixed annuities in half?
     If, instead of criticizing the federal system for its
relative expense, we focus instead on the fact that it is nearly
alone in providing well for what is a demonstrably —— and
surprisingly ——   expensive part of life, then we may be led to
diagnose a very different set of "problems" of the federal
compensation system. First, it may shift our attention to
federal wages rather than pension benefits. If retirement is




                               62
expensive and federal employees want to provide for it through an

(appropriately) expensive pension system, then they should not
also expect their wages to be comparable to those in the private
sector. Private sector workers have less generous pension plans
and are —- we hope ——   using their higher current incomes to set
aside personal assets to supplement their inadequate pensions.
Arguably, if the total compensation of federal workers is too
high, it is perhaps their wages, rather than their pension
benefits, that are out of line.

     This suggests that we may want to look beyond benefit
reductions as a means of closing the existing gap in the

retirement system. Congress may eventually decide that the
pension system is configured about right ——      that   is, that fully
indexed pensions are the right form, and that the current level

of benefits is appropriate. In that case, the gap would •have to

be closed from the other side, by finding additional funding
either from the employees ——   that    is, from reductions in the net

wages of federal workers ——    or from taxpayers, in one form or
another.
     If we believe that the pension benefit adequacy of the
federal system should be viewed as a strength rather than as a
weakness, a second problem that emerges is the retirement
behavior of federal workers. If the level of benefits granted is
roughly right, but the system is too expensive, then perhaps the
average employee works for too short and retires for too long a

period. This view is entirely consistent with the existing
structure of pay incentives, which provide substantially lower
effective annual compensation for work after attainment of full



                                  63
retirement eligibility. It is also consistent with the evidence
that half of federal workers retire before age 60. If we take
this view, then, a crucial problem of the existing system lies
not in its level of benefits, but in the fact that they are

accrued too early.
     This view suggests that one approach to reforming the
retirement system would include a combination of benefit
adjustments to reconfigure retirement incentives and additional

funding to permit maintenance of pension adequacy. In this case,
the following options may be in the right direction.

Improvements in Disclosure
     The public is almost completely unaware of the magnitude of
the future burden represented by the net liabilities of the
retirement system. Even knowledgeable commentators on federal
budget issues are largely ignorant of the size of the system's

quasi—debt. Substantially improved disclosure —— more frequent,
less arcane, more accurate, and better presented reports on
system status ——   is   a prerequisite to serious attention. As with

most off—budget expenditures, a strong dose of public scrutiny

might have a salutary effect.
     Disclosure may also help make federal decision—makers aware

of the full cost of federal employees. Current guidelines for
costing employee time take account of "fringe benefits," but
substantially underestimate the expense associated with the

retirement system. Making this correction could bring decisions
on labor expense and, for example, the advisability of
substituting capital for labor in the federal government, more



                                 64
into line with reality.

Increasing Officially Mandated Contributions
     The fund can continue to operate on a cash basis with little

or no change in its funding for at least another 20 years, given

current estimates of supplemental Treasury payments. Continuing
the practice of underfunding the pension system will add to the
burden future taxpayers bear for benefits presumably received by

current taxpayers. Currently, roughly half of the system's
obligations are being funded by "debt"   increases in the

unfunded liability. We may wish to continue funding some of the

obligations of the retirement system through debt, but if we
choose to do so our choice should be deliberate and considered.
To make it explicit, we could first make contributions to the
pension system at the fully funded rate, and then, as a separate
action, decide how much of the current funding should be raised
from a debt issue and how much should come from current funds,
     Putting the system on a fully funded current basis calls for

contributing about 36 percent of payroll annually, or about $14
billion more than the current official contribution rate

provides. This year, the Treasury made a supplemental payment of
about this amount to the fund. Rather than simulating interest
payments on non—existent assets, supplemental payments could be
calculated based on the full funding rate. This would shift the
basis of accounting for this transaction to a more consistent and

conceptually sound foundation without increasing the funds
transferred by the Treasury. Now seems to be an opportune time
to change the basis of accounting for this transaction.


                                65
Making the Unfunded Liability More Explicit
     The principal and accumulated (and accumulating) interest on
the existing unfunded liability is properly a responsibility of
former taxpayers. There is no longer any practical way to make
them responsible for it. How, if at all, should this accumulated
"debt" be "funded?"

     One possible approach would be to convert the unfunded

liability to an explicit debt. Suppose, for example, that the
government funded the system by issuing debt securities. The
cash raised would be transferred to the retirement system, which
is allowed to invest only in Treasury securities. Thus, it would
wind up taking the money and buying back the securities issued to
fund it. The net transaction is simply that the Treasury printed
additional special obligations and gave them to the retirement
fund to hold in its portfolio. No net funds would be exchanged.6
The liability of the fund would now be backed by an explicit
Treasury promise in the form of the securities held in the
retirement system vault. What really backs the pensions is
unchanged ——   it   is still a promise that the federal government
will make the necessary funds available when the time comes. The

obligation would simply be a little more explicit.
     This more explicit recognition has a number of potential
advantages. For one thing, the fund —— and the obligation ——

might be taken more seriously by the public. The obligation
might be easier to understand, and changes in the annual
performance and experience of the fund might be easier to
observe. These subtle changes of recognition are the stuff of


                                  66
which real scrutiny and eventual policy may be made.
     Moreover, the Treasury would owe interest on the
obligations, and the fund would receive these payments annually.

In a sense, it is exactly this transaction that the annual

supplemental payment appropriated by the Congress is simulating.
Thus, the current funding arrangement is equivalent to what would
obtain if the Congress ordered the Treasury to borrow funds equal
to the unfunded liability and put them on deposit in the
retirement system account. The rest of the transaction ——

printing   these securities and handing them to the retirement
system ——   is   merely a paper transaction. We might say that the
Congress, recognizing this, has merely decided not to carry out
the paper shuffle but has carried out the real part of the
transaction —— the actual payment of interest.

     The "simulation" approach adopted by the Congress thus
misses a potentially important opportunity to provide a more
explicit and understandable method for scrutinizing the fund's

status and performance. If the fund held the securities, it
would be much easier for the public and commentators to

understand the whole system. Making the obligation explicit
avoids the arcane notions of "unfunded liabilities" and payments
of pseudo—interest on hypothetical securities. The change would
relieve the fund of its mysterious cloak of subtlety, which
currently masks what is in fact a relatively simple set of

transactions and relationships.
     Another possibility would be to raise the funds to cover the
unfunded liability through additional taxes or through



                                 67
expenditure reductions. Virtually no one would seriously propose
such a drastic action. Actually raising the funds would
explicitly back the government's obligations, but would be
accompanied by extensive dislocations. The net impact on the
economy will be difficult to judge, even if we know whether the
funds came from net borrowing, taxes, or expenditures. Explicit

federal borrowing may displace other borrowing, or may call forth
more lending. If the former, what projects were displaced? If
the latter,   what would those funds now lent have been   spent on
otherwise?    If   the funds came from taxes or expenditures, what

are the ultimate sources? What other spending was not done?
Speculation about the ultimate source of the funds will quickly

become ethereal. This is perhaps the most powerful conceptual
reason for arguing that the unfunded liability of the system
should be explicitly recognized, and prevented from growing, but

not necessarily reduced through direct funding. Instead, the
most sensible policy goal may be to move toward a system that (1)

is fully funded on a current basis, and (2) has explicitly

recognized obligations.




                                 68
                          Conclusion


     The Federal Civil Service Retirement System constitutes a

very large component of the federal government's future promises
to pay. Its current size ——   approximately   $540 billion ——   is
roughly half that of the explicitly recognized national debt. It
is also about one half the size of the Social Security quasi—
debt, which is a net liability on behalf of a considerably
greater number of beneficiaries.
    The retirement system can, in all likelihood, live out this

century under the current arrangement without running out of
cash, but it cannot live ten years into the next century without

additional funding. By any standard, it represents a very large
obligation of which the public is at best only dimly aware.
    What should be done to reform its benefit structure is sure
to be debated vigorously. Some will argue that the current
system is far too generous, and that it amounts to considerably
overpaying federal workers. Others will argue that changing the
system now amounts to repudiating solemn promises of the

government. Ultimately, the Congress will have to decide.
     What, if anything, might or should be done to reform its

funding is also a complicated issue. Does it make any difference
if the Congress recognizes the obligations to pensioners in the
form of explicit Treasury securities held in a retirement system
vault? If so, why not fund it fully? If not, why fund it at
all, since all of its investible funds are held in the form of

Treasury securities?


                               69
     At the present time, it could be placed on a more solid long
term funding basis with little change in the current net flows

from the Treasury. Funding crises do not lead to conceptually
sound reforms; there is little reason to await the next crisis in

the hope that it will generate fundamental improvement. This
would seem to be an opportune time to improve the conceptual
basis of the funding foundation upon which the retirement system
rests.




                              70
                            Appendix I

Evaluation of Pension Fund Obligations and Financial Condition

       A number of measures of the soundness of pension systems

have been articulated by actuaries, accountants, economists,
budget analysts, and others. Many of the proposed measures ——

like   those adopted by the Congress ——   are internally
inconsistent. The proliferation of such measures reflects the
fact that there are several dimensions to the financial condition
of a pension fund, and no one measure will appropriately
summarize all of them.

       Accountants argue persuasively that the only appropriate
basis on which to evaluate the condition of any institution is
the accrual basis. The future obligations that the organization
has already contracted to meet are treated as liabilities, and
the future contractual obligations of others to it are treated as
assets. This perspective allows two interrelated portraits of

the organization's solvency. First, one can present a snapshot
of the condition at a given instant consisting of a summary of
the existing liabilities and assets, and thus of the net

liabilities (called the "unfunded liability") of the system.
Second, the annual changes in the unfunded liability can be

examined as a measure of the performance of the fund in a

particular year.
       The Unfunded Liability The essence of the "unfunded
liability" measure is that it represents only the existing
accrued deficit. If the system has made more promises than it



                                 71
has collected funds to back, it has an unfunded liability. But
this liability should reflect only promises already made. This
means that, in computing the current unfunded liability, one must
presume (for the sake of the computation only) that future

contributions to the fund will be on a "full funding" basis.     If

the fund has been collecting 10 percent of payroll when 20

percent would be required for full funding, the computation of
the current unfunded liability assumes that all future payroll
contributions will be at the full funding rate of 20 percent.
This counter—factual presumption is made so that the resulting
deficit reflects only the failure to fully fund the system to

date, not the possibility of future underfunding.

     There is a further complication in choosing the funding
method under which the system is to be evaluated. In the view of

some, current funding of the system should be strictly construed.
For example, if a given worker is currently entitled to no
pension because he or she has not yet worked for enough years to
qualify, a strict construction of the fund's existing obligation

to that worker would deny any liability. This approach is known
as the "vested benefits" valuation method. This method

recognizes only current contractual obligations independent of
the future career of the worker. The fundamental principle
underlying this notion is that pension obligations are merely a
part of an employee's compensation package; since we do not
accrue liabilities for future salary payments, why should we for

pensions?
     To many, this is an unduly conservative estimation
procedure. If, for example, half of the workers in the same age



                              72
and experience category as the worker in question will, on a
statistical basis, go on to collect pension benefits, it seems
imprudent not to recognize that the system has accrued some

(albeit statistical) obligation to them. This would appear to be
particularly relevant to the federal system, in which both

employees and the employer frequently treat prospective pension
benefits as "entitlements."7

     The central question concerns the appropriate time pattern

for this recognition. Using a statistical view of the cohort of

employees rather than the micro view of each individual employee
suggests that there should be an annual allowance for pension
obligation buildup over the worker's lifetime. There are many
ways in which this statistical obligation could be amortized
across the years of the employee's career. A common approach is
to amortize the projected expenses through a contribution stream
that is a level fraction of the employee's salary over his or her
career. This is easy to understand and to administer. It leads
to more funding later in the career than would a level payment in
nominal terms, preventing any substantial changes in the
"effective rate" of the contribution as a fraction of income.
This method is referred to as the "normal cost" approach to

pension funding.
     There is one further ambiguity within this approach. The
fraction of salary required to fund a pension for a worker who

enters the system at age 40 may be different from that required
for a worker who enters at age 25. Depending upon the benefit

structure and projected salary trajectories, the appropriate



                               73
funding rate may be either higher or lower for the worker who
enters later in life. Rather than recognize a different funding
rate for each entry—age cohort of workers, most systems compute

an average funding rate appropriate for the mix of entry ages

they experience. This is known as the "entry age normal" funding
method. It is used as the basis for estimating the unfunded
liabilities discussed in this paper.

     Changes in the Unfunded Liability While the unfunded
liability provides a useful snapshot of the condition of a
retirement system at a given instant, its effect is to show only
the accrued excess of obligations the system has accepted over
its current and prospective available funds. This measure shows
only status; it cannot show direction. We can, however, get a
measure of the current performance of a system by focusing on

changes in the unfunded liabilities from year to year. The
unfunded liability shows the accumulated history from the start
of the fund to the present; the change in the unfunded liability
focuses on the current performance of the fund —— whether its

funds are well invested, whether it continues to extend more
promises than it is collecting funds to back, and so on.

     The Current and Prospective Cash Balance of the Fund The
accrual basis for evaluating a retirement system is designed to
match the future income and obligations of the fund to give a

coherent picture of its current status. It cannot, however,
provide a summary of the current and prospective cash position of
the fund, which is an equally vital aspect of its financial
condition. Thus, in addition to examining appropriate estimates
of the unfunded liability of the fund and of the year to year


                              74
changes in the unfunded debt, it is important to develop
projections of the cash balances of the fund. This effort is
complicated by the fact that it depends upon the number and
average salary of employees who have not yet entered the
employment system. (The measures that concentrate on unfunded
liabilities can be computed with reference only to current

employees and annuitants.) Thus, an evaluation of the fund's
cash position involves projections of the size of the federal
civil service over a considerable time period, and must be viewed

as uncertain. However, given the importance of the cash basis
integrity of the fund —— and particularly noting Congress's

efforts to prevent, or at least delay, cash insolvency in the
retirement system -— we cannot completely avoid making cash

projections.

                           Appendix II
                  Sensitivity of the Estimates


     The estimates presented here are, in a qualitative sense,

relatively insensitive to the parametric assumptions of the
model. Because civil service retirement benefits are indexed,
the assumed rate of inflation is practically immaterial. Perhaps
surprisingly, the unfunded liability is also insensitive to
changes in the assumed rate of real salary growth. Briefly, this
results from the rough balance between two offsetting effects:

while more rapid growth of salaries would increase future pension

costs, it also increases future contributions (at the full
funding rate used in calculating the current unfunded liability).



                               75
Changing the assumed annual rate of real salary increase from 1
percent (used in the estimates reported in the text) to 0 or 2

percent generally changes the estimated unfunded liability by
only $20 to $30 billion (depending on the other assumptions
made), or by about 4 to 5 percent.

     The one major assumption that does have a considerable

impact on the estimated unfunded liability is the rate at which
future flows are discounted. Because the bulk of both revenues
and benefit payments lie well in the future, the rate at which
they are discounted has a notable effect.      Moreover, sInce we
know that benefit payments exceed anticipated contributions but
on average occur later, it is clear that the unfunded liability
will be lower the higher is the assumed rate of discount. Table
Al shows the estimated unfunded liability under the baseline

assumptions for other parameters and a range of discount rates.
It is clear that any tenable assumption about the long—term real
discount rate results in a very large unfunded liability. Even
if we discount at 3 percent in real terms —— which seems very
generous ——   the   unfunded liability remains over $400 billion.
Perhaps the most optimistic way to read the results in Table Al
is to note that even if we should be using a lower rate of
discount —— 1 percent instead of 1.5 percent for, example, the

unfunded liability remains below $600 billion.
     What rate of discount should we use? The discount rate
should be the long term risk—free rate of return in the economy.
A number of researchers (see, for example, Bodie [1980], Garbade
and Wachte]. [1978], and Carison [1977]) have presented evidence
that one proxy for this rate, the real rate of return on short—



                                     76
Table Al. Sensitivity of Unfunded Liability Estimates to Changes
             in the Assumed Discount Rate
             (Dollar figures in billions)
     Assumed Discount Rate           Unfunded Liability
               .8 %                         $605
              1.0                            586
              1.5                            540
              2.0                            499
              2.5                            462
              3.0                            428

Source: Simulation. Parameters are as in baseline case except
for discount rate.




                                77
term Teasury debt, ranged from approximately zero to about 3
percent over the period 1950 to 1975, with most values between 1
and 2 percent. Since the Federal Reserve Bank changed its
monetary management policies in October of 1979, real returns
have been considerably higher, at times as high as 6 to 8
percent. On the theory that financial effects are likely to be
more volatile than real effects, and that the real discount rate
should ultimately reflect the real rate of sustainable long—term
economic growth, a moderate rate of 1.5 percent has been used
here. To some this will seem very high when compared to the
long—term rates of return achieved in the last 30 years. To

others, it   will   seem too low as an estimate of what well—managed

economic   growth might produce. We can take some solace in the
fact that the comparisons among alternative policies —— the main
focus of this paper —— are likely to be little affected by
changes in the discount rate.




                                  78
                              Notes

11t is not completely immaterial in the Civil Service Retirement
System because of an anomaly in the calculation of benefits.
Since the salary history used to compute the retirement benefit
is an average of three years' salary —— expressed in nominal
terms —— the nominal rate of salary increases has a slight impact
upon the relation between the salaries paid and the retirement
benefits, when both are converted into real terms. In addition,
some reform proposals cut the rate of increase in pension
benefits after retirement to something less than the full cost of
living increase. If such a system were adopted, the real value
of benefits received would depend on the rate of inflation. In
every other respect, holding all real rates constant, changing
the assumed rate of inflation has no impact.

2Taking this view raises an interesting point of controversy. We
assume that assets in the fund are worth their current market
value. In fact, however, they may be worth less than this,
because there appears to be a consistent fund policy of investing
them in below—market rate of return "special" federal securities.

3The appendix discusses the determination of "normal cost" and
other technical aspects of the valuation of pension fund assets
and liabilities.

4mis rate was used throughout the analyses presented here;
comparisons of different scenarios should be little affected by
this choice. The basis for this choice, and the sensitivity of
the resulting estimates of the unfunded liability, is discussed
in Appendix II.

5This effectively assumes that a 1.5 percent real return to the
entitlements already accrued should not be viewed as a part of
annual compensation, because it is not a return received for
working. Rather, it is an interest payment on amounts credited
for earlier work.

6Because no funds actually need to be borrowed from private
lenders, this transaction should have no direct impact on
securities markets.

7me Office of Management and Budget classifies the Civil Service
Retirement System as an "entitlement" program. It does not,
however, classify the wages of federal employees as an
entitlement. This is a puzzling distinction, since both are part
of compensation for federal employment.




                              79
                     References
Bodie, Zvj, "An Innovation for Stable Real Retirement Income,"
Journal of Portfolio Management (Fall 1980), pp 5-13.
Carison, John A., "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of
Inflation: Comment," American Economic Review Vol. 67 No. 3
(1977) , pp 469—475.

Garbade, Kenneth and Paul Wachtel, "Time Variation in the
Relationship Between Inflation and Interest Rates," Journal of
Monetary Economics 4(1978), pp 755—765.
Hartman, Robert W., Pay and Pensions for Federal Workers,
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1983.

Jump,  Bernard Jr., "Compensating Government Employees: Pension
Benef it Objectives, Cost Measurement, and Financing," National
Tax Journal, 1976.

Munnell, Alicia H. and Ann M. Connolly, "Funding Government
Pensions: State—Local, Civil Service, and Military," Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Proceedings, October 1976, pp
72—133.

Office of Personnel Management, Fringe Benefit Facts 1980.   US
Government Printing Office, 1981.

_______, "Statement of General Infomration for the Civil Service
Retirement System Plan Year Ending September 30, 1980," mimeo,
February 16, 1982.
_______, Annual Report of the Civil Service Pension System, 1980.
US Government Printing Office, 1981.

______, Board of Actuaries of the Civil Service Retirement
System Fifty—Seventh Annual Report, US Government Printing
Office, 1980.
Quinn, Joseph F., "Pension Wealth of Government and Private
Sector Workers,"American Economic Review Papers       Proceedings,
May 1982, pp. 283—287.
Smith, Sharon P., "Prospects for Reforming Federal Pay," American
Economic Review Papers 4 Proceedings, May 1982, pp. 273-277.




                                  80
