                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SKILL VS. LUCK IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND VENTURE CAPITAL:
                    EVIDENCE FROM SERIAL ENTREPRENEURS

                                         Paul Gompers
                                         Anna Kovner
                                          Josh Lerner
                                        David Scharfstein

                                    WORKING PAPER 12592
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12592


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2006




Helpful comments were provided by Yael Hochberg, Steve Kaplan, Roni Michaely, Avri Ravid, and
various seminar participants. We thank for Tim Dore for exceptional research assistance on this
project. Harvard Business School's Division of Research and the National Science Foundation
provided financial assistance. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skill vs. Luck in Entrepreneurship and Venture Capital: Evidence from Serial Entrepreneurs
Paul Gompers, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein
NBER Working Paper No. 12592
October 2006
JEL No. G24,L26

                                            ABSTRACT


This paper argues that a large component of success in entrepreneurship and venture capital can be
attributed to skill. We show that entrepreneurs with a track record of success are more likely to
succeed than first time entrepreneurs and those who have previously failed. Funding by more
experienced venture capital firms enhances the chance of success, but only for entrepreneurs without
a successful track record. Similarly, more experienced venture capitalists are able to identify and
invest in first time entrepreneurs who are more likely to become serial entrepreneurs. Investments
by venture capitalists in successful serial entrepreneurs generate higher returns for their venture
capital investors. This finding provides further support for the role of skill in both entrepreneurship
and venture capital.

Paul Gompers                                           Josh Lerner
Graduate School of Business                            Harvard Business School
Harvard University, Morgan 483                         Morgan Hall, Room 395
Soldiers Field                                         Cambridge, MA 02163
Boston, MA 02163                                       and NBER
and NBER                                               jlerner@hbs.edu
pgompers@hbs.edu
                                                       David Scharfstein
Anna Kovner                                            Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall                                            Baker 239
Graduate School of Business Administration             Soldiers Field
Harvard University                                     Boston, MA 02163
Boston, MA 02163                                       and NBER
akovner@hbs.edu                                        dscharfstein@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

       What makes entrepreneurs successful? Is it skill or luck? Knight (1921, part III,

ch. IX, ¶ 10) argues that an important component of entrepreneurship is the willingness

of the “venturesome to ‘assume’ or ‘insure’ the doubtful and timid by guaranteeing to the

latter a specified income in return for an assignment of the actual results.” In this view,

luck is a big determinant of entrepreneurial success. According to Kihlstrom and Laffont

(1979), luck is the only determinant of entrepreneurial success: in their model

entrepreneurs are simply less risk averse individuals who are willing to guarantee

workers’ wages and bear residual risk. Schumpeter (1934, p. 137) argues just the

opposite, claiming that “the entrepreneur is never the risk bearer,” but rather an

innovator, one who discovers new production processes, finds new markets, creates new

types of organizations, or introduces new products. Entrepreneurial success, in this view,

flows from innovative skill. Only suppliers of capital bear risk.

       In this paper, we empirically reject the Kihlstrom and Laffont hypothesis that

entrepreneurs are just efficient risk bearers in favor of the view, emphasized by

Schumpeter, that skill is an important component of entrepreneurship. At the same time,

we present evidence that suppliers of capital are not just efficient risk bearers in the

entrepreneurial process, as Schumpeter suggests, but rather bring their own set of

capabilities to identifying skilled entrepreneurs and helping them build their businesses.

       Our approach to identifying skill in entrepreneurship is to examine the

performance of venture-capital backed serial entrepreneurs. We try to answer the

following simple question: Are successful entrepreneurs more likely to succeed in their

next ventures than first-time entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs who previously failed? Our
answer is yes. Our empirical model indicates that entrepreneurs who succeeded in a

prior venture (i.e., started a company that went public) have a 30% chance of succeeding

in their next venture. By contrast, first-time entrepreneurs have only an 18% chance of

succeeding and entrepreneurs who previously failed have a 20% chance of succeeding.

This performance persistence suggests that a component of success in entrepreneurship is

attributable to skill. While it may be better to be lucky than smart, the evidence

presented here indicates that being smart has value too.

       We also find evidence in support of the entrepreneurial skill hypothesis by

examining the behavior and performance of venture capital firms. As has been shown by

Sorensen (2004), Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein

(2006), and Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2006), companies that are funded by more

experienced (top-tier) venture capital firms are more likely to succeed. This could be

because top-tier venture capital firms are better able to identify high quality companies

and entrepreneurs. Alternatively, this performance differential could be because top-tier

venture capital firms add more value – e.g., by helping new ventures make customer

contacts, fill key management positions, or set business strategy. However, we find that

there is only a performance differential when venture capital firms invest in companies

started by first-time entrepreneurs or those who previously failed. If a company is started

by an entrepreneur with a track record of success, then the company is no more likely to

succeed if it is funded by a top-tier venture capital firm or one in the lower tier. Thus, it

seems, prior success is a public signal of quality. It also implies that previously

successful entrepreneurs derive no benefits from the value-added services of more




                                              2
experienced venture capital firms; successful entrepreneurs apparently know what they’re

doing.

         Another piece of evidence in support of the entrepreneurial skill hypothesis is that

when previously successful entrepreneurs raise funding for their next venture, they are

able to do so when the company is younger and at an earlier stage of development.

Presumably, this is the case because venture capital firms perceive a successful track

record as evidence of skill, not just luck.

         Taken together, these findings also support the view that suppliers of capital are

not just efficient risk-bearers, but rather help to put capital in the right hands and ensure

that it is used effectively. The evidence for this goes beyond the finding–documented

here and by others–that more experienced venture capital firms have higher success rates

on their investments. More experienced venture capital firms only have higher success

rates when they invest in unproven entrepreneurs, a fact which highlights the role

suppliers of venture capital play in identifying skilled entrepreneurs and helping them to

succeed.

         Finally, we study the value consequences of serial entrepreneurship. We start by

examining the pre-money valuations of new ventures. More experienced venture capital

firms invest at higher valuations, which is consistent with our finding that they also

invest in firms with higher success rates. However, we do not find that serial

entrepreneurs (whether successful or not) are able to benefit from their higher success

rates by selling equity at higher prices. Given this fact, it should come as no surprise that

the average investment multiple (exit valuation divided by pre-money valuation) is

higher for companies of previously successful serial entrepreneurs. We also find that




                                              3
fund returns are higher for venture capital firms that tend to invest a larger share of their

portfolio in serial entrepreneurs. Our findings are consistent with there being an

imperfectly competitive venture capital market in which prices do not get bid up to the

point where excess returns from investing in serial entrepreneurs are eliminated.

       Our findings are related to a number of other studies in the entrepreneurship

literature. Several study the effect of experience on performance. Consistent with our

findings, Eesley and Roberts (2006a) use data from a survey of alumni from the

Massachusetts Institute of Technology to show that entrepreneurial experience increases

the likelihood of success (as measured by firm revenues). Our finding that serial

entrepreneurs are more likely to succeed is also consistent with the observations of

Kaplan and Stromberg (2003), who study the contractual terms of venture capital

financings. They find that serial entrepreneurs receive more favorable control provisions

than first time entrepreneurs, including more favorable board control, vesting, liquidation

rights, and more up-front capital. Presumably this is because their higher success rates

make it less important for venture capitalists to protect themselves with tighter control

provisions.

       Chatterji (2005) shows that industry experience also increases the likelihood of

success. In the medical device industry, startups founded by former employees of other

medical device companies perform better than other startups. The value of industry

experience is also emphasized by Bhide (2000), who shows that a substantial fraction of

the Inc. 500 got their ideas for their new company while working for their prior

employer. Kaplan, Sensoy, and Stromberg (2006) emphasize the importance of

management in the success of entrepreneurial firms. Carroll and Mosakowski (1987),




                                              4
Honig and Davidson (2000) and Reuber, Dyke and Fischer (1990) are other related

works.

         Finally, a number of papers have examined the characteristics of serial

entrepreneurs. Eesley and Roberts (2006b) find that entrepreneurs are more likely to start

another venture if they started their first venture when they were younger, were not

married, and funding their first company with venture capital. Bengtsson (2005, 2006)

finds that failed serial entrepreneurs are more likely than successful serial entrepreneurs

to get funding from the same venture capital firm that financed their first ventures.

Consistent with our finding on the role of venture capitalists, he argues that these initial

venture capitalists are better able to judge whether the venture failed because of bad luck

or the limitations of the entrepreneur.

         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the construction

of the data set and summarizes the data. Our main findings are presented in Section 3.

We conclude in Section 4.



2. Data

         The core data for the analysis come from Dow Jones’ Venture Source (previously

named Venture One), described in more detail in Gompers, Lerner, and Scharfstein

(2005). Venture Source, established in 1987, collects data on firms that have obtained

venture capital financing. Firms that have received early-stage financing exclusively from

individual investors, federally chartered Small Business Investment Companies, and

corporate development groups are not included in the database. The companies are initially

identified from a wide variety of sources, including trade publications, company Web pages,




                                              5
and telephone contacts with venture investors. Venture Source then collects information

about the businesses through interviews with venture capitalists and entrepreneurs. The data

collected include the identity of the key founders (the crucial information used here) as well

as the industry, strategy, employment, financial history, and revenues of the company. Data

on the firms are updated and validated through monthly contacts with investors and

companies.

        When considering and controlling for the role of the venture capital investor, we

consider only observations in which the venture capital firm serves on the board of the

company. We do not consider the influence of other venture investors who do not serve

on the board of directors. Our analysis focuses on data covering investments from 1975

to 2000, dropping information prior to 1975 due to data quality concerns.1 In keeping

with industry estimates of a maturation period of three to five years for venture capital

financed companies, we drop companies receiving their first venture capital investment

after 2000 so that the outcome data can be meaningfully interpreted. Results were

qualitatively similar when we ran the analyses looking only at data through 1998 in order to

be conservative about exit periods.

        For the purposes of this analysis, we examine the founders (henceforth referred to as

“entrepreneurs”) that joined firms listed in the Venture Source database during the period

from 1986 to 2000. Typically, the database reports the previous affiliation and title (at the

previous employer) of these entrepreneurs, as well as the date they joined the firm. In some

cases, however, Venture Source did not collect this information. In these cases, we attempt

to find this information by examining contemporaneous news stories in LEXIS-NEXIS,


1
 Gompers and Lerner (2004) discuss the coverage and selection issues in Venture Economics and Venture
Source data prior to 1975.


                                                 6
securities filings, and web sites of surviving firms. We believe this data collection

procedure may introduce a bias in favor of having more information on successful firms, but

it is not apparent to us that it affects our analysis.

        We identify serial entrepreneurs through their inclusion as founders in more than

one company in our data set. As a result, we may fail to identify serial entrepreneurs who

had previously started companies that were not venture capital financed. Thus, our study is

only about serial entrepreneurship in venture capital-financed firms, not about serial

entrepreneurship in general. To the extent that prior experience in non-venture-backed

companies is important, we will be understating the effect of entrepreneurial experience.

        Table 1 reports the number and fraction of serial entrepreneurs in our sample in each

year. Several patterns are worth highlighting. First, the number of entrepreneurs in the

sample increased slowly from 1984 through 1994. Afterwards, as the Internet and

technology boom took off in the mid-1990s, the number of entrepreneurs grew very rapidly.

Second, with the general growth of the industry through this period, serial entrepreneurs

accounted for an increasing fraction of the sample, growing from about 7% in 1986 to a

peak of 13-14% in 1994. There was some decrease in the fraction of serial entrepreneurs

after 1994, probably because of the influx of first-time entrepreneurs as part of the Internet

boom. The absolute number of serial entrepreneurs actually peaked in 1999.

         Table 2 documents the distribution of serial entrepreneurs across industries based

on the nine industry groupings used in Gompers, Kovner, Lerner, and Scharfstein (2006).

The data show a clear concentration of entrepreneurs in the three sectors that are most

closely associated with the venture capital industry: Internet and computers;

communications and electronics; and biotech and healthcare. These are also the three




                                                  7
industries with the highest representation of serial entrepreneurs. The other industries, such

as financial services and consumer, are smaller and have a lower percentage of serial

entrepreneurs.

        Table 3 lists the 50 most active venture capital firms in our sample and ranks

them according to both the number of serial entrepreneurs they have funded and the

fraction of serial entrepreneurs in their portfolios. Given that many successful venture

capital firms have an explicit strategy of funding serial entrepreneurs, it is not surprising

that these firms have higher rates of serial entrepreneurship than the sample average. This

tabulation suggests that the biggest and most experienced venture capital firms are more

successful in recruiting serial entrepreneurs. Nevertheless, there does appear to be quite

a bit of heterogeneity among these firms in their funding of serial entrepreneurs. Some of

the variation may stem from the industry composition of their portfolios, the length of

time that the groups have been active investors, and the importance they place on funding

serial entrepreneurs. In any case, the reliance on serial entrepreneurs of the largest, most

experienced, and most successful venture capital firms indicates that we will need to

control for venture capital firm characteristics in trying to identify an independent effect

of serial entrepreneurship.

        Table 4 provides summary statistics for the data we use in our regression analysis.

We present data for (1) all entrepreneurs in their first ventures; (2) entrepreneurs who have

started only one venture; (3) serial entrepreneurs in their first venture; and (4) serial

entrepreneurs in their later ventures.

        The first variable we look at is the success rate within these subgroups of

entrepreneurs. We define “success” as going public or filing to go public by December




                                                8
2003. The findings are similar if we define success to also include firms that were acquired

or merged. The overall success rate on first time ventures is 25.3%. Not surprisingly, serial

entrepreneurs have an above-average success rate of 36.9% on their first ventures: venture

capitalists are more likely to be more enthusiastic about financing a successful entrepreneur

than one who has previously failed. It is more interesting that in their subsequent ventures

they have a significantly higher success rate (29.0%) than do first time entrepreneurs

(25.3%).

         Serial entrepreneurs have higher success rates, even though on average they receive

venture capital funding at an earlier stage in their company's development. While 45% of

first-time ventures receive first-round funding at an early stage (meaning they are classified

as “startup,” “developing product,” or “beta testing,” and not yet “profitable” or “shipping

product”), close to 60% of entrepreneurs receive first-round funding at an early stage when

it is their second or later venture. The later ventures of serial entrepreneurs also receive

first-round funding when the ventures are younger–21 months as compared to 37 months for

first time entrepreneurs. This earlier funding stage is also reflected in lower first-round pre-

money valuations for serial entrepreneurs–$12.3 million as compared to $16.0 million for

first-time entrepreneurs.

         Controlling for year, serial entrepreneurs appear to be funded by more experienced

venture capital firms, both in their first and subsequent ventures.2 The last row of Table 4

reports the ratio of the number of prior investments made by the venture capital firm to the

average number of prior investments made by other venture capital firms in the year of the

investment. This ratio is consistently greater than one because more experienced (and likely

2
 Throughout the paper, we use venture capital experience as a proxy for ability. Recently, other measures
of ability have been utilized including centrality of the venture capitalists in the overall venture capital
network (Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2006; Sorenson and Stuart, 2001).


                                                     9
larger) venture capital firms do more deals. The table indicates that venture capital firms

that invest in serial entrepreneurs, whether in their first or subsequent ventures, have nearly

three times the average experience of the average firm investing in the same year. This is

about 14% greater than the year-adjusted experience of venture capital firms that invest in

one-time-only entrepreneurs.3 Given the evidence that more experienced venture capital

firms have higher success rates (e.g., Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein, 2006) it

will be important for us to control for venture capital experience in our regression, as well as

other factors such as company location, which has also been linked to outcomes.



3. Findings

         A. Success

         In this section we take a regression approach to exploring the impact of serial

entrepreneurs on the success of the companies they start. In the first set of regressions,

the unit of analysis is the entrepreneur at the time that the database first records the firm’s

venture capital funding. Our basic approach is to estimate logistic regressions where the

outcome is whether the firm “succeeds,” i.e. goes public or registers to go public by

December 2003. Our results are qualitatively similar if we also include an acquisition as

a successful outcome.

         A main variable of interest in the initial regressions is a dummy variable, LATER

VENTURE, which takes the value one if the entrepreneur had previously been a founder

of a venture capital backed company. We are also interested in whether the entrepreneur




3
 Note that venture capital firms that invest in the first ventures of serial entrepreneurs have done fewer
deals on an absolute basis. This is because these first deals are early in the sample period.


                                                      10
had succeeded in his prior venture, and thus construct a dummy variable, PRIOR

SUCCESS, to take account of this possibility.

         There are a number of controls that must be included in the regression as well.

As noted above, we control for venture capitalists’ experience. The simplest measure of

experience would be the number of prior companies in which the venture capital firm

invested. We take a log transformation of this number to reflect the idea that an

additional investment made by a firm that has done relatively few deals is more

meaningful than an additional investment by a firm that has done many. However,

because of the growth and maturation of the venture capital industry, there would be a

time trend in this measure of experience. This is not necessarily a problem: investors in

the latter part of the sample do have more experience. Nevertheless, we use a more

conservative measure of experience, which adjusts for the average level of experience of

other venture capital firms in the relevant year. Thus, our measure of experience for a

venture capital investor is the log of one plus the number of prior companies in which the

venture capital firm has invested minus the log of one plus the average number of prior

investments undertaken by venture capital firms in the year of the investment. Because

there are often multiple venture capital firms investing in a firm in the first round, we

take experience of the most experienced investor who serves on the board of directors of

the firms after the first venture financing round of the company, which we label VC

EXPERIENCE.4



4
 We have replicated the analysis using the average experience of investors from the earliest round and
employing an entrepreneur-company-VC firm level analysis where each investor from the earliest round
was a separate observation. In both cases, the results were qualitatively similar. We do not use the
experience of venture capitalists who do not join the firm’s board, since it is standard practice for venture
investors with significant equity stakes or involvement with the firm to join the board.


                                                      11
         The regressions also include dummy variables for the round of the investment.

Although we include each company only once (when the company shows up in the

database for the first time), about 26% of the observations begin with rounds later than

the first round. (In these instances, the firm raised an initial financing round from another

investor, such as an individual angel.) All of the results are robust to including only

companies where the first observation in the database is the first investment round. We

also include dummy variables for the company’s stage of development and the logarithm

of company age in months. Because success has been tied to location, we include a

dummy variable for whether the firm was headquartered in California and one for

whether it was headquartered in Massachusetts. We also include year and industry fixed

effects. Finally, because there is often more than one entrepreneur per company, there

will be multiple observations per company. Thus, robust standard errors of the

coefficient estimates are calculated after clustering by company. In later regressions, the

unit of analysis will be the company.

         The first column of Table 5 reports one of the central findings of the paper. The

coefficient of LATER VENTURE is positive and statistically significant. At the means of

the other variables, entrepreneurs in their second or later ventures have a predicted

success rate of 25.0%, while first-time entrepreneurs have a predicted success rate of

20.8%.

         There are a number of hypotheses as to why the success rate of entrepreneurs in

their second or later ventures is higher than the success rate of first-time entrepreneurs.

One hypothesis is that there is learning-by-doing in entrepreneurship. The experience of

starting a new venture–successful or not–confers on entrepreneurs some benefits (skills,




                                             12
contacts, ideas) that are useful in subsequent ventures. (Such a hypothesis is consistent

with Lazear’s (2005) finding that Stanford MBAs who ultimately become entrepreneurs

follow more varied career paths than their classmates.) In this view, entrepreneurs can

learn to succeed through the experience of having started a company regardless of what

its ultimate performance is. Alternatively, the higher average success rate of

entrepreneurs in subsequent ventures could reflect a deeper pool of talented and hard-

working entrepreneurs. We use the outcome of serial entrepreneurs' prior ventures to

distinguish between these hypotheses.

       To determine whether a pure learning-by-doing effect exists, in the second

column of Table 5 we add the dummy variable, PRIOR SUCCESS, which equals 1 if the

prior venture of the serial entrepreneur was successful. The estimated coefficient of this

variable is positive and statistically significant. Including it also lowers the coefficient of

the LATER VENTURE dummy so that it is no longer statistically significant. The

predicted success rate of entrepreneurs with a track record of success is 30.6%, compared

to only 22.1% for serial entrepreneurs who failed in their prior venture, and 20.9% for

first-time entrepreneurs. This finding indicates that it is not experience per se that

improves the odds of success for serial entrepreneurs. Instead, it suggests the importance

of entrepreneurial skill in determining performance.

       The unit of analysis for the first two columns of Table 5 is the entrepreneur-

company level. We also repeat the analysis using only one observation per company,

accounting for any potential concerns about the independence of observations. The third

column of Table 5 reports the results of a regression in which the unit of analysis is the

company, not the entrepreneur-company. The key variables are 1) a dummy for whether




                                              13
any of the founders is in their second or later ventures and 2) a dummy for whether any

of the founders was successful in a prior venture. Here too a track record of prior success

has a bigger effect on future success than does prior experience per se. Companies with a

previously successful entrepreneur have a predicted success rate of 26.7%, whereas those

with entrepreneurs who failed in prior ventures have an 17.9% success rate, and

companies with first-time entrepreneurs have a 14.1% chance of success. The effect of

prior success on predicting future success is very large.

       The regressions also indicate that venture capital firm experience is positively

related to success. Using estimates from the third column of Table 5, at the 75th

percentile of VC EXPERIENCE and at the means of all the other variables, the predicted

success rate is 19.0%, while at the 25th percentile, the predicted success rate is only

13.3%. There are a number of reasons why more experienced venture capital firms may

make more successful investments.

       To consider the importance of the VC firm in determining portfolio company

success, we do a similar analysis on two levels. In specification 4 of Table 5, we look at

the data on an entrepreneur-company-VC firm level. This allows us to fully consider

variation in entrepreneur and VC firm characteristics. To account for concerns about the

independence of observations, specification 5 is at the company-VC firm level.

       In these specifications, we are using VC EXPERIENCE as an imperfect proxy for

the quality of a venture capital firm. If successful entrepreneurs are more likely to get

funded by better venture capital firms, we could be getting a positive coefficient of

PRIOR SUCCESS because it is a proxy for the unobservable components of venture

capital firm quality that is not captured by VC EXPERIENCE. Thus, to control for




                                             14
unobservable characteristics, we estimate the model with venture capital firm fixed

effects. This enables us to estimate how well a given venture capital firm does on its

investments in serial entrepreneurs relative to its other investments in first-time

entrepreneurs. Results in the fourth and fifth columns of Table 5 indicate that with

venture capital firm fixed effects, the differential between first time entrepreneurs and

successful serial entrepreneurs is even larger. The fifth column, which estimates the

effects at the company level, generates a predicted success rate for first-time

entrepreneurs of 17.7%. The predicted success rate for failed serial entrepreneurs in later

ventures is 19.8%, and it is 29.6% for entrepreneurs with successful track records.

       Financing from experienced venture capital firms has a large effect on the

probability that an entrepreneur succeeds for one of several reasons: because these firms

are better able to screen for high quality entrepreneurs, because they are better monitors

of entrepreneurs, or because they simply have access to the best deals. But, if an

entrepreneur already has a demonstrable track record of success, does a more

experienced venture capital firm still enhance performance? To answer this question, we

add to the basic specification in column 2 and 3 of Table 5 an interaction term between

VC EXPERIENCE and PRIOR SUCCESS, as well an interaction term between VC

EXPERIENCE and LATER VENTURE.

       The results are reported in columns 6 and 7 of the table. The coefficient of VC

EXPERIENCE×PRIOR SUCCESS is negative and statistically significant (though

somewhat more so in column 6). This indicates that venture capital firm experience has a

less positive effect on the performance of entrepreneurs with successful track records.

Indeed, using estimates from column 7, the predicted success rate for previously




                                             15
successful entrepreneurs is 28.1% when funded by more experienced venture capital

firms (at the 75th percentile of VC EXPERIENCE) and 27.7% when funded by less

experienced venture capital firms (at the 25th percentile of VC EXPERIENCE).

Essentially, venture capital firm experience has a minimal effect on the performance of

entrepreneurs with good track records. Where venture capital firm experience does

matter is in the performance of first-time entrepreneurs and serial entrepreneurs with

histories of failure. First-time entrepreneurs have a 17.6% chance of succeeding when

funded by more experienced venture capital firms and an 11.7% chance of succeeding

when being funded by a less experienced venture capital firm. Likewise, failed

entrepreneurs who are funded by more experienced venture capital firms have a 22.1%

chance of succeeding as compared to a 14.7% chance of succeeding when they are

funded by less experienced venture capital firms.

        These findings provide support for the view that venture capital firms actively

screen and/or monitor their portfolio companies, and that there is some skill in doing so.

When an entrepreneur has a proven track record of success–a publicly observable

measure of quality–experienced venture capital firms are no better than others at

determining whether he will succeed. It is only when there are less clear measures of

quality–an entrepreneur is starting a company for the first time, or an entrepreneur has

actually failed in his prior venture–that more experienced venture capital firms have an

advantage in identifying entrepreneurs who will succeed. To use a sports analogy, all

general managers of teams in the National Football League (NFL) probably agree that

superstar quarterback Tom Brady of the New England Patriots would be a valuable

addition to their teams. But, NFL teams were much less optimistic about his prospects




                                            16
in 2000 when the Patriots drafted him in the sixth round. The football equivalent of our

finding would be that teams with a more experienced staff (such as the Patriots) are better

at identifying diamonds-in-the-rough such as Tom Brady when they are in the draft, but

no better at determining their worth once they are proven superstars.5

         The results are also consistent with the view that venture capitalists actively

monitor their portfolio firms or add value through a variety of means such as executive

recruiting and customer contacts. Previously successful entrepreneurs–who presumably

need less monitoring and value-added services–do not benefit as much from this sort of

venture capital firm monitoring and expertise. By way of contrast, the evidence suggests

that first-time entrepreneurs and those with a track record of failure are more likely to

benefit from venture capital firm expertise. To continue the football analogy, Tom Brady

would benefit less from a high-quality football coach now than he did when he was first

drafted.

         Table 6 provides additional supporting evidence for the view that more

experienced venture capital firms are better able to identify and/or develop

entrepreneurial skill. Here, we analyze the sample of first-time entrepreneurs to

determine the factors that lead them to become serial entrepreneurs. The dependent

variable is equal to one if the entrepreneur subsequently starts another venture. The

logistic regression reported in the first column in the table indicates that first-time

entrepreneurs funded by more experienced venture capital firms are more likely to

become serial entrepreneurs. At the 25th percentile of experience, there is a 4.8% chance


5
 Massey and Thaler (2006) present strong evidence that high first-round NFL draft picks are overvalued
relative to later picks. Although they interpret their findings as evidence of a behavioral bias, it is also
possible that less experienced general managers (who run lower quality teams and get to pick early in the
first round) have a harder time assessing quality.


                                                     17
that an entrepreneur will start another venture, whereas at the 75th percentile, there is a

5.7% probability. Though the increase is small on an absolute basis, given the low

baseline rates of serial entrepreneurship, the effect is quite big.

         B. Valuation

         We now examine how serial entrepreneurship and venture capital firm experience

affect company valuations.6 To analyze this question, we use first-round “pre-money”

valuation as our valuation measure. Venture Source calculates this as the product of the

price paid per share in the round and the shares outstanding prior to the financing round.7

The pre-money valuation is the perceived net present value of the company, and therefore

excludes the additional capital raised in the financing.

         A company’s valuation depends on numerous factors including those we can

(imperfectly) observe (e.g., the stage of product development, company age, industry,

location, public market valuation levels, entrepreneur’s quality, and venture capital firm’s

quality) and those we cannot (e.g., the company’s sales and assets). We are mainly

interested in how measures of entrepreneur quality and venture capital firm quality affect

pre-money valuation.

         Table 7 presents the results of regressing the natural log of real pre-money

valuation (expressed in millions of year 2000 dollars) on the above observables. Because

the data include significant outliers (one valuation exceeds $600 million), we winsorize

the dependent variable at the 99th percentile ($131.5 million), which is more than 15



6
  Hsu (2004) shows that entrepreneurs have to pay more (i.e., to accept a lower valuation) to be financed by
venture capitalists with better track records.
7
  Almost all venture capital financings use convertible preferred stock. This methodology for calculation
pre-money valuation implicitly assumes that the value of preferred stock’s liquidation preference is zero.
Thus, this common approach to calculating pre-money valuation overstates the true valuation. This bias is
unlikely to vary systematically with the variables we are using in our regression analysis.


                                                    18
times the median. All the regressions include industry and year fixed effects. We again

consider specifications at the entrepreneur-company level (1, 2 and 6), company level (3

and 7), the entrepreneur-company-VC firm level (4), and the company-VC firm level (5).

Before describing our main results, it is worth pointing out that the controls all have the

predicted sign. Older firms and those at later stages of product development have higher

valuations. In addition, when public market industry valuations are higher, venture

capital valuations are also higher. The public market industry valuation is calculated as

the average market-to-book equity ratio for publicly traded firms in the same industry.8

Finally, firms located in California have slightly higher valuations than those in other

states and firms located in Massachusetts have somewhat lower valuations, but these

differences are not statistically significant.

         Of more interest is the finding that venture capital firm experience is positively

related to pre-money valuation. The effect, however, is modest. The elasticity is

approximately 9.2%. For example, the estimates from column 3 of Table 7 imply that at

the 75th percentile of VC EXPERIENCE, the forecasted valuation is $10.49 million,

whereas at the 25th, it is $8.92 million. That more experienced firms pay more for new

ventures is not surprising, given that they have higher success rates. Because there are



8
 In order to do this we need to link the SIC codes of public companies to the nine industries used in our
analysis. Our procedure is to identify the SIC codes of all venture capital-backed firms that went public
within a given Venture Economics industry code. Because there are multiple SIC codes associated with
each of our nine industries, we construct market-to-book ratios as a weighted average of the market-to-
book ratios of the public companies in those SIC codes, where the weights are the relative fractions of
firms that went public within our nine industries. For each of the public firms assigned to the industry, we
compute the ratio of shareholders’ equity to the market value of the equity at the beginning of the quarter.
If multiple classes of common and preferred stock were outstanding, the combined value of all classes is
used. In many industries, numerous small firms with significant negative earnings introduce a substantial
skewness to the distribution of these ratios. Consequently, we weighted the average by equity market
capitalization at the beginning of the quarter.




                                                    19
unobservable firm characteristics that affect valuation levels (or those that are measured

with error), it is likely that VC EXPERIENCE serves as a proxy for the characteristics

that increase firm value. These characteristics, such as the quality of the entrepreneur,

might be unobservable to less experienced venture capital firms. Alternatively,

characteristics such as sales or assets could be observable to market participants, but

unobservable to us given the data we have. If more experienced venture capital firms

invest in more mature firms in ways we do not fully capture with our company stage

controls, this could explain our finding.

         The finding that new ventures funded by more experienced venture capital firms

invest at higher pre-money valuations needs to be reconciled with Hsu’s (2004) finding

that more experienced venture capital firms make offers at lower pre-money valuations.

Hsu examines a sample of new ventures that received competing offers from venture

capital firms. To the extent that more experienced venture capital firms add more value

to new ventures (as is consistent with our findings), they would require larger equity

stakes (lower share prices) in exchange for their money and their value-added services.

Thus, the offers from top-tier ventures capital firms should imply lower pre-money

valuations even though the companies are worth more if funded by them. Because Hsu is

looking at within-venture offers, he is controlling for the quality of the venture. He is

therefore able to isolate the effect of venture capital firm quality on valuations. Because

we are looking across ventures, we are picking up the effect identified by Hsu as well as

the between-venture differences in quality. This may explain why the estimated effect is

small.




                                             20
       Somewhat surprisingly, in the first two columns of Table 7 we find no

relationship between pre-money valuation and LATER VENTURE and PRIOR SUCCESS.

The same is true when we conduct the analysis at the company level (column 3) and

include venture capital firm fixed effects (columns 4 and 5). Given the higher success

rates of previously successful entrepreneurs, one would have thought that firms

associated with these entrepreneurs would have had higher valuations. Apparently this is

not the case, which suggests that venture capital firms are able to buy equity in firms

started by previously successful entrepreneurs at a discount.

       The last two columns of Table 7 add interactions of VC EXPERIENCE with

measures of PRIOR SUCCESS and LATER VENTURE. The coefficient of the

interaction term is negative and statistically significant only at the five percent level. This

suggests that top-tier venture capital firms are not as eager to pay for prior performance,

but the magnitude of the effect is small.

       This result is consistent with the results of Kaplan and Stromberg (2003). Kaplan

and Stromberg examine venture capital contractual terms and find that repeat

entrepreneurs receive more favorable terms for vesting, board structure, liquidation

rights, and the tranching of capital, but did not receive greater equity ownership

percentages. It therefore appears that serial entrepreneurs may extract greater value from

venture capitalists in the non-price terms of investment.

       The overall conclusion that we draw from Table 7 is that despite the higher

success rates of entrepreneurs with successful track records, venture capital firms are not

paying premiums to invest in their companies. Why successful entrepreneurs appear




                                              21
unable to capture an increasing share of rents is something of a mystery, but it has

implications for returns.

         C. Returns

         In this section, we investigate whether venture capital firms earn higher returns on

their investments in serial entrepreneurs. Unfortunately, we do not observe actual rates

of return on venture capital investments.9 What we can observe, with varying degrees of

accuracy, is company valuations at the time of exit. Venture Economics and Venture

Source provide this information for most IPOs and some acquisitions. For companies

missing information in these databases, we search for valuation at the time of IPO in

SDC Corporate New Issues database. We also searched for acquisition values using

Factiva. If the firm did not go public by December 2003, we assume that the exit value is

zero. We exclude from the analysis firms that went public or were acquired where we

could not find the valuation.

         Our crude measure of return is the ratio of the exit valuation to pre-money

valuation in the first financing round with venture investors, what we refer to as the

investment multiple. The investment multiple is likely to be correlated with actual

returns but it does not adjust for two critical elements of return: the time it takes to exit

and the dilution that occurs over financing rounds.

         Table 8 presents regression results in which the dependent variable is the

investment multiple divided by the average investment multiple of firms funded in the

same industry and year. We refer to this variable as the relative investment multiple.



9
 Venture capitalists typically invest in multiple financing rounds. Even if we know that a given venture
firm invested in a certain round, it is often unclear what percentage of the equity sold in the financed the
venture capitalist received. This information is needed to compute a rate of return.


                                                      22
When the relative investment multiple is one, the investment multiple on the venture

capital firm’s investment is equal to the industry-year average.

       The regressors include the same set of variables we have been considering

throughout. The first column indicates that the relative investment multiple is greater for

firms with serial entrepreneurs, although the effect is not statistically significant. The

effect is larger for serial entrepreneurs who previously succeeded, as results reported in

the second column indicate. The estimated effect is statistically significant at

conventional levels. Finally, venture capital experience is positively related to the

relative investment multiple.

       The estimates from the third column of Table 8 imply that among companies

funded by inexperienced venture capital firms, only those with previously successful

entrepreneurs do better than the industry-year average investment multiple (79% higher

on average). First time and failed entrepreneurs do significantly worse than the average.

By contrast, when companies are funded by top-tier venture capital firms, they perform

in general at the industry average and do significantly better if one of the entrepreneurs

has a successful track record (107% greater).

       The last column of Table 8 looks at relative investment multiples, conditional on

the venture succeeding. Prior success and venture capital experience have no appreciable

effect on relative investment valuation. This indicates that the higher returns documented

in the first four columns of the Table 8 come from higher success rates, not greater

returns in the IPOs.

       Finally, we try to connect our deal-level results to venture capital fund internal

rates of return. Our source of return data is the 2004 Private Equity Performance




                                             23
Monitor, which presents return data on over 1,700 private equity funds. This information

is compiled by Mark O’Hare, who over the past five years has created a database of

returns from public sources (e.g., institutional investors who have posted their returns

online), Freedom of Information Act requests to public funds, and voluntary disclosures

by both general and limited partners. In order to do this mapping, we need to make some

assumptions. (For instance, because Mayfield V was raised in 1984 and Mayfield VI in

1988, we attribute all investments made between 1984 and 1987 to Mayfield V.)

       Our dependent variable is fund internal rate of return (IRR) measured in percent.

(For example, a 60% return gets entered into the data as 60.) The average fund IRR is

13.8%. We include a series of controls including industry shares in the portfolio of the

fund, year dummies for the year the fund was established, and assets under management

at the time the fund was raised.

       Our main independent variables of interest are the portion of a fund’s deals that

involve serial entrepreneurs and the portion that involve successful serial entrepreneurs.

The results in Table 9 are quite strong and demonstrate the impact that serial

entrepreneurs can have on portfolio returns. At the 25th return percentile, 6.8% of venture

capital funds are investments in companies with serial entrepreneurs; at the 75th

percentile, it is 18.2%. The coefficient of 59.2 in column 2 implies a 7.3% greater IRR

for funds that invest in serial entrepreneurs. However, there appears to be no link to the

share of the fund invested in previously successful entrepreneurs. The estimated effects

of experience are also large. Top-tier firms are predicted to have IRRs of 45.4%, as

compared to 14.3% for less experienced venture capital firms.


4. Conclusions



                                            24
        This paper examines the role that skill plays in the success of entrepreneurs and

venture capitalists. By examining the experience of serial entrepreneurs and the venture

capitalists that fund them, we are able to provide insights into how important each is and

what type of skill each possesses. Our results indicate that skill is an important

determinant of success for entrepreneurial startups. Successful serial entrepreneurs are

more likely to replicate the success of their past companies than either single venture

entrepreneurs or serial entrepreneurs who failed in their prior venture.

        More experienced venture capital firms are also shown to have higher success

rates on their investments. However, this is isolated to first time entrepreneurs and those

who previously failed. When experienced and inexperienced venture capital firms invest

in entrepreneurs with a track record of success, there is no performance differential. This

evidence would seem to suggest that prior success is a signal of quality or that venture

capital firms add little value to talented, successful entrepreneurs. If prior success were

pure luck, we would not see this pattern.

        While they are more likely to be successful, serial entrepreneurs are not able to

extract all of the value from their superior ability. We find that successful serial

entrepreneurs do not achieve higher valuations than do other entrepreneurs.10 This leads

to higher deal returns for venture capitalists who invest in companies started by

successful serial entrepreneurs. Investing in serial entrepreneurs also leads to higher

rates of return of the funds themselves.

        Our paper raises several interesting questions for future research. First, while our

paper identifies entrepreneurial skill, it does not distinguish exactly what the critical


10
  We are unable to determine the value implications of the non-price terms in Kaplan and Stromberg
(2003) because we do not have the actual financing documents.


                                                  25
entrepreneurial skill is. It is possible that entrepreneurial skill is embodied in the

networks with customers, suppliers, and other market participants that enhance the

outcomes of serial entrepreneurs. It is also possible that the skill is greater ability to

identify markets, set strategy, and correctly analyze various business problems. In future

work, we hope to examine the markets that serial entrepreneurs enter and to identify

whether future success is confined to the markets where they have operated in the past or

whether successful serial entrepreneurs are also more successful in new markets.

        While not ruling it out, our results are less consistent with the learning by doing

work of Eesley and Roberts (2006a,b). A learning-by-doing story would need to explain

why there is differential learning between successful and unsuccessful serial

entrepreneurs as well as why more experienced venture capitalists can identify failed

serial entrepreneurs who “learned” in their previous venture.

        The results in this paper also highlight the role of venture capital skill in

identifying talented entrepreneurs and attractive markets. We do not, however, identify

whether this ability operates at the individual or the firm level. Similarly, we do not

know whether various attributes of the individual general partners or the firms

themselves are also associated with greater ability to identify successful investments. In

future work, we plan to look at how demographic characteristics of individual general

partners and characteristics of venture capital teams affect the success of venture capital

investments.




                                              26
                                       References

Bengtsson, Ola, Repeat Relationships between Venture Capitalists and Entrepreneurs,
Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, 2005.

Bengtsson, Ola, Investor Attitudes and the Supply of Capital: Are Venture Capitalists in
California More Forgiving?, Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, 2006.

Bhide, Amar, The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 2000.

Carroll, Glenn R., and Elaine Mosakowski, The Career Dynamics of Self-Employment,
Administrative Science Quarterly 32. 1987. 570-589.

Chatterji, Aaron K., Spawned with a Silver Spoon? Entrepreneurial Performance and
Innovation in the Medical Device Industry, Unpublished Working Paper, University of
California at Berkeley, 2005.

Eesley, Charles, and Edward Roberts, Cutting Your Teeth: Learning from Rare
Experiences, Unpublished working paper, MIT, 2006a.

Eesley, Charles, and Edward Roberts, The Second Time Around?: Serial Entrepreneurs
From MIT, Unpublished working paper, MIT, 2006b.

Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, Specialization and
Success: Evidence from Venture Capital, Unpublished working paper, Harvard
University, 2006.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, The Venture Capital Cycle. 2nd edition. Cambridge:
MIT Press. 2004.

Gompers, Paul, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public
Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999, Journal of Finance 60.
2005. 577-614.

Hochberg, Yael, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, Whom You Know Matters:
Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance, Journal of Finance
Forthcoming. 2006.

Honig, Benson, and Per Davidsson, Nascent Entrepreneurship, Social Networks and
Organizational Learning, Paper presented at the Competence 2000, Helsinki, Finland.

Hsu, David H., What Do Entrepreneurs Pay for Venture Capital Affiliation? Journal of
Finance 59. 2004. 1805-1844




                                           27
Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, Private Equity Performance: Returns,
Persistence and Capital, Journal of Finance 60. 2005. 1791-1823.

Kaplan, Steven N., Berk A. Sensoy, and Per Strömberg, What are Firms? Evolution from
Birth to Public Companies, Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, 2006.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
World: Evidence from Venture Capital Contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70. 2003.
281-316.

Kihlstrom, Richard, and Jean-Jacques Laffont, A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion, Journal of Political Economy 87.
1979. 719-748.

Knight, Frank H. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.
1921. <http://www.econlib.org/library/Knight/knRUP8.html>.

Lazear, Edward P., Entrepreneurship, Journal of Labor Economics 23. 2005. 649-680.

Massey, Cade, and Richard H. Thaler, Overconfidence vs. Market Efficiency in the
National Football League, Working paper no. 11270, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2006.

Reuber, Rebecca, Lorraine Dyke, and Eileen Fischer, The Impact of Entrepreneurial
Teams on the Financing Experiences of Canadian Ventures, Journal of Small Business
and Entrepreneurship 7. 1990. 13-22.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. The Theory of Economic Development. Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press. 1934.

Sorensen, Morten, How Smart is Smart Money? A Two-Sided Matching Model of
Venture Capital, Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago, 2004.

Sorenson, Olav, and Toby Stuart, Syndication Networks and the Spatial Distribution of
Venture Capital Investments. American Journal of Sociology. 106. 2001. 1546-1586.




                                          28
Table 1: Frequency of Serial Entrepreneurs by Year

                                                           Serial Entrepreneurs as
Year    Serial Entrepreneurs      Total Entrepreneurs        a Percent of Total
1980                        0                       11                           0.0
1981                        0                         7                          0.0
1982                        0                       11                           0.0
1983                        0                       34                           0.0
1984                        2                       29                           6.9
1985                        3                       42                           7.1
1986                        9                       99                           9.1
1987                        9                      130                           6.9
1988                       10                      209                           4.8
1989                       14                      254                           5.5
1990                       35                      301                          11.6
1991                       34                      337                          10.1
1992                       53                      522                          10.2
1993                       65                      516                          12.6
1994                       78                      574                          13.6
1995                      129                    1,051                          12.3
1996                      166                    1,262                          13.2
1997                      141                    1,205                          11.7
1998                      164                    1,256                          13.1
1999                      174                    1,678                          10.4
2000                       38                      404                           9.4
Sample includes one observation per entrepreneur - company pair.




                                                 29
Table 2: Frequency of Serial Entrepreneurs by Industry


                                                                                       Serial Entrepreneurs as
                                    Serial Entrepreneurs       Total Entrepreneurs       a Percent of Total
Internet and Computers                                556                      4,489                       12.4
Communications and Electronics                        157                      1,424                       11.0
Business and Industrial                                  2                       109                         1.8
Consumer                                               29                        576                         5.0
Energy                                                   0                        19                         0.0
Biotech and Healthcare                                271                      1,964                       13.8
Financial Services                                     11                        163                         6.7
Business Services                                      68                        827                         8.2
Other                                                  30                        361                         8.3
Sample includes one observation per entrepreneur - company pair.
Table 3: Frequency of Serial Entrepreneurs by Venture Capital Firm

                                          Serial           Total        Serial Entrepreneurs as      Ranking by:
Year                                  Entrepreneurs    Entrepreneurs      a Percent of Total       Number Percent
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers                 100             666                       15.0         1         9
New Enterprise Associates                         80             702                       11.4         2        28
Sequoia Capital                                   69             432                       16.0         3         5
U.S. Venture Partners                             68             454                       15.0         4        10
Mayfield                                          63             459                       13.7         5        19
Accel Partners                                    61             418                       14.6         6        13
Crosspoint Venture Partners                       60             407                       14.7         7        11
Institutional Venture Partners                    56             385                       14.5         8        14
Bessemer Venture Partners                         49             340                       14.4         9        16
Matrix Partners                                   44             275                       16.0        10         4
Menlo Ventures                                    43             305                       14.1        11        17
Sprout Group                                      42             315                       13.3        12        21
Brentwood Associates                              40             265                       15.1        14         8
Venrock Associates                                40             389                       10.3        13        31
Mohr Davidow Ventures                             38             251                       15.1        16         6
Oak Investment Partners                           38             462                         8.2       15        39
Domain Associates                                 37             210                       17.6        17         1
Benchmark Capital                                 36             264                       13.6        19        20
Greylock Partners                                 36             374                         9.6       18        34
InterWest Partners                                35             312                       11.2        20        29
Advent International                              33             238                       13.9        21        18
Foundation Capital                                31             188                       16.5        24         2
Enterprise Partners Venture Capital               31             215                       14.4        23        15
Canaan Partners                                   31             252                       12.3        22        23
Delphi Ventures                                   30             185                       16.2        26         3
Sigma Partners                                    30             204                       14.7        25        12
Charles River Ventures                            29             192                       15.1        27         7
Norwest Venture Partners                          27             231                       11.7        28        25
Austin Ventures                                   25             270                         9.3       29        36
Morgan Stanley Venture Partners                   24             191                       12.6        34        22
Lightspeed Venture Partners                       24             202                       11.9        33        24
Sutter Hill Ventures                              24             207                       11.6        32        26
Battery Ventures                                  24             242                         9.9       31        33
Sevin Rosen Funds                                 24             254                         9.4       30        35
JPMorgan Partners                                 23             225                       10.2        36        32
St. Paul Venture Capital                          23             277                         8.3       35        38
Alta Partners                                     22             190                       11.6        37        27
Morgenthaler                                      20             183                       10.9        38        30
Trinity Ventures                                  18             214                         8.4       39        37
Warburg Pincus                                    16             195                         8.2       40        40

Sample includes one observation per VC firm-portfolio company. Includes the 40 VC firms with the most
total deals in the sample.




                                                  2
Table 4: Summary Statistics

                                                                  Entrepreneurs
                                                  All First         with One              Serial Entrepreneurs
                                                  Ventures          Venture            First Venture      Later Ventures
Success Rate                                       0.253              0.243               0.369 ***          0.290 ***
Pre-Money Valuation (millions of 2000 $)           15.95              15.78               17.75 *            12.30 ***
Firm in Startup Stage                              0.116              0.118               0.090 **           0.175 ***
Firm in Development Stage                          0.294              0.294               0.293              0.377 ***
Firm in Beta Stage                                 0.039              0.039               0.037              0.045
Firm in Shipping Stage                             0.469              0.470               0.462              0.362 ***
Firm in Profitable Stage                           0.073              0.070               0.101 **           0.036 ***
Firm in Re-Start Stage                             0.009              0.009               0.016              0.006
California-Based Company                           0.430              0.417               0.578 ***          0.591 ***
Massachusetts-Based Company                        0.119              0.119               0.122               0.119
Age of Firm (in Months)                            36.64              36.30               40.54 **           20.60 ***
Previous Deals by VC Firm                          51.35              51.76               46.70 ***          58.86 ***
Previous Deals by VC Firm Relative to Year
Average                                             2.896              2.887              2.989              3.290    ***
One observation per entrepreneur-company pair.
***, **, * indicate significant difference from mean value of entrepreneurs with one venture at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.




                                                   3
Table 5: Venture Success Rates

                                          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                        Probit          Probit          Probit          Probit          Probit          Probit          Probit
LATER VENTURE                           0.0411          0.0126                          0.0017                          0.0069
                                        (2.92)    ***   (0.73)                          (0.09)                          (0.34)
PRIOR SUCCESS                                           0.0830                          0.0992                          0.1252
                                                        (2.93)    ***                   (3.04)    ***                   (3.68)    ***
Any Entrepreneur In LATER VENTURE                                       0.0384                          0.0222                          0.0362
                                                                        (2.21)    **                    (1.01)                          (1.65)    *
Any Entrepreneur Has PRIOR SUCCESS                                      0.0808                          0.0939                          0.1198
                                                                        (3.12)    ***                   (2.90)    ***                   (3.66)    ***
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE                      0.0381          0.0379          0.0357                                          0.0391          0.0399
                                        (4.51)    ***   (4.49)    ***   (5.82)    ***                                   (4.56)    ***   (5.52)    ***
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X LATER VENTURE                                                                                      0.0079
                                                                                                                        (0.51)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X PRIOR SUCCESS                                                                                      -0.0453
                                                                                                                        (2.02)    **
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X Any Entrepreneur                                                                                                   0.0027
In Later Venture                                                                                                                        (0.16)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X Any Entrepreneur                                                                                                   -0.0404
Has PRIOR SUCCESS                                                                                                                       (1.87)    *
Logarithm of Age of Company             0.0060          0.0061          0.0084          0.0086          0.0024          0.0060          0.0082
                                        (0.89)          (0.90)          (1.70)    *     (1.03)          (0.37)          (0.89)          (1.68)    *
California-Based Company                0.0249          0.0249          0.0029          0.0183          -0.0066         0.0249          0.0024
                                        (1.33)          (1.33)          (0.21)          (0.75)          (0.34)          (1.33)          (0.17)
Massachusetts-Based Company             -0.0616         -0.0610         -0.0415         -0.1039         -0.0681         -0.0617         -0.0436
                                        (2.38)    **    (2.36)    **    (2.24)    **    (3.24)    ***   (2.61)    ***   (2.39)    **    (2.37)    **
Company In Development Stage            0.0175          0.0168          0.0304          0.0183          0.0544          0.0171          0.0305
                                        (0.58)          (0.56)          (1.39)          (0.55)          (2.05)    **    (0.57)          (1.40)
Company In Beta Stage                   0.0402          0.0403          0.0691          0.0476          0.1202          0.0411          0.0702
                                        (0.78)          (0.78)          (1.78)    *     (0.93)          (2.79)          (0.80)          (1.81)    *
Company In Shipping Stage                                      0.0659                     0.0657               0.0671            0.0982             0.1282               0.0664              0.0677
                                                                (2.06)        **          (2.06)      **        (2.92)     ***   (2.79)    ***       (4.56)    ***       (2.08)     **       (2.94)     ***
Company In Profitable Stage                                     0.1784                    0.1789               0.2269            0.1814             0.2672               0.1798              0.2278
                                                                (3.49)        ***         (3.50)      ***       (5.40)     ***   (2.99)    ***       (5.26)    ***       (3.51)     ***      (5.41)     ***
Company In Re-Start Stage                                      -0.0163                    -0.0138              -0.0554           -0.0040            0.0133              -0.0128              -0.0541
                                                                (0.15)                    (0.13)                (0.76)           (0.04)              (0.15)              (0.12)              (0.74)
Company Stage Missing                                          0.1057                     0.1061               0.1453            0.2929             0.2891               0.1082              0.1500
                                                                (1.96)        *           (1.97)      **        (3.31)     ***   (4.07)    ***       (4.46)    ***       (2.00)     **       (3.39)     ***


Controls for:
Round Number                                                     yes                       yes                   yes              yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
Year                                                             yes                       yes                   yes              yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
Industry                                                         yes                       yes                   yes              yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
VC Firm Fixed Effects                                             no                        no                    no               yes                yes                  no                  no


Log-likelihood                                                 -4872.2                    -4867.7              -1635.5           -9568.9            -2805.8             -4865.5              -1632.9
χ2-Statistic
                                                                373.1                     376.9                 536.7            1008.7             1034.9               379.4                535.7
p-Value                                                         0.000                     0.000                 0.000            0.000               0.000               0.000                0.000
Observations                                                    9,876                     9,876                 3,831            19,617              6,180               9,876                3,831

The sample consists of 9,932 ventures by 8,808 entrepreneurs covering the years 1975 to 2000. The dependent variable is Success, an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the portfolio
company went public and zero otherwise. LATER VENTURE is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the entrepreneur had started a previous venture-backed company and zero otherwise.
PRIOR SUCCESS is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the entrepreneur had started a previous venture-backed company that went public or filed to go public by December 2003 and zero
otherwise. Any Entrepreneur in Later Venture is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if any entrepreneur within the company had started a previous venture-backed company and zero otherwise.
Any Entrepreneur with Prior Success is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if any entrepreneur within the company started a previous venture-backed company that went public or filed to go
public by December 2003 and zero otherwise. VC FIRM EXPERIENCE is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the average
in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. The sample analyzed in columns 1, 2, and 6 is at the entrepreneur-company level, the sample analyzed in columns 3 and 7 is
at the company level, the sample analyzed in column 4 is at the entrepreneur-company-VC firm level, and the sample analyzed in column 5 is at the company-VC firm level.
Standard errors are clustered at portfolio company level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                     2
Table 6: Probability of Becoming a Serial Entrepreneur

                                                                    (1)                    (2)
                                                                  Probit                 Probit
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE                                                0.0058                0.0058
                                                                  (2.57)     **          (2.53)      **
PRIOR SUCCESS                                                                           0.0009
                                                                                         (0.17)
Logarithm of Age of Company                                       0.0036                0.0036
                                                                   (1.75)    *           (1.75)      *
California-Based Company                                          0.0347                0.0347
                                                                   (6.47)    ***         (6.46)      ***
Massachusetts-Based Company                                       0.0193                0.0194
                                                                   (2.18)    **          (2.19)      **
Company In Development Stage                                      0.0122                0.0122
                                                                   (1.29)                (1.28)
Company In Beta Stage                                             0.0058                0.0058
                                                                   (0.40)                (0.40)
Company In Shipping Stage                                         0.0141                0.0141
                                                                   (1.47)                (1.47)
Company In Profitable Stage                                       0.0032                0.0031
                                                                   (0.26)                (0.25)
Company In Re-Start Stage                                         -0.0086               -0.0085
                                                                   (0.41)                (0.41)
Company Stage Missing                                             0.0262                0.0261
                                                                   (1.75)    *           (1.75)      *
Controls for:
Round Number                                                        yes                   yes
Year                                                                yes                   yes
Industry                                                            yes                   yes

Log-likelihood                                                    -2145.5               -2145.5
χ2-Statistic                                                        563.6                  564.4
p-Value                                                             0.000                  0.000
Observations                                                        8,734                  8,734
The sample consists of 8,808 initial ventures by entrepreneurs covering the years 1975 to 2000. The
dependent variable is Become Serial, an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the entrepreneur
begins a second venture and zero otherwise. VC FIRM EXPERIENCE is the difference between the log
of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the average in
year t of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. PRIOR SUCCESS is an
indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the entrepreneur's first venture-backed company went
public or filed to go public by December 2003 and zero otherwise.
Standard errors are clustered at portfolio company level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below
coefficient estimates.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Table 7: Pre-Money Valuations

                                          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                         OLS             OLS             OLS             OLS             OLS             OLS             OLS
LATER VENTURE                           -0.0290         -0.0245                         0.0144                          -0.0210
                                        (0.97)          (0.66)                          (0.46)                          (0.45)
PRIOR SUCCESS                                           -0.0132                         -0.0726                         0.0671
                                                        (0.23)                          (1.31)                          (0.90)
Any Entrepreneur In LATER VENTURE                                       -0.0260                         -0.0112                         -0.0176
                                                                        (0.60)                          (0.28)                          (0.31)
Any Entrepreneur Has PRIOR SUCCESS                                      0.0065                          -0.0351                         0.1204
                                                                        (0.11)                          (0.58)                          (1.50)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE                      0.0916          0.0916          0.1149                                          0.0965          0.1344
                                        (4.88)    ***   (4.88)    ***   (7.12)    ***                                   (5.09)    ***   (7.12)    ***
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X LATER VENTURE                                                                                      -0.0050
                                                                                                                        (0.15)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X PRIOR SUCCESS                                                                                      -0.0926
                                                                                                                        (1.75)    *
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X Any Entrepreneur                                                                                                   -0.0135
In Later Venture                                                                                                                        (0.31)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X Any Entrepreneur                                                                                                   -0.1382
Has PRIOR SUCCESS                                                                                                                       (2.34)    **
Logarithm of Age of Company             0.0889          0.0889          0.0927          0.0396          0.0543          0.0886          0.0916
                                        (4.94)    ***   (4.93)    ***   (5.82)    ***   (3.77)    ***   (3.08)    ***   (4.92)    ***   (5.76)    ***
California-Based Company                0.0771          0.0771          0.0629          0.0576          0.0195          0.0771          0.0611
                                        (1.87)    *     (1.87)    *     (1.69)    *     (2.29)    **    (0.47)          (1.87)    *     (1.64)
Massachusetts-Based Company             -0.0554         -0.0555         -0.0715         -0.1195         -0.1312         -0.0575         -0.0800
                                        (0.95)          (0.95)          (1.42)          (3.46)          (2.53)    **    (0.99)          (1.60)
Company In Development Stage            0.4787          0.4788          0.4366          0.7874          0.6834          0.4794          0.4367
                                        (8.28)    ***   (8.28)    ***   (8.71)    ***   (19.28)   ***   (10.77)   ***   (8.29)    ***   (8.70)    ***
Company In Beta Stage                   0.6504          0.6503          0.6652          1.1635          1.0595          0.6509          0.6661
                                        (6.17)    ***   (6.17)    ***   (7.32)    ***   (19.80)   ***   (11.83)   ***   (6.18)    ***   (7.37)    ***
Company In Shipping Stage               0.9070          0.9070          0.8456          1.2609          1.1157          0.9078          0.8468
                                                                  (14.02)      ***        (14.02)   ***       (14.48)     ***   (28.84)    ***      (16.19)     ***      (14.05)     ***      (14.49)     ***
Company In Profitable Stage                                       1.3444                  1.3442              1.3231            1.8374              1.6150               1.3451               1.3247
                                                                  (12.92)      ***        (12.91)   ***       (13.16)     ***   (28.27)    ***      (14.51)     ***      (12.93)     ***      (13.21)     ***
Company In Re-Start Stage                                         -0.5520                 -0.5524            -0.5416            0.2357              0.0529               -0.5501              -0.5322
                                                                   (2.29)      **         (2.29)    **        (2.45)      **    (2.29)     **        (0.22)               (2.28)     **        (2.41)     **
Company Stage Missing                                             0.0000                  0.0000              0.0000            0.0000              0.0000               0.0000               0.0000
                                                                   (0.00)                 (0.00)              (0.00)            (0.00)               (0.00)               (0.00)               (0.00)
Logarithm of Value-Weighted Industry Index                        0.4467                  0.4465              0.3532            0.2684              0.1682               0.4472               0.3572
                                                                   (4.32)      **         (4.32)    **        (3.80)      **    (3.95)     **        (1.61)               (4.33)     **        (3.86)     **


Controls for:
Round Number                                                        yes                    yes                  yes              yes                  yes                  yes                  yes
Year                                                                yes                    yes                  yes              yes                  yes                  yes                  yes
Industry                                                            yes                    yes                  yes              yes                  yes                  yes                  yes
VC Firm Fixed Effects                                               no                      no                  no               yes                  yes                  no                    no


R-squared                                                          0.36                    0.36                0.35              0.56                0.56                  0.36                 0.35
Observations                                                       6,377                  6,377               2,348             15,670               4,912                6,377                2,348

The sample consists of 6,418 professional venture financings of privately held firms between 1975 and 2000 in the Venture Source database for which the firm was able to determine the valuation of the
financing round. The dependent variable is natural logarithm of Pre-Money Valuation, defined as the product of the price paid per share in the financing round and the shares outstanding prior to the financing
round, expressed in millions of current dollars. Later Venture is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the entrepreneur had started a previous venture-backed company and zero otherwise.
PRIOR SUCCESS is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the entrepreneur had started a previous venture-backed company that went public or filed to go public by December 2003 and zero
otherwise. Any Entrepreneur in Later Venture is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if any entrepreneur within the company had started a previous venture-backed company and zero otherwise.
Any Entrepreneur with Prior Success is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if any entrepreneur within the company started a previous venture-backed company that went public or filed to go public
by December 2003 and zero otherwise. VC FIRM EXPERIENCE is the difference between the log of the number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the average in year t of
the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t. The sample analyzed in columns 1, 2, and 6 is at the entrepreneur-company level, the sample analyzed in columns 3 and 7 is at the company
level, the sample analyzed in column 4 is at the entrepreneur-company-VC firm level, and the sample analyzed in column 5 is at the company-VC firm level.
Standard errors are clustered at portfolio company level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                     2
Table 8: Venture Returns

                                          (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
                                         OLS            OLS                OLS            OLS            OLS             OLS            OLS             OLS
LATER VENTURE                           0.3429         0.0883             0.1228                        -0.3030         0.1845          0.0163         0.1536
                                        (1.63)         (0.36)             (0.54)                        (1.93)    *     (1.41)          (0.12)         (0.86)
PRIOR SUCCESS                                          0.7799             0.8278                        1.4183                          0.4238         0.3159
                                                       (1.46)             (1.66)    *                   (2.77)    ***                   (1.37)         (0.91)
ANY ENTREPRENEUR IN LATER VENTURE                                                        0.3823
                                                                                         (1.39)
ANY ENTREPRENEUR HAS PRIOR SUCCESS                                                       0.8185
                                                                                         (1.64)
                                                                                                                                           -
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE                      0.1531         0.1515             0.1594         0.2285         0.2089          -0.1216         0.1187         -0.1076
                                        (1.73)    *    (1.71)    *        (1.80)    *    (2.29)    **   (1.93)    *     (1.63)          (1.59)         (1.41)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X LATER VENTURE                                        -0.0546                       0.0224                                         -0.1387
                                                                          (0.28)                        (0.17)                                         (1.18)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X PRIOR SUCCESS                                        -0.0555                       -0.0591                                        0.1012
                                                                          (0.16)                        (0.16)                                         (0.40)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X Any Entrepreneur                                                    -0.0892
In Later Venture                                                                         (0.34)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE X Any Entrepreneur                                                    0.0359
Has PRIOR SUCCESS                                                                        (0.09)
                                                                                                                                           -
Logarithm of Age of Company             -0.1371        -0.1373            -0.1376        -0.1084        -0.0712         -0.2048         0.2023         -0.2023
                                        (2.23)    **   (2.23)    **       (2.22)    **   (1.60)         (1.18)          (3.36)    ***   (3.31)   ***   (3.30)    ***
California-Based Company                0.3013         0.3024             0.3021         0.1221         0.2886          0.0169          0.0126         0.0146
                                        (1.23)         (1.23)             (1.23)         (0.48)         (0.96)          (0.08)          (0.06)         (0.07)
Massachusetts-Based Company             -0.1708        -0.1634            -0.1643        -0.1585        -0.0815         0.0258          0.0277         0.0247
                                        (0.68)         (0.65)             (0.66)         (0.54)         (0.26)          (0.09)          (0.09)         (0.08)
                                                                                                                                           -
Company In Development Stage            -0.3487        -0.3519            -0.3521        -0.1943        -0.2974         -1.1035         1.1169         -1.1208
                                        (0.80)         (0.81)             (0.81)         (0.41)         (0.61)          (2.05)    **    (2.07)   **    (2.07)    **




                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                           -
Company In Beta Stage                                        -0.9392               -0.9333             -0.9346             -0.7156              -1.0589              -1.7482            1.7498            -1.7495
                                                              (2.23)      **        (2.21)    **       (2.21)      **       (1.57)               (2.28)     **        (3.07)     ***    (3.07)     ***     (3.07)      ***
                                                                                                                                                                                           -
Company In Shipping Stage                                    -0.1372               -0.1318             -0.1321             -0.0247              -0.4690              -1.2298            1.2334            -1.2365
                                                              (0.29)                (0.28)             (0.28)               (0.05)               (0.91)               (2.27)     **     (2.27)     **      (2.27)      **
                                                                                                                                                                                           -
Company In Profitable Stage                                  -0.3106               -0.3011             -0.3019             -0.1153              -0.4534              -1.4655            1.4653            -1.4703
                                                              (0.64)                (0.62)             (0.62)               (0.22)               (0.82)               (2.62)     ***     (2.62)    ***     (2.62)      ***
Company In Re-Start Stage                                     0.5986                0.6178             0.6163               0.0814              0.8543               0.3517             0.3693             0.3669
                                                              (0.39)                (0.41)             (0.40)               (0.09)               (0.48)               (0.31)             (0.32)            (0.32)
Company Stage Missing                                        -1.0495               -1.0383             -1.0363             -0.7742              -1.1125              0.0000             0.0000             0.0000
                                                              (2.54)      **        (2.51)    **       (2.50)      **       (1.74)      *        (2.52)     **        (0.00)             (0.00)            (0.00)


Controls for:
Round Number                                                   yes                   yes                 yes                 yes                  yes                  yes                yes               yes
Year                                                           yes                   yes                 yes                 yes                  yes                  yes                yes               yes
Industry                                                       yes                   yes                 yes                 yes                  yes                  yes                yes               yes


R-squared                                                      0.01                  0.01               0.01                 0.01                0.01                  0.1                0.1                0.1
Observations                                                  8,897                 8,897              8,897                3,513                6,586                1,554              1,554             1,554


The sample consists of 8,944 ventures for which an IPO valuation was determined or for which there was no IPO. The dependent variable is IPO Exit Return, defined as the ratio of the IPO valuation to the pre-
money valuation for the venture relative to the ratio of the IPO valuation to pre-money valuation of all ventures in the same industry in the current year. LATER VENTURE is an indicator variable that takes on the
value of one if the entrepreneur had started a previous venture-backed company and zero otherwise. PRIOR SUCCESS is an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if the entrepreneur had started a previous
venture-backed company that went public or filed to go public by December 2003 and zero otherwise. Any Entrepreneur in Later Venture is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if any entrepreneur
within the company had started a previous venture-backed company and zero otherwise. Any Entrepreneur with Prior Success is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if any entrepreneur within the
company started a previous venture-backed company that went public or filed to go public by December 2003 and zero otherwise. VC Firm Experiencet is the difference between the log of the number of
investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t and the average in year t of the number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t.
Standard errors are clustered at portfolio company level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient
estimates.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                   4
Table 9: Fund-Level Returns

                                                      (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                                     OLS                  OLS                OLS                WLS
Share of Portfolio With LATER VENTURE              54.0521              59.1963            36.7272            310.7474
                                                    (1.21)               (1.24)             (0.63)              (1.70)     *
Share of Portfolio With PRIOR SUCCESS                                                      64.4079            -74.5977
                                                                                            (0.72)              (0.31)
VC FIRM EXPERIENCE                                 20.0744              19.5406            20.0984             20.1381
                                                    (5.02)      ***      (4.77)    ***      (5.01)    ***       (3.50)     ***
Controls:
Vintage Year Fixed Effects                            yes                yes                 yes                 yes
Fund Size                                             yes                yes                 yes                 yes
Percentage in Each Industry                           yes                yes                 yes                 yes
Mean Round Number of Deals                                               yes
R-squared                                            0.45                0.46               0.46                 0.59
Observations                                         514                 482                514                  514

The sample consists of 370 VC funds with information from the 2004 Private Equity Performance Monitor. The dependent
variable is Fund IRR, defined as the IRR of the fund. Share of Portfolio with Later Venture is the share of the individual VC
firm's portfolio in later ventures of serial entrepreneurs over the years of the fund. Share of Portfolio with Prior Success is
the share of the individual VC firm's portfolio in later ventures of serial entrepreneurs where the entrepreneur was successful
in the previous venture over the years of the fund. VC FIRM EXPERIENCE is the difference between the log of the average
number of investments made by venture capital organization f prior to year t for each investment in the fund and the average
in year t of the average number of investments made by all organizations prior to year t.
Standard errors are clustered at VC firm level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.
