                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      BANK DISTRESS DURING THE GREAT CONTRACTION, 1929 TO 1933, NEW
          DATA FROM THE ARCHIVES OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS

                                         Gary Richardson

                                       Working Paper 12590
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12590


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2006




I thank Shagufta Ahmed, Shaista Ahmed, Jacqueline Chattopadhay, Ching-Yi Chung, Nathan Montgomery,
Yuiichi Inomata, Mark Ng, Mitra Pai, Doris Sum, Brandon Tsang, Ian Wagner, and Eve Wang for
research assistance. I thank Reid Click, Deborah Kauffman, Ed and Edwin Richardson, and Gloria
Richardson for accommodations near the National Archives. I thank Erik Heitfield for the loan of
photographic equipment. I thank Marigee Bacolod, Dan Bogart, William Branch, Mark Carlson, Milton
Friedman, Michelle Garfinkel, Ami Glazer, Joseph Mason, and Kris Mitchener for extensive comments
on earlier drafts of this essay. I thank numerous friends and colleagues for comments, advice, and
encouragement. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Bank Distress During the Great Contraction, 1929 to 1933, New Data from the Archives of
the Board of Governors
Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 12590
October 2006
JEL No. E42,E5,E65,N1,N12

                                            ABSTRACT

During the contraction from 1929 through 1933, the Federal Reserve System tracked changes in the
status of all banks operating in the United States and determined the cause of each bank suspension.
This essay introduces that hitherto dormant data and analyzes chronological patterns in aggregate series
constructed from it. The analysis demonstrates both illiquidity and insolvency were substantial sources
of bank distress. Contagion (via correspondent networks and bank runs) propagated the initial banking
panics. As the depression deepened and asset values declined, insolvency loomed as the principal threat
to depository institutions. These patterns corroborate some and question other conjectures concerning
the causes and consequences of the financial crisis during the Great Contraction.

Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
                Miss Jones, Division of Bank Operations, requests that she be notified should
        any of this data be considered for destruction. She considers this valuable from a
        historical standpoint as it is the only record the Board has prior to 1933.
                Plans are now under way for making a card record, and Miss Jones wants to
        be sure this record is complete prior to destruction.
                                                                              Esther Crews
                                                                              June 11, 19411


Introduction

        The causes, consequences, and possibilities of preventing the banking panics of the Great

Depression have been debated for seven decades. The debate’s factual foundations rest upon data

published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin. The September 1937 issue contains the only

comprehensive collection of statistics on suspended banks, and is the sole source of aggregate bank

failure rates (Board of Governors 1937, hereafter FRB’37).2 Scholars studying the contraction

continuously redefine, reinterpret, and reveal new relationships between data from FRB’37 and

measures of industrial, commercial, and financial activity.

        The principal reason the debate continues may be the single source of evidence. FRB’37

provides imperfect information about bank distress. It distinguishes neither temporary from terminal

suspensions, nor voluntary from involuntary liquidations, nor institutions afflicted by illiquidity

from banks suffering insolvency. It contains information neither on the causes of bank suspensions

nor the number of bank mergers. The smallest period of aggregation at the national level is the

1
   Memo in the first file in the first box of St. 6386 forms in the National Archives. The card record, a compact method
   of recording information compatible with tabulating machines and suitable for long term storage, was never
   completed. Plans called for cards to describe each bank suspension, liquidation, merger, reopening, and other change
   of status (e.g. withdrawal from Federal Reserve membership) which occurred in the United States between 1929 and
   1933. Cards would also report the cause of each suspension and describe each consolidation due to financial
   difficulties. Work had barely begun when the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. The Federal Reserve prioritized
   wartime tasks. Historical studies were forsaken. The Division of Bank Operations cleared its decks by sending
   records from the previous decade to the Board’s Central Subject File, including those related to the Division’s
   inchoate endeavor to encode data from the 1930s. The Division never returned to the task.
2
   Reprints of these series (or cross-tabulations based upon them) appeared in Banking and Monetary Statistics (Board
   of Governors 1943) and Historical Statistics of the United States (Bureau of Census 1975). Precursors to these series
(cont.)



                                                           1
month and at the Federal Reserve district level is the year. Key terms remain undefined, leaving

much open to interpretation.

         This essay introduces new statistical series that provide precise, detailed, aggregate

information about categories of bank distress and causes of bank suspensions. The source for the

new series is the same as for the old series. From 1929 though 1933, the Board of Governors

collected data on changes of status for all banks operating in the United States, both members of the

Federal Reserve System and nonmembers, state and national, incorporated and private. The Board

also analyzed the cause of each bank suspension. The Division of Bank Operations recorded this

information on the St. 6386 series of forms. The series comprehensively covered the commercial

banking industry from January 1929 through the national banking holiday in March 1933.

Observations existed for every event affecting every bank. These events included the major, such as

openings, closings, reopenings, receiverships, and consolidations, and the minor, such as changes in

Federal Reserve membership, capital stock, charter type, and even street address. The forms also

included financial information for each bank on the date of each transaction. The complete series of

St. 6386 forms survives in the National Archives of the United States.3

         Since the St. 6386 database covers the entire population of banks and events, analysis of it

may be conducted in a manner more straightforward than in the current literature. Currently,

scholars employ the FRB’37 series, samples of microdata from various sources, economic logic,

and statistical techniques to infer patterns of events. The debate revolves around and conclusions

depend upon the assumptions underlying the analysis. Now, there is no need to argue over the



    appeared in various publications of the Board of Governors and in Bank Suspension in the United States
    (Goldenweiser et. al. 1931). Studies of the banking panics published prior to 1938 employ these predecessor series.
3
    The St. 6386 forms were the basis of the Federal Reserve’s bank data collection system from 1929 to 1933. All facts
    and figures about bank distress published by the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve district banks and much
    of the material published by state banking authorities originated with this source.


                                                           2
nature and timing of events. The St. 6386 database reveals what happened to every bank in the

nation on every day of the contraction.

         This essay analyzes aggregate series derived from the database using non-parametric

methods. The goal is filter the data as little as possible, allowing the evidence – and the hundreds of

bank examiners, accountants, receivers, economists, Federal Reserve agents, and others who

collaboratively created this data set – to speak for itself. Summary statistics, charts, and graphs

demonstrate that some types of bank distress were less prevalent than the conventional wisdom

claims; other types of bank distress, such as temporary banks suspensions, contagion through

correspondent networks, and suspensions due to illiquid assets, which according to the conventional

wisdom seldom occurred, in fact occurred often and played a pivotal role in the collapse of the

banking system.4

         This direct examination of the definitive data for the entire population of banks and events

answers two fundamental questions about the contraction. When did banks fail? Why did banks

fail? An accurate answer to the latter must be extended, because the nature of the banking crisis

changed over time. Before October 1930, the pattern of failures resembled the pattern that prevailed

during the 1920s. Small, rural banks with large loan losses failed at a steady rate. In November

1930, the collapse of correspondent networks triggered banking panics. Runs rose in number and

severity after prominent financial conglomerates in New York and Los Angeles closed amid

scandals covered prominently in the national press. More than a third of the banks which closed

their doors to depositors soon resumed normal operations. Following Britain’s departure from the

gold standard in September 1931, the depression deepened. Asset values declined. Insolvency


4
    For example, while Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963) and Ben Bernanke (1983, pp. 259-260) argue that
    during the Depression, banks did not suspend the conversion of deposits to currency as they had done during
    banking crises before the creation of the Federal Reserve System. The data introduced in this essay demonstrates
    otherwise.


                                                          3
loomed as the largest threat facing depository institutions. During the financial crisis in the winter

of 1933, almost all of the banks that failed were liquidated at a substantial loss.

       Overall, between the Great Crash and the Banking Holiday, both illiquidity and insolvency

were substantial sources of bank distress. Nearly three fourths of the banks that closed their doors

due to financial difficulties were insolvent. Slightly more than one quarter were solvent, and

without outside financial assistance, reopened for business, or repaid all of their depositors and

creditors, or merged at face value with other institutions. Frozen and devalued assets were a primary

cause of approximately one half of all bank suspensions and a contributing cause of another one

quarter. Heavy withdrawals were a primary cause of nearly one half of all bank suspensions and a

contributing cause of another one sixth.

       The rest of this essay substantiates this depiction of the banking crises of the Great

Contraction. Section 1 reviews the relevant literature, highlights FRB’37’s role in academic debates,

and elucidates the utility of the new evidence. Section 2 describes the data, defines key concepts,

and compares the archival evidence to the old FRB’37 series. An appendix presents facsimiles of

the St. 6386 forms and discusses issues important for interpreting empirical work based upon this

new and unique source. Section 3 presents chronological patterns for the four categories of bank

distress: terminal suspensions, temporary suspensions, consolidations due to financial difficulties,

and voluntary liquidations. Section 4 presents chronological patterns for the principal causes of

bank suspensions: heavy withdrawals, problematic assets, the closure of correspondent banks,

defalcations, and mismanagement. Section 5 discusses the implications these chronological patterns,

which corroborate some conjectures, cast doubt on others, and raise new questions concerning the

causes and consequences of the collapse of the banking system during the Great Depression.




                                                    4
1. Review of the Literature

        Scholars ask three big questions about the banking system during the Great Depression.

Why did bank suspensions surge at certain points in time? How did bank suspensions affect

commercial and industrial activity? Could Federal Reserve intervention have prevented (or did its

actions trigger) this crisis? Despite 70 years of analysis, debate persists about the answer to each

inquiry.

        Concerning causes of the banking crises, some scholars conclude that banks failed because

the economy contracted. Loan default rates rose. Asset values declined. Deteriorating fundamentals

forced banks into insolvency, continuing a process of liquidation that began during the 1920s.5

Other scholars conclude that a contagion of fear, a flight to cash holdings, and withdrawals en

masse drained deposits from banks and pushed financial markets towards collapse. Illiquidity of

assets and Federal Reserve inaction exacerbated the credit crunch.6

        Concerning the consequences of the banking crises, some scholars see bank failures as

symptoms of ongoing events with no special role in the propagation of the downturn.7 Other

scholars believe that banking panics had monetary effects. Panics eroded depositors’ confidence,

induced further withdrawals, forced banks to liquidate assets at deep discounts, lowered asset

prices, encouraged banks to hold excess reserves, and reduced the money multiplier. This vicious

5
   Peter Temin (1976) argue that real, rather than monetary, forces caused banks to fail and the economy to contract by
   regressing state-level FRB’37 suspension data on various explanatory variables. Charles Calomiris and Joseph
   Mason (2003) support the supposition that contagion forced banks to fail by regressing time-to-liquidation for
   individual Fed member banks on an array of bank characteristics, aggregate variables, and state-level FRB’37
   suspension rates. Eugene N. White (1984) initiated the use of bank balance sheet data to analyze these issues.
6
   Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963) argue that the Federal Reserves’ failure to act as a lender of last resort,
   prevent banking panics, and stem the decline of the money supply transmogrified what would have been an ordinary
   recession into the Great Depression by examining seasonally-adjusted series of deposits in suspended banks from
   FRB’37 to determine the dates of banking panics and correlating those dates with changes in monetary aggregates.
   Elmus Wicker (1996) uses district-level data on suspensions from FRB’37 to illuminate the regional patterns of
   panics.
7
   This view arises from Keynesian, classical, real business cycle, and other macroeconomic models. Temin’s spending
   hypothesis (Temin 1976) is the seminal statement of the stark Keynesian conception of the contraction, which sees
(cont.)


                                                          5
cycle reduced the money supply and turned what would have been a typical recession into a

cataclysmic contraction.8 Another set of scholars maintains that bank panics influenced economic

activity by disrupting financial intermediation. Bank failures increased the cost of credit

intermediation, dislocated the financing of small and medium firms, disrupted current production,

and curtailed investment spending. This financial acceleration deepened the depression.9

         Concerning the possibilities of preventing the banking panics, some scholars argue the

Federal Reserve could have done little to aid ailing banks. Fundamental forces pushed banks into

insolvency; monetary intervention could not pull them out. Liquidity assistance could not eliminate

loan losses. Open-market expansion – even on a massive scale – could not lift the economy out of

the liquidity trap (Temin 1976). Other scholars argue that the Federal Reserve could not aid ailing

banks directly, since illiquidity and contagion caused few banks failures, but that massive open-

market expansions, such as those that the Roosevelt administration implemented after abandoning

the gold standard, could reignite economic progress, and thus indirectly alleviate the banking

situation (Calomiris and Mason 2003, Eichengreen 1992, Romer 1992, Temin 1989). Another set of

scholars argue that even limited assistance from the Federal Reserve might have mitigated banking

panics. By acting as a lender of last resort and extending loans to solvent but illiquid institutions, the

Federal Reserve could have kept ailing institutions afloat. A credible commitment to do so might

have calmed consumers, reassured bankers, raised the money multiplier, alleviated the credit

crunch, and eased the economic situation (Richardson and Troost 2005). A final and influential set

of scholars concludes that the Federal Reserve’s sins were of commission as well as omission. The


    bank failures as a symptom of the autonomous decline in consumption and investment expenditure, and which dates
    back at least to the publication of Keynes’ General Theory.
8
    Friedman and Schwartz (1963) contains the seminal statement of the monetarist position, whose roots date back at
    least to the publications of Lauchlin Curry (1931 and 1932) and the Chicago monetary tradition which arose at that
    time.




                                                          6
Federal Reserve not only neglected to aid ailing banks, but by raising interest rates, reducing the

monetary base, and restricting discount lending, the Federal Reserve weakened all banks, and

created conditions conducive to panics. As evidence, these scholars highlight the Federal Reserve’s

monetary contraction in 1928 and the Federal Reserve’s defense of the gold standard in 1931

(Friedman and Schwartz 1963, Meltzer 2003).

         Much of the academic debate focuses on competing interpretations of the Depression’s

initial banking crisis in the fall of 1930. According to Friedman and Schwartz (1963), the crisis

began when “a contagion of fear spread among depositors (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, p. 308).”

The contagion began in agricultural areas and accelerated after the failure of the Bank of the United

States, which was the largest commercial bank ever to have failed up to that time in U.S. history,

and whose distinctive name “led many at home and abroad to regard it somehow as an official bank

(Friedman and Schwartz 1963, pp. 309-11).” The panic spread more rapidly than it would have

under the pre-Federal Reserve banking system, because the existence of the Federal Reserve

prevented banks from restricting the conversion of deposits into currency, which would have cut the

“vicious circle set in train by the search for liquidity.” Such a restriction would almost certainly

have prevented the subsequent waves of bank failures that were destined to come in 1931, 1932,

and 1933, just as restriction in 1893 and 1907 had quickly ended bank suspension arising primarily

from lack of liquidity (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, p. 311).”

         According to Wicker (1980, 1996), the collapse of Caldwell and Company triggered the

crisis. Caldwell controlled one of the largest banking chains in the South, with assets over

$200,000,000, and one of the largest insurance groups in the region, with assets over $230,000.000.




9
    Ben Bernanke (1982) regresses growth rates of industrial production on first differences of deposits in suspended
    banks to show that suspensions increased the cost of credit intermediation


                                                           7
Questionable managerial and financial practices caused the firm’s demise, which quickly forced the

suspension of the Bank of Tennessee and its affiliates.

          According to Temin and White, the first banking crisis was caused by worsening

fundamental factors, rather than contagion among banks. Temin (1976) argues that the Stock

Market Crash, the Dust Bowl, and the ensuing financial, agricultural, and industrial depressions

reduced the value of bank’s investments and raised suspension rates. White argues that the bank

failures during 1930 “did not mark a departure from previous experience (White 1984, p. 135).”

Both real and monetary factors played a part. Poorly performing assets and restrictive monetary

policy were both contributing factors. The former pushed banks towards insolvency. The latter

raised banks’ costs by forcing them to seek costly sources of funds such as bills payable,

acceptances, and rediscounts. Since banks failed for those reasons throughout the 1920s and since

national “bank failures can be predicted a year in advance with some accuracy (White 1984, p.

135),” the banking failures during the fall of 1930 appear to be an accentuation of prior trends,

rather than a turning point in the propagation of the Great Depression.10

          The data introduced by this essay demonstrates that all of these views have merit. Each

portrays a portion of a complex, dynamic mosaic. Conclusions which rely solely upon FRB’37

differ because the data are open to interpretation. Conclusions based upon panels of microdata differ

because the samples depict certain types of events (such as liquidations) affecting certain banks

(such as national banks) in particular times and places. Reconciling these views requires

comprehensive, definitive data. The remainder of this essay turns to that task.


10
     White (1984) pioneered efforts to examine samples of data from national banks. Subsequent work examines banks
     within individual cities, states, and Federal Reserve districts (Charles Calomris and Joseph Mason 1997, Mark
     Carlson 2004). The most recent and comprehensive work (Calomiris and Mason 2003), which analyzes a panel of all
     Federal Reserve member banks, yields a strong and stark conclusion. The “two Friedman-Schwartz crises are not
     associated with positive unexplained residual failure risk, or increased importance of bank illiquidity for forecasting
     failure (2003).”


                                                             8
2: Data Definitions, Quality, and Comparisons

        During the 1920s, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors developed a lexicon for

discussing bank distress and procedures for collecting data on the phenomenon. An appendix delves

into details of the definitions and the collection process. This section concisely characterizes the key

concepts before comparing the archival evidence to previously published tabulations. The

comparison demonstrates two important points. First, the archives retain the original data set in its

entirety. Second, the archival evidence contains information previously unavailable to scholars.

        In the Federal Reserve’s lexicon, a suspension was a bank that closed its doors to depositors

and ceased conducting normal banking business for at least one business day. Some, but not all,

suspended banks reopened for business. A liquidation was a permanent suspension. A liquidating

bank closed its doors to the public, surrendered its charter, and repaid depositors, usually under the

auspices of a court appointed officer known as a receiver. A voluntary liquidation was a category of

closure in which banks ceased operations and rapidly arranged to repay depositors the full value of

their deposits. Voluntary liquidations did not require the services of receivers and were not

classified as suspensions. A consolidation (or merger) was the corporate union of two or more

banks into one bank which continued operations as a single business entity and under a single

charter. The categories of bank distress were typically construed to be temporary suspensions,

terminal suspensions (i.e. liquidations), voluntary liquidations, and consolidations due to financial

difficulties.11

        The Federal Reserve attributed most bank suspensions to one of five common causes. The

first was slow, doubtful, or worthless paper. The term worthless paper indicated an asset with little

or no value. The term doubtful paper meant an asset unlikely to yield book value. The term slow




                                                   9
paper meant an asset likely to yield full value in time, but whose repayment lagged or which could

not be converted to full cash value at short notice. The second common cause of suspension was

heavy withdrawals, the typical example being a bank run. The third was failure a banking

correspondent. Correspondents were banks with ongoing relationships facilitated by deposits of

funds. A typical example is a county bank (the client) which kept its reserve deposits within and

cleared its checks through a national bank in a reserve city (the correspondent). The fourth common

cause was mismanagement. The fifth was defalcation, a monetary deficiency in the accounts of a

bank due to fraud or breach of trust.

          The first question one should ask about the archival evidence is: do figures from it

correspond closely to the figures published in the FRB’37? Figure 1 answers that question. The

solid line is the number of bank suspensions each month according to FRB’37. This tally includes

all banks: national, state, and private. The dotted line represents the archival data. It is calculated

from the St. 6386 forms in the National Archives using the definitions, rules, and algorithms

established by the Division of Bank Operations in the 1930s. The lines correspond closely. Similar

exercises on various cross-tabulations duplicate the analogous series published in 1937. The

replication of the FRB’37 series demonstrates that the archival data remains comprehensive. The

dataset contains observations for all banks that suspended operations during the Great Depression.12

          Figure 2 summarizes the new information in the archival data. The entire shaded area

indicates the total number of bank changes due to financial difficulties that occurred each week

from January 1929 through December 1933. The lower, darkly shaded area indicates the number of


11
     Contemporary publications often employed the terms failure and closure as synonyms, which typically (but not
     universally) referred to the sum of temporary and terminal suspensions.
12
     Additional confirmation of this comes from the state-level databases which I have constructed by combining
     information from government (state examiners, Fed, and OCC reports) and commercial sources (Rand McNally’s
     Bankers Directory and Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia). For the four states which I have completed, FL, MS, NY, TN,
     the state-level databases and St. 6386 series of forms match at rates over 99.5%.


                                                         10
new observations (i.e. temporary suspensions, voluntary liquidations, and consolidations due to

financial difficulties) contained in the archival data. The upper, lightly shaded area indicates the

number of terminal suspensions. For each of these observations, the archival evidence adds an array

of information including the cause of the suspension, the date of the suspension, the financial

condition of the bank on that date, the identity of the institution or individuals who initiated the

change, and in many cases, written comments concerning the circumstances leading to and/or

resulting from the event.

       Three patterns in the new data should be noted. First, the new observations are clustered

between the fall of 1930 and winter of 1933, when bank suspensions surged above pre-depression

levels in repeated waves of bank failures. Second, the archival evidence allows us to view the data

without chronological aggregation. Weekly and daily series of suspensions display volatility much

greater than the monthly series published in FRB’37. On several occasions, the number of bank

suspensions rose (or fell) overnight by a factor of 20 or more. Such wild swings may be one reason

that banking crises made such an impression on the public. Third, the banking holiday of March

1933 does not appear in the archival evidence. Why not? The Federal Reserve’s reporting system

was not designed to (and for that reason did not) track the status of banks that closed during state or

national banking holidays. The Division of Bank Operations provided a rough approximation

(4000) of the number of banks that did not reopen within 3 months of the national banking holiday,

which was published (with caveats) in FRB’37. The actual number is unknown. The number was

not based on an exact count or hard evidence. The appendix discusses this and other issue in more

detail. The following sections of this essay examine chronological patterns in the archival data.




                                                   11
3: Categories of Bank Distress

         This section examines chronological patterns on categories of bank distress. Table 1 presents

annual data. Several patterns appear prominent. The majority of bank changes due to financial

distress were terminal suspensions (72.9%). The remaining changes were divided between

temporary suspensions (12.3%), consolidations due to financial difficulties (9.7%), and voluntary

liquidations (5.2%). Temporary suspensions occurred at a higher rate early in the depression, when

more than one in five suspended banks reopened for business, and usually occurred during surges of

bank suspensions which contemporary observers classified as banking panics. Consolidations due to

financial difficulties followed a different pattern. Struggling banks were least likely to merge in

1930 and most likely to do so in 1931. The rate of voluntary liquidations followed no discernible

trend.

         Figure 3 displays patterns of terminal and temporary suspensions from January 1929 to

March 1933. The rates of both types of suspensions remained near pre-depression levels until

November 1930, when the rates rose to levels unseen since the turn of the century. The rise in

temporary suspensions was particularly pronounced. Few temporary suspensions occurred during

typical weeks; many weeks witnessed none. Almost all temporary suspensions occurred during

waves of bank failures such as the banking crisis of fall 1930, when more than 40% of all

institutions which closed their doors to depositors soon reopened for business. The percentage fell

as the depression progressed. Less than 20% of the banks which closed their doors during the fall of

1931 later reopened. Only a small fraction of the banks which suspended operations during 1932

and 1933 reopened, and most of those that did manage to resume operations did so after receiving

infusions of cash from stockholders, depositors, and other sources.

         Figure 4 displays patterns of voluntary liquidations and consolidations due to financial

difficulties. Kernel-smoothing illuminates trends over time. Consolidations rose during the waves of

                                                   12
bank failures and peaked at the end of 1932. Voluntary liquidations varied greatly from week to

week, and no trend is discernible.

       Figure 5 indicates rates at which banks departed from the banking business each year. The

horizontal axis divides the rates into solvencies and insolvencies. The share of solvent departures

appears above the axis. The numerator of this ratio consists of banks in each year which (i)

voluntarily liquidated and (ii) consolidated due to financial difficulties (dark grey area) plus (iii) the

number of bank mergers of banks not in financial distress (light grey). The number of mergers is a

lower-bound approximation based on the number of ‘net changes for other reasons’ indicated in

Table 3.13 The denominator is the number of banks in operation at the beginning of each year. The

share of insolvent departures appears below the axis. The numerator is the number of terminal

suspensions. The denominator is the number of banks in operation at the beginning of each year.

The values for 1933 include banks which ceased operations in January, February, and March with

the exception of those closed due to banking holidays declared by state and federal governments.

The dotted outlines indicate the annualized rate of departure during the first three months of 1933,

or in other words, what would have happened had departure rate during the first quarter continued

throughout the year. The last column indicates the rates of departure averaged over the entire

contraction.

       Figure 5 shows that for the period January 1929 through March 1933, departures from the

banking business were split about evenly between solvent and insolvent. Solvent departures –

principally mergers but also voluntary liquidations and consolidations under duress – were

concentrated during the first two years of the contraction (i.e. 1929 and 1930) and during the first

half of 1932, a period during which the Federal Reserve System pursued an expansionary policy.




                                                    13
Insolvent departures gradually increased during 1930 and peaked in 1931 following Britain’s

departure from the gold standard, to which the Federal Reserve reacted by raising the discount rate

and contracting the money supply. Insolvent departures continued at a high rate in 1932 and spiked

upwards during the months before the Roosevelt administration declared a national banking holiday

in March 1933.

          Together, Figures 3 through 5 demonstrate that during the depression, bank distress occurred

in many forms. Some forms for which data has been available – such as the liquidation of insolvent

banks – have been studied extensively. Other forms for which data has not been extant – such as

temporary suspensions and consolidations due to financial difficulties – have not been analyzed.

The hitherto unobserved forms of distress were concentrated during surges of bank suspensions

which contemporaries characterized as panics. The concentration suggests that the causes of

suspensions during panics differed from the causes during ordinary times. The next section, which

examines evidence on the causes of bank suspensions, strengthens that supposition.


4: Causes of Bank Suspensions

          The previous section documented when and how banks departed from the banking business.

This section determines why banks did so by analyzing chronological patterns in the causes of bank

suspensions. The appendix contains an extensive discussion of how the Board of Governors

determined the cause of each bank’s demise. The method involved gathering financial data for each

institution; talking with the regulators, examiners, receivers, correspondents, and bankers who knew

the facts of the issue at hand; applying a set of algorithms devised to determine the cause of the

failure; and reporting the results in a lexicon devised to convey the conclusions clearly, concisely,


13
     The estimate of mergers used here is a lower bound, since ‘net changes for other reasons’ equals ‘mergers’ minus
     ‘new bank openings.’ A subsequent essay will provide precise figures after research assistants complete the coding
     of the remaining microdata, which will take approximately 1 year.


                                                           14
and consistently. I report these conclusions both in the lexicon employed by economists in the

1920s and after translating them into terms used by modern economists. I should emphasize that I

make no judgments about the reasons why particular banks failed. Those judgments were made by

contemporary experts possessing far more information about each event than is available to scholars

today.

         A series of tables and figures present the key findings. Table 2 presents annual figures.

Tables 3 presents hazard rates for causes and categories of permanent bank changes. Table 4

presents hazard rates for causes of temporary suspensions. In each table, row (a) indicates the total

number of banks suspending operations. Row (a.1) indicates the total number of banks suspending

operations due to problems with assets and liabilities. Imbalances often arose on one side of the

balance sheet, but could arise simultaneously on both sides. Rows (a.1.1) through (a.1.5) display the

possible combinations: (a.1.1) slow, doubtful, or worthless assets listed as the primary cause of

suspension; (a.1.2) assets listed as the primary cause and heavy withdrawals listed as a contributing

cause; (a.1.3) both withdrawals and assets listed as primary causes; (a.1.4) heavy withdrawals listed

as the primary cause and assets as the contributing cause; and (a.1.5) withdrawals alone as the

primary cause of suspension. Row (a.2) indicates the number of banks suspending due to the closure

of a correspondent. Row (a.3) indicates the number of banks suspending due to defalcations,

mismanagement, excessive loans to officers and directors, excessive investment in building and

facilities, and similar circumstances. Row (a.4) indicates the number of banks suspending due to

other or multiple causes. The latter consists in part of complex cases which do not fit into the

mutually exclusive categories above, often because they spanned two or more classifications. An

example is a poorly managed bank which failed to enforce collections on its slow farm loans and

which experienced runs after local newspapers revealed that its president embezzled funds from

savings accounts. Row (b) indicates the number of consolidations due to financial difficulties. Row

                                                   15
(c) indicates the number of voluntary liquidations. Row (d) indicates the number of net changes for

reasons unrelated to financial difficulties. This series consists almost entirely of the number of

mergers minus the number of new openings.

       In Table 2, several patterns appear prominent. The share of suspensions due primarily to

problems on the asset side of the balance sheet fell through 1931, rose in 1932, and fell again in

1933. The share of suspensions due primarily to withdrawals rose through 1931, fell in 1932, and

rose again in 1933. The ratio of assets over withdrawals varied over time. Withdrawals’ role in the

collapse of the banking system peaked in 1931, while before and after, asset problems caused the

majority of suspensions. The share of suspensions due to defalcation and mismanagement fell

throughout the depression, perhaps because corrupt and poorly-managed institutions lacked the

resources needed to weather the initial states of the storm. The share of suspensions due to the

closure of correspondents peaked during 1930.

       Figure 6, which plots the number of suspensions each week due to the closure of

correspondents (and for sake of comparison also plots total changes due to financial distress),

reveals why. The typical week witnessed few, if any, suspensions from this source. The weekly

mode and median were zero. The mean was one. The weekly number rose during July of 1929,

when the Mediterranean fruit fly epidemic produced a banking panic in Florida, but remained near

zero until November 1930, when it spiked sharply upwards.

       Figure 7 paints an analogous picture for suspensions whose primary cause was heavy

withdrawals. Suspensions due to withdrawals were rare during the initial year of the depression but

rose following the collapse of correspondent networks in November 1930. During 1931, when bank

suspensions surged repeatedly, withdrawals were a significant cause of suspensions. Thereafter,

withdrawals continued to cause suspensions during periods of acute banking distress, but the ratio

of withdrawals relative to other causes declined.

                                                    16
        Figure 8 examines the share of suspensions due to correspondents, withdrawals, and assets

for the depression as a whole. The left-hand pie chart presents data for banks which suspended

operations temporarily. The right-hand pie chart presents data for banks which suspended

operations permanently. The shades of gray indicate the percentage of banks suspending for

different reasons. The color black denotes banks which suspended solely due to heavy withdrawals

(in key, WITHDRAWALS) but which were in fine financial shape before depositors’ demanded

repayment of deposits. Most of these banks experienced sudden and severe runs. Three-quarters

gray denotes banks forced out of operations by heavy withdrawals and also afflicted by asset

troubles that exacerbated their condition, but which were not severe enough to have necessitated

suspension in the absence of withdrawals (WITHDRAWAL + assets). One-half gray indicates

banks in double trouble. Problems severe enough to necessitate suspension existed on both sides of

the balance sheet (WITHDRAWALS & ASSETS). One-quarter gray indicates banks whose slow,

doubtful, and worthless assets forced them to close their doors and where withdrawals exacerbated

the situation. Examples include (i) banks forced by continuous, slow withdrawals to sell their

profitable assets leaving them with a problematic portfolio, and (ii) banks headed towards failure

whose demise was accelerated by depositors’ demands (ASSETS + withdrawals). Lightly-dotted

gray indicates banks forced to suspend solely due to problematic assets (ASSETS).

       Figure 8 demonstrates that for the contraction as a whole, heavy withdrawals were the

primary cause of more than a half of all temporary suspensions. The closure of counterparties

caused another sixth of all temporary suspensions. Asset problems were the primary cause of less

than a third of the temporary suspensions. For terminal suspensions, the pattern differed. Asset

problems were the primary cause of more than half of all bank suspensions and a contributing cause

of another one-quarter. More than eight in ten of the banks which went out of business, in other

words, were judged to have problematic assets.

                                                 17
          Figure 9 uses the same patterns to portray the cause of suspensions during the fall of 1930

and winter of 1931, a period which witnessed the initial surge of bank suspensions. Before mid-

October, the pattern of bank suspensions resembled the pattern of failures throughout the 1920s.

Banks failed at a steady rate. The principal cause was problems with asset quality. The pattern

changed dramatically in November 1930, when the rate of suspension rose suddenly. The closure of

correspondents caused the initial increase. Thereafter, runs (or fear of runs) forced scores of banks

to close their doors, and adverse circumstances pushed many weak banks into insolvency.

          Comments written on the St. 6386 forms tell the tale.14 On November 7, the Bank of

Tennessee (Nashville, TN) closed due to “depreciation in the value of securities” and irregularities

which left it with “bills payable of $2,887,100.00” and debts “on real estate of $260,079.20” on a

deposit base of $10,000,000.15 In the following week, heavy withdrawals forced many banks in the

city to suspend operations. On November 12, the Holston-Union National Bank (Knoxville, TN)

closed due to heavy withdrawals “due to loss of confidence caused by failure of banks in Nashville”

and the frozen state of its assets.

          On November 17, armageddon arrived. The National Bank of Kentucky (Louisville, KY)

suspended operations because of “heavy withdrawals and affiliation with the Caldwell Chain.” The

closure forced its affiliate, the Louisville Trust Company, to suspend operations on the same day.

During the next week, eleven clients of the national bank suspended operations, as did four clients




14
     The archival evidence attributes the suspension of the principal banks controlled by Caldwell conglomerate to either:
     (a) financial difficulties directly attributed to Caldwell’s demise, or (b) runs because of the banks known connection
     to Caldwell and Company. The archival evidence attributes the suspension of nearly 100 additional banks to: (a) the
     severing of correspondent links to institutions, such as the Bank of Tennessee, controlled by the Caldwell
     conglomerate, (b) runs due to known affiliations with the Caldwell organization, or (3) runs due to geographic
     proximity to Caldwell controlled institutions or geographic proximity to banks undergoing runs.
15
     This quotation contains all of the information necessary to locate the cited text in the central subject file of the Board
     of Governors in the National Archives. The appendix describes how to locate the original sources.


                                                              18
of the trust company. An additional client closed its doors soon thereafter. The Federal Reserve

attributed the suspension of all of those clients to the severance of the correspondent-client linkage.

       The American Exchange Trust Company (Little Rock, Arkansas) also suspended operations

due to “heavy withdrawals due to rumors caused by failure of Caldwell and Company [in]

Nashville.” The American Exchange Trust Company was the lead bank in the A. B. Banks chain

and one of the principal correspondent institutions in Arkansas and the surrounding states. Its

suspension forced 37 of its clients to suspend operations immediately. Another five suspended

operations during the following week. Some of those clients – notably the Arkansas Trust Company

(Newport, AR) and the Merchants and Planters Bank and Trust (Pine Bluff, AR) – had clients of

their own, which suspended operations in turn.

       One client of the American Exchange Trust Company remained in operation for a month.

The Citizens Bank and Trust Company (Harrison, AR) endured by calling on the resources of the A.

T. Hudsputh Chain, for which it was the principal bank. But on December 17, when those resources

ran thin and the loss of funds on deposit in the American Exchange Trust Company appeared

irreversible, the Citizens Bank threw in the towel. Within 24 hours, its suspension caused seven of

its client banks and the remaining members of the A. T. Hudsputh chain to suspend operations.

        Similar events occurred in Illinois. On November 8, Quincy-Ricker National Bank and

Trust Company (Quincy, IL) suspended operations due to the collapse its largest borrower, the

“Smith and Ricker Land and Cattle Company, of Kansas City, Missouri.” Its suspension soon

forced four of its client banks to close their doors. During the following week, deposits fell steadily

at banks in the vicinity. On November 14, cash reserves of the State, Savings, Loan, and Trust

Company (Quincy, IL) ran out. It suspended operations. In the next three days, six of its client

banks also closed. Three more did so during the next month. The effects of these suspensions spread

across state lines. On November 20, the Hannibal Trust Company (Hannibal, MO) suspended

                                                  19
operations due to “heavy withdrawals due to closing of a number of banks in their section at

Quincy, Illinois.” The closing of the Hannibal Trust Company forced one of its clients, the Farmers

Bank (Oakwood, MO), to suspend operations later that afternoon.

       Similar chains of collapsing correspondent networks radiated out from Sioux City, Iowa and

Clarksdale and Tupelo, Mississippi during December, 1930. On December 6, both the Sioux City

National Bank and the First National Bank in Sioux City suspended operations due to “slow,

doubtful, or worthless paper.” Two days later, the Leeds Bank of Sioux City, a client of the former,

closed its doors. On December 12, the Exchange Bank of Marcus, a client of the latter, ceased

operations. On December 17, another client of the latter, The Alvord Bank (Alvord, IA) suspended

operations. This was one of the four banks in the Charles Shade chain. The remaining banks of the

chain (located in Inkwood, Larchwood, and Rock Rapids, IA) suspended operations at the same

time. On December 24, the Peoples Bank and Trust Company (Tupelo, MS) suspended operations

due to “excessive bills payable” and “slow, doubtful, and worthless assets.” Its branches at

Nettleton and Rienzi closed concurrently. During the next 24 hours, its suspension forced six state

banks for which it served as correspondent, located in the towns of Fulton, Guntown, Saltillo,

Shannon, Sherman, and Verona, to suspend operations. On December 1930, the Planters National

Bank in Clarksdale suspended operations, forcing two of its clients into suspension and inducing

banks in neighboring towns to suspended operations for fear of runs.

       During the months of November and December, the collapse of correspondent networks

triggered numerous bank runs. Comments on cause of suspension forms indicate the cause of these

runs was: “general loss of confidence due to failure of banks in Nashville and Knoxville,” “loss of

confidence and runs,” and “runs due to failure of nearby banks.” Comments indicate that banks also

failed because they were “unable to meet demands” of depositors or consumed their “cash

reserves.” Many of these banks possessed from frozen and/or slow assets, which explains why they

                                                 20
chose to close their doors at a time when depositors drained funds from banks in their vicinity.

Comments on banks whose suspensions were attributed to ‘assets only’ typical indicate that these

institutions had preexisting financial problems. Some had frozen assets. Others had devalued assets,

which were revealed as a consequence of the crisis following Caldwell’s collapse.

       The impact of the failure of the Bank of the United States is also evident in the data. It is the

second spike in Figure 9. The Bank of the United States possessed one of the largest branch

networks in the nation with 57 branches and was the fourth largest bank in New York City and

eighth largest in the nation. On the 7th December long queues began forming outside the bank's

branches. Over the next four days depositors took out $20 million from the bank. On the 11th

December, all its branches and the headquarters closed, never to reopen. An even larger institution

(hitherto overlooked by economic historians), the Guaranty Building and Loan Association, and its

banking subsidiaries, investment houses, and other investment interests headquartered in

Hollywood, California failed the preceding day. Their failures appeared on front pages of

newspapers around the nation in many places on the same day. On the next day in areas already

battered by Caldwell’s aftershocks, the number of bank suspensions surged once again.

       Following the collapse of Caldwell, the Bank of the United States, and the Guaranty

Building and Loan Association, forty percent of the institutions that closed soon reopened. Since

they reopened without receiving infusions of capital or other outside assistance and survived the

remainder of the depression, they were solvent. Moreover, some banks that closed permanently at

this time might have been solvent, if they had not been forced to liquidate when similar institutions

in neighboring communities dumped assets on the market, driving down prices, and when a national

liquidity crunch forced hundreds of banks (which suspended operations) and thousands of others

(beset by withdrawals but able to continue without interruption) to sell bonds and securities, which

were their most readily marketable assets, and whose prices fell when their supply suddenly

                                                  21
expanded. These events are symptoms of a banking system suddenly suffering withdrawals and

lacking liquidity.

       Lack of liquidity also bedeviled the banking system during the spring of 1931, when

suspension surged in Illinois in an event that Friedman and Schwartz (1963) named the Second

Banking Crisis. The Federal Reserve attributed only three suspensions to closures of

correspondents, one in Florida, one in Nebraska, and one in North Carolina, all far from the locus of

suspensions in Illinois, even though Federal Reserve agents indicated that of the 25 banks which

suspended in Chicago between June 6th and 10th, eleven belonged to the John Bain Group, seven

belonged to the Foreman Group, and one belonged to the Ralph E. Ballou and E. L. Wagner Group.

For almost all of those suspensions, the Federal Reserve determined heavy withdrawals to have

been the primary cause and slow or frozen assets to have been a contributing cause. The same was

true of almost all other suspensions in Illinois and adjacent states. Federal Reserve agents stated

laconically on most of the forms that the bank closed its doors after depleting its cash reserves.

These comments suggest an epidemic of illiquidity plagued banks. Banks’ assets were frozen.

Depositors wanted cash. Banks closed when they failed to make ends meet.

       The pattern of causation changed as time passed. Comments written on the St. 6386 forms

illuminate the changes. In September, Britain abandoned the gold standard. Fear that the United

States might also devalue its currency triggered the flight of financial assets abroad. In October, to

combat the external drain and defend gold, the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate from 1.5%

to 3.5% and sold substantial quantities of government securities, which reduced the money supply

and raised market interest rates. These actions weakened the financial positions of banks throughout

the nation. Depositors grew increasingly apprehensive about the health of depository institutions.

Bank suspensions surged once again, and suspension rates remained elevated through the winter of

1932. During this period, banks failed for a wide array of reasons. Heavy withdrawals from healthy

                                                  22
banks caused 20% of the suspensions. Heavy withdrawals from banks beset by portfolio problems

caused 40% of the suspensions. Depreciated assets caused 24% of the suspensions. For many of

these banks, written comments indicated that droughts, declines in agricultural prices, depressions

of local industries, and depreciations of bonds’ values and securities’ prices had reduced the value

of the bank’s portfolio so far as to necessitate suspension.

       During the spring of 1932, the Federal Reserve initiated an open-market purchase program

in an attempt to reinvigorate banks and reinflate the economy. The attempt lasted only a few

months. During that period, suspensions fell to their lowest level since the fall of 1930. Withdrawals

also eased. Liquidity appears to have been available. The majority of the banks that suspended

operations did so principally due to problems on the asset side of their balance sheet.

       This pattern held true even during the month of June, when a banking crisis plagued the city

of Chicago and surrounding environs. During that panic, some solvent banks experienced runs, but

the solvent institutions which suspended operations soon reopened. Devalued assets were the

primary cause of most terminal suspensions, while withdrawals were noted as only a contributing

condition, if they were mentioned at all. Written comments on the suspension forms indicate that

banks were struggling due to declines in the values of securities, bonds, and real estate and losses

due to uncollectible and defaulted loans. In other words, during this event, most banks which

experienced runs were either insolvent or teetering on the edge of bankruptcy. Illiquidity and runs

did not destroy solvent institutions. Real economic forces caused their demise.

       In November 1932, Franklin Roosevelt won the presidential election. Expectations that the

new Democratic administration would abandon the gold standard induced foreigners to ship funds

abroad and Americans to convert deposits to precious metals. The Federal Reserve lacked the

resources to counter these external and internal drains. Some districts (e.g. Atlanta) extended credit

freely to ailing institutions. Other districts (e.g. New York) had to choose between aiding banks and

                                                   23
preserving their dwindling stocks of gold. Policies lacked consistency across districts, and some

districts (e.g. Chicago) refused to cooperate with others despite their statutory obligation to do so.

Bank suspensions rose steadily during this period. Banks failed for many, and usually multiple,

reasons. Three-out-of-four suspensions suffered both asset problems and heavy withdrawals. Only a

handful of banks that suspended operations ever reopened, and in every case, their resurrection

required outside financial assistance.

       Figure 10 combines information from the previous figures to address a perennial question

concerning the depression: did (a) contagion and illiquidity or (b) fundamentals and falling asset

values cause banks to fail? The answer is that both were important sources of bank distress. Failures

due to the former were concentrated during crises, during which contagion and illiquidity caused

between one-third and one-half of all suspensions. Failures caused by fundamentals predominated

before November 1930, during the lulls between panics, and after Britain abandoned the gold

standard and the Federal Reserve embarked on a contractionary policy to counter gold outflows.

Outside of panic periods, contagion and illiquidity caused a small fraction of all suspensions, while

fundamentals caused the preponderance

       Figure 10 justifies this answer by providing two estimates of banks failing due to contagion

and illiquidity. The lower bound is 1,376 or approximately one-fifth of all banks which suspended

operations between January 1929 and March 1933. The lower bound estimate consists of all banks

which (i) temporarily suspended operations and reopened within three months without outside

financial assistance, (ii) permanently suspended operations after experiencing heavy withdrawals

and for no other reason (i.e. the examiners judged their assets to be in satisfactory condition), (iii)

permanently suspended operations after being forced to close by the closure of a counterparty. The

upper bound is 2,739 or approximately one-half of all suspended banks. The upper bound consists

of banks in categories (i), (ii), and (iii) plus banks which suspended operations permanently (iv)

                                                   24
after experiencing heavy withdrawals and possessing assets which examiners judged to be frozen or

slow, (v) because they had exhausted their borrowing capacity, were unable to borrow, or failed to

obtain loans from their correspondent, or (vi) because they had exhausted their cash reserves.

Written comments on the St. 6386 forms identify banks in categories (v) and (vi).



5: Discussion

       The evidence presented in the previous section corroborates the arguments of many scholars.

As Temin (1976) and White (1984) maintain, large numbers of banks liquidated during the 1920s.

Thos banks often operated in rural areas and incurred large losses on loans. This trend continued

throughout the depression and intensified as the downturn deepened.

       As Wicker (1980) argues, the collapse of the Caldwell conglomerate triggered the initial

banking panic in the fall of 1930. Correspondent networks propagated the panic during the initial

weeks, when almost all of the banks which suspended operations were financially or geographically

connected to the Caldwell conglomerate. Bank runs radiated outward from these focal events.

Heavy withdrawals became the principal form of bank distress and forced hundreds of banks to

suspend operations. Yet, as Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue, the failure of the Bank of the

United States accentuated depositors’ fears and reinvigorated the panic. All three scholars,

Friedman, Schwartz, and Wicker, argue that the crisis was a departure from previous trends, a

unique event that may have altered the course of the contraction. The archival evidence supports a

synthesis of their views, while revealing additional aspects of the event. Several smaller

correspondent chains, with no connection to Caldwell, imploded at that time. The failure of the

Guaranty Building and Loan Association added fuel to the fire. Nearly half of the institutions that

suspended operations as a consequence of these events rapidly reopened for business.




                                                  25
       As Friedman and Schwartz (1963) contend, illiquidity played a role in the surge in bank

suspensions in June of 1931. In that month, runs occurred on banks in Illinois. Examiners reported

that heavy withdrawals were the primary cause of almost all of these suspensions. Frozen assets and

limited cash reserves contributed to many closures, but none of the banks possessed portfolios

which had deteriorated near the point of insolvency.

       As Calomiris and Mason (1997) maintain, the Chicago banking panic of June 1932 was due

to depositors’ confusion about bank asset quality. Examiners reported that for most banks which

entered receivership, the primary cause of suspensions was doubtful and worthless assets. The

banking panic did not produce significant numbers of failures among solvent banks.

       For the remainder of the contraction, the causes of bank suspensions fit the descriptions of

events offered by Temin (1976) and Calomiris and Mason (2003). Declining asset values were the

principal cause of bank suspensions. Most banks which closed their doors did so permanently. All

were insolvent. The few which reopened did so only after receiving outside financial assistance.

       The archival evidence shows that scholars accurately interpreted their own data, but because

the nature of the financial crisis varied across time, place, and institutions, no single sample could

capture the complexity and dynamism of events. During the last two decades, samples brought to

bear on the debate typically consisted of data on national and member banks. Liquidation was the

observed outcome. So, recent research emphasized insolvency. The data introduced in this essay

concurs with those conclusions but adds information on illiquidity. The new observations show that

illiquidity bedeviled banks beginning in the fall of 1930. Insolvency returned as the principal form

of distress in the years which followed.

       Why did the nature of the banking crisis change over time? The archival evidence

illuminates the initial impetus. A series of events revealed the fragility of the banking system which

had evolved since the foundation of the Federal Reserve. During the 1920s, financial markets

                                                   26
changed rapidly. Entrepreneurs invented new financial instruments and forms of consumer credit.

Individual investment in the equity markets increased rapidly and haphazardly. Markets became

more tightly integrated across space and time. Financial conglomerates grew to take advantage of

new opportunities. These innovative organizations included banking chains and groups. Some

organizations spanned commercial and investment banking, insurance, real estate, equity trading,

and brokerage services. These conglomerates enabled businesses and individuals to access the

rapidly modernizing financial system.

       In November and December 1930, these new and supposedly superior institutions showed

signs of weakness. Correspondent networks (such as Caldwell’s) collapsed. Banking chains (such as

A.B. Banks) failed. Banking groups (such as BancoKentucky) also failed. Three prominent

conglomerates – Caldwell in middle America, the Bank of the United States in New York, and the

Guaranty Building and Loan Association in California – failed. Their failures resulted in three of

the largest bankruptcies in United States to that date. Scandals swirled around each bankruptcy.

Defalcation undermined each institution. False financial reports deceived investors and depositors,

who lost large sums as a result. For months, newspapers throughout the nation reported the scandals

at length and in depth on their front pages. The news altered depositors’ beliefs about the safety,

stability, and efficacy of the system. The public reacted by withdrawing funds, increasing holdings

of currency, and switching savings to safer, older, and more transparent institutions.

       This argument explains the liquidity crunch that began in the fall of 1930 and lasted through

the spring of 1931. What explains the continued contraction of the banking system? Answers to this

question can be divided into two classes. The first follows the logic of Friedman and Schwartz

(1963). The liquidity crisis grew like a snowball rolling down a hill. The initial credit crunch forced

some banks out of business. Fear of further failures induced depositors to withdraw additional

funds, which forced banks to sell more assets, which drove asset prices even lower, which forced

                                                  27
more banks to fail, which confirmed depositors’ fears in a continuing cycle of self-fulfilling

pessimism. The snowball stopped only when Roosevelt declared a national banking holiday in the

winter of 1933 and restored confidence in the safety and soundness of the financial system.

       The second follows the logic of Temin (1989). Shocks – droughts, tariff wars,

contractionary policies, beggar-thy-neighbor devaluations, declines in autonomous consumption

and investment – battered the economy in the early 1930s. England’s departure from the gold

standard was a particularly severe stimulus. These real shocks reduced asset values and pushed

marginal banks into insolvency. The banking crisis came to an end only after economic recovery

began in 1933.

       The information presented in this essay cannot distinguish between these theories. Both are

consistent with the data. Both probably explain a portion of events. Their relative explanatory

power remains one of the key unanswered questions concerning the depression.

       The patterns presented in this essay answer some but far from all questions concerning the

causes and consequences of bank failures during the Great Depression. Viewing the data from

different perspectives may resolve other riddles. One possibility is comparing the causes of national

versus state bank suspensions. A second possibility is comparing the causes of member versus

nonmember bank suspensions. Such exercises may help to reconcile the conclusions of Calomiris

and Mason (2003), Carlson (2004), and White (1984), who study microdata from member, state,

and national banks respectively, with those of Mitchener (2004) and Wicker (1996), who study data

on state bank suspensions aggregated at the county, state, and Federal Reserve District levels.

Additional insights may be gleaned by comparing urban and rural banks or by examining

suspension patterns geographically or weighted by bank size (e.g. assets, liabilities, or capital) or

weighted by the length of temporary suspensions (e.g. number of days).




                                                   28
       The archival evidence introduced in this essay may also illuminate the transmission

mechanisms of monetary policy and the linkages between the financial crisis and real economy.

Terminal suspensions disrupted financial intermediation and increased the costs of credit

intermediation to a greater extent than temporary suspensions. Temporary suspensions were

symptoms of liquidity crises and banking panics propelled by sudden swings in depositors’ moods.

By distinguishing these events, the archival data provides mechanisms for illuminating the

monetary and non-monetary effects of financial panics and the ways in which Federal Reserve

action (or inaction) contributed to the collapse of the economy.

       These analyses are topics for future essays. My preliminary explorations along each

dimension indicate that none contradict the conclusions justified by the chronological patterns

presented in this essay. Illiquidity bedeviled banks throughout the depression. Heavy withdrawals

played a primary or contributing role in nearly half of all suspensions. Asset problems also

bedeviled banks throughout the Great Depression. Slow, doubtful, or worthless assets played a

primary or contributing role in over half of all suspensions. The initial banking panic in the fall of

1930 – with its cluster of temporary bank suspensions, bank runs, and collapsing correspondent

networks – appears to have been a credit crunch inspired by the collapse of financial conglomerates

and propagated by the public’s flight from deposits to currency. During later surges in banking

crises, the suspension of depository institutions appears to have been driven less by sudden swings

in depositors’ fears for the safety of banks and more by declines in the values of banks’ portfolios.

       These conclusions raise new questions concerning the collapse of the banking system during

the 1930s. Why did correspondent networks collapse in November and December 1930 but endure

even greater shocks during the following three years? Why did some banks which suspended

operations reopen for business, while others whose owners and managers also strove to reorganize

and reopen, fail to reopen their doors? Why were banks able to avoid suspension by merging with

                                                   29
healthy institutions at the last minutes in some states but not in others? Did the policies pursued by

state banking departments and Federal Reserve Banks influence the categories and causes of bank

changes under duress? Future essays employ the new archival evidence to answer such questions

and to advance our efforts to understand the causes and consequences of financial distress during

the Great Depression.




                                                  30
Figure 1
Comparing Archival and Published Data
Total Suspensions, All Banks, by Month, September 1929 to March 1933


                          600

                                      Archival Data
                                      Published Data
                          500



                          400
  Suspensions Per Month




                          300



                          200



                          100



                            0
                             Sep-29        Mar-30      Sep-30   Mar-31    Sep-31   Mar-32   Sep-32   Mar-33


    Sources: Archival data from National Archives and Record Administration, Record Group 82, as
    described in appendix. Published data from Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937, Table 12,
    p. 907




                                                                     31
Figure 2
Comparing FRB’37 and Archival Data, January 1929 through December 1933

                              160
                                                                    All Observations
                              140                                   New Observations

                              120
   Number of Banks Per Week




                              100


                               80


                               60


                               40


                               20


                               0
                               Jan-29   Jan-30   Jan-31        Jan-32        Jan-33    Jan-34

Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                          32
Figure 3
Terminal and Temporary Bank Suspensions, January 1929 through March 1933

                            120
                                       Terminal Suspensions
                                       Temporary Suspensions
                            100
 Number of Banks Per Week




                             80



                             60



                             40



                             20



                              0
                              Jan-29            Jan-30         Jan-31   Jan-32   Jan-33

Source: National Archives and Record Administration.




                                                               33
Figure 4
Consolidations Due to Financial Difficulties and Voluntary Liquidations
January 1929 through March 1933

                           15

                                     Voluntary Liquidations
                                     Consolidations Due to Financial Distress
                                     Voluntary Liquidations Smoothed
                                     Consolidations Smoothed
Number of Banks Per Week




                           10




                            5




                            0
                            Jan-29               Jan-30                Jan-31           Jan-32               Jan-33

                           Notes: Consolidations and liquidations are smoothed using Epanechnikov kernel filters with
                           bandwidth equal to four weeks.

                           Source: National Archives and Record Administration.




                                                                         34
Figure 5
Solvency and Insolvency among Banks Departing the Banking Business Each Year
January 1929 through March 1933


                                          1929   1930   1931    1932    1933         Average
                         12%
 Percent of Banks Each Year

                              Solvent
                              Insolvent




                         12%

Notes: Figures for 1933 include only changes occurring in January through March except those
which occurred to institutions closed by government proclamation of banking moratoria or holidays.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration and FRB’37.




                                                           35
Figure 6
Suspensions Due to Closures of Correspondents, January 1929 through March 1933
                             160
                                        Suspensions Due to Closure
                             140        of Correspondent
                                        All Changes

                             120
  Number of Banks per Week




                             100


                             80


                             60


                             40


                             20


                               0
                               Jan-29                 Jan-30         Jan-31   Jan-32   Jan-33
Source: National Archives and Record Administration.




                                                                     36
Figure 7
Suspensions Due to Heavy Withdrawals (as primary cause), January 1929 through March 1933
                             160
                                        Suspensions Primarily Due to
                             140        Withdrawals
                                        All Changes

                             120
  Number of Banks per Week




                             100


                             80


                             60


                             40


                             20


                               0
                               Jan-29            Jan-30                Jan-31   Jan-32   Jan-33


Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                       37
Figure 8
Causes of Suspensions, Percent of Totals, January 1929 through March 1933


                                     Temporary                        Terminal
                                              12%                     4%
                               15%
                                                              15%
  Assets                                                                             31%
  Assets + withdrawals
  Withdrawals & assets                               19%
  Withdrawals + assets
  Withdrawals            23%
  Correspondents
                                                           24%
                                                    8%

                                                                                  18%
                                        23%                           8%




Note: The pie charts above display the proportion of suspensions occurring between January 1929
and March 1933 attributed to the 6 causes listed above. Suspensions attributed to defalcation,
mismanagement, multiple, and other causes were excluded from the calculations. The proportions
of suspensions attributed to those causes were roughly equal.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                    38
Figure 9
Causes of Suspension during the First Banking Crisis, September 1930 through March 1931
                            120
                                                                         ASSETS
                                                                         ASSETS + withdrawals
                            100
                                                                         WITHDRAWALS & ASSETS
                                                                         WITHDRAWALS + assets
 Number of Banks Per Week




                            80                                           WITHDRAWALS
                                                                         Correspondent

                            60



                            40



                            20



                              0
                            September   October    November   December   January         February   March 9,
                             22, 1930   20, 1930   17, 1930   15, 1930   12, 1931         9, 1931    1931

    Source: National Archives and Record Administration.




                                                               39
Figure 10
Suspensions Due to Contagion and Illiquidity, January 1929 through March 1933
                             160
                                       Distress Due to Illiquidity, Upper
                             140       Bound
                                       Distress Due to Illiquidity, Lower
                                       Bound
                             120       All Changes
  Number of Banks per Week




                             100


                             80


                             60


                             40


                             20


                              0
                              Jan-29                 Jan-30                 Jan-31   Jan-32   Jan-33

Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                            40
Table 1
Bank Changes Due to Financial Difficulties by Category and Year
January 1929 through March 1933

 Categories                                     1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 Total

 Suspensions, Terminal                           433 1078 1958 1300         420    5189
 Suspensions, Temporary                           70 278 316 161             48     874
 Consolidations Due to Financial Difficulties     54 136 309 151             38     688
 Voluntary Liquidations                           39   86 110    99          37     371

 Total                                           596 1578 2693 1712         543    7122

Note: Statistics for 1933 include only the months January through March. Figures do not include c
banks closed due to government proclamations, moratoria, or banking holidays.
Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




Table 2
Causes of Suspensions
January 1929 through March 1933

 Causes of Suspensions                       1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 Total

  (a.1) Assets and Liabilities                  242   848 1720 1125       337     4272
    (a.1.1) Assets                              102   316 457 354          91     1320
    (a.1.2) Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)       44   142 294 250          61      791
    (a.1.3) Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)       16    71 163    74        22      346
    (a.1.4) Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)       38   145 487 294         116     1080
    (a.1.5) Withdrawals                          42   174 319 153          47      735
  (a.2) Closure of correspondent                 28   140   97   68        24      357
  (a.3) Defalcation and mismanagement           143   153 159    76        16      547
  (a.4) Other and multiple causes                90   215 298 193          91      887

 Total                                          503 1356 2274 1462        468     6063

Note: Statistics for 1933 include only the months January through March. Figures do not include c
banks closed due to government proclamations, moratoria, or banking holidays. Rows (a.1.1)
through (a.1.5) indicate subtotals of line (a.1).
Source: National Archives and Records Administration.


                                                 41
Table 3
Categories and Causes of Permanent Bank Changes, Annual Hazard Rates, January 1929 through March 1933
                                                       1929               1930                  1931             1932              1933               Total
                                                  %       #          %       #            %        #        %       #          %      #          %       #
Banks at beginning of year                            24,198             22,172                19,375           17,082         14,440                24,198
(a) Terminal suspensions due to                1.79     433       4.86 1,078           10.11 1,958       7.61 1,300         2.91 420         21.44 5,189
 (a.1) Assets and liabilities                  0.88     212       3.18     704          7.70 1,491       5.91 1,010         2.15 310         15.40 3,727
   (a.1.1) Assets                              0.39      95       1.32     293          2.22 430         1.98   338         0.60 86           5.13 1,242
   (a.1.2) Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)      0.17      42       0.51     114          1.29 250         1.25   214         0.40 58           2.80 678
   (a.1.3) Withdrawals (p) and assets (p)      0.05      11       0.27      59          0.70 135         0.42    71         0.13 19           1.22 295
   (a.1.4) Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)      0.13      32       0.51     113          2.24 434         1.46   250         0.73 106          3.86 935
   (a.1.5) Withdrawals                         0.13      32       0.56     125          1.25 242         0.80   137         0.28 41           2.38 577
 (a.2) Closure of correspondent                0.09      22       0.35      78          0.40      77     0.29      50       0.14     20       1.02     247
 (a.3) Defalcation and mismanagemen            0.51     123       0.59     130          0.73     142     0.43      74       0.11     16       2.00     485
 (a.4) Other causes                            0.31      76       0.75     166          1.28     248     0.97     166       0.51     74       3.02     730
(b) Consolidations due to difficultie          0.22      54       0.61     136          1.59     309     0.88     151       0.26     38       2.84     688
(c) Voluntary liquidations                     0.16      39       0.39      86          0.57     110     0.58      99       0.26     37       1.53     371
(d) Net changes for other reasons              6.20 1,500         6.75 1,497           -0.43      -84    6.39 1,092                          16.55 4,005
Banks at end of year                                  22,172             19,375                17,082           14,440         13,945                13,945


Notes: Statistics for 1933 include only the months January through March. The initial entry is the number of banks operating at the beginning of January
1929. For each year, the percentage column indicates the fraction of the banks operating in that year which experienced each event. For the total column, the
percentage indicates the fraction of banks which experienced each event at some point in time from January 1929 to March 1933. (p) indicates a primary
cause. (c) indicates a contributing cause.
Sources: Data on banks in operation from Wicker 1996, Table 1.1, page 2 and Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937, Table 12, p. 907. Suspension data
from Record Group 82, National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                  42
Table 4
Categories and Causes of Temporary Bank Changes, Annual Hazard Rates, January 1929 through March 1933
                                                   1929          1930            1931            1932          1933           Total
                                                 %    #        %    #          %    #          %    #         % #           %    #

Banks at beginning of year                       24,198          22,172         19,375          17,082        14,440         23,594
(a) Temporary suspensions due to              0.29   70      1.25   278      1.63   316     0.94 161       0.33 48        3.70 873
 (a.1) Assets and liabilities                 0.12   30      0.65   144      1.18   229     0.67 114       0.19 27        2.31   544
   (a.1.1) Assets                             0.03    7      0.10    23      0.14    27     0.09 16        0.03 5         0.33    78
   (a.1.2) Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)     0.01    2      0.13    28      0.23    44     0.20 35        0.02 3         0.47   112
   (a.1.3) Withdrawals (p) and assets (p)     0.02    5      0.05    12      0.14    28     0.02   3       0.02 3         0.22    51
   (a.1.4) Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)     0.02    6      0.14    32      0.27    53     0.26 44        0.07 10        0.61   145
   (a.1.5) Withdrawals                        0.04   10      0.22    49      0.40    77     0.09 16        0.04 6         0.67   158
 (a.2) Closure of correspondent               0.02     6     0.30    67      0.10    20     0.11    18     0.03    4      0.49 115
 (a.3) Defalcation and mismanagement          0.09   21      0.11    24      0.09    17     0.01     2                    0.27    64
 (a.4) Other causes                           0.05   13      0.19    43      0.26    50     0.16    27     0.12 17        0.64 150




Notes: Statistics for 1933 include only the months January through March. The initial entry is the number of banks operating at the
beginning of January 1929. For each year, the percentage column indicates the fraction of the banks operating in that year which
experienced each event. For the total column, the percentage indicates the fraction of banks which experienced each event at some
point in time from January 1929 to March 1933. (p) indicates primary cause. (c) indicates contributing cause.


Sources: Data on banks in operation from Wicker 1996, Table 1.1, page 2 and Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937, Table 12,
p. 907. Suspension data from National Archives and Records Administration, Record Group 82. See appendix for details.




                                                                     43
Appendix

         This appendix contains three parts. The first describes the location, organization, and procedures for
citation of the archival evidence. The second discusses when, where, why, and how the Board of Governors
collected this information and issues important for interpreting empirical work based upon this new and
unique source. The discussion emphasizes the methods that Federal Reserve agents employed to ascertain the
causes of bank suspensions and the lexicon that the Board of Governors devised during the 1920s to facilitate
their analysis. The discussion cites the memos and training materials distributed to Federal Reserve
employees undertaking this task and outlines the algorithms that they employed when analyzing the
evidence. The third part of the appendix delves into details of the data collection process and the procedures
that the Federal Reserve used to validate and cross-check the evidence. The purpose of the extended
discussion is to reassure the reader of the veracity of the Federal Reserve’s observations, illuminate their
value for historical research, and elucidate the information available in the database, so that readers may
effectively employ it in their own research.

Location, Organization, and Citation

          From 1929 through 1933, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors collected information on bank
changes on three forms. Form St. 6386a reported bank consolidates. Form St. 6386b reported bank
suspensions. Form St. 6386c reported all other bank changes. Facsimiles of the forms appear below. The
surviving forms may be found in the National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject
File, file number 434.-1, “Bank Changes 1921-1954 Districts 1929-1954 - Consolidations, Suspensions and
Organizations-St. 6386 a,b,c, (By States) 1930-1933.” The forms are filed alphabetically by state, name of
town or city, and name of bank. Multiple entries for individual banks appear in chronological order. To avoid
repeated, lengthy citations in the body of the essay and this appendix, after quotations from the archival data,
the information required to locate the form (i.e. name of state, town, bank) is indicated in brackets.

Defining and Classifying Changes in Bank Status: Origins and Procedures of the Process

         During the 1920s, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors embarked on an ambitious project: the
creation of standard statistical reports for all banks operating in the United States, both members of the
Federal Reserve System and nonmembers, national and state, incorporated and private. In August 1925, the
Board began collecting information on the causes of bank suspensions. The Division of Bank Operations
introduced Form X-4401, “Notification of Bank Suspension or Insolvency,” and Form X-4402, “Notification
of Termination of Insolvency or Suspension.” The forms remained in use for four years.
During that period, the Board of Governors strove to improve the accuracy of the information that they
collected. The process was interactive and ongoing. The Board circulated forms to agents around the country
and asked them to suggest improvements. They solicited comments from bureaucrats, bankers, examiners,
and academics. They amended the forms to make them more concise and complete. Correspondence between
the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve district banks announced up-and-coming modifications and
important decisions concerning the coding of ambiguous cases. A series of memos defined key terms and
explained how to fill out the forms.
         Analysts strove to standardize the definitions of the words with which they worked. Standardization
was important, because definitions of banking terms varied across time and jurisdictions. Each state-banking
bureau published its own report and used terms as it saw fit. Explicit definitions seldom appeared. This
lexical ambiguity caused confusion. Multiple definitions existed for frequently used terms. Many varied
according to context. For example, the nine letters l-i-q-u-i-d-a-t-e referred in some circumstances to the sale
of assets, in other circumstances to a change in a corporate charter, and at other times to the dissolution of a
financial institution and its departure from the banking business. At the end of the 1920s, as the Federal




                                                      44
F. R. Board
Form St. 6386a                              BANK CONSOLIDATIONS
November 1929                            (Include absorptions, mergers, etc.)


Effective data of consolidation ________________                       Federal Reserve District ____________

                                          Member                                Surplus             Loans
 Name and Location of Banks                  or              Capital             and                 and
                                         nonmember                              profits          investments

(a) Banks entering into consolidation:




(b) New or consolidated bank:




Is the consolidated institution a newly chartered bank? ____. If not, give the name of the bank (before
consolidation) under whose charter the consolidated institution is to operate:



Give the names of banks, if any, that were in financial difficulties at time of consolidation:



Disposition made of the head office of each bank entering into consolidation:



Did any of the banks entering into consolidation have branches? ______
Were any of the banks affiliated with banking groups or chains? _______
   (Report details on Forms St. 6386d and St. 6386e)


Terms of consolidation, if known, etc.




                                                       45
F. R. Board
Form St. 6386b                           BANK SUSPENSIONS
November 1929

Date of suspension _____________________              Federal Reserve District _____________

Name and location of bank _____________________Member or nonmember _____________

                                    Loans and
Capital $ ________________          Investments $________________ Gross Deposits $
______________

Borrowings from Federal Reserve Bank $ _______________ From other banks $
_________________

Condition figures are as of ______________________

Closing directed by
__________________________________________________________________

Causes of suspension: Check in the appropriate column those of the following which apply, either
as primary or contributing causes, amplifying the indicated causes with such supplementary data as
may be available.

                                                        Primary cause   Secondary cause

 1. Slow, Doubtful or worthless paper

 2. Failure of banking correspondent
    (Name of failed correspondent)

 3. Failure of other large debtor
   (Name of failed debtor and
    connection with bank, if any)

 4. Defalcation

 5. Heavy withdrawals

 6. Other causes (specify)

 Remarks:




                                                 46
F. R. Board
Form St. 6386c              ORGANIZATIONS, LIQUIDATIONS, CONVERSIONS,
Nov. 1929          AND OTHER CHANGES IN STATUS OF MEMBER AND NONMEMBER BANKS


Effective date of change _______________________                             Federal Reserve District _____________


Character of change __________________________________________________


Name and location of                                                                        Member or
  bank before change ________________________________________                               nonmember ___________


Name and location of                                                                        Member or
  bank after change _________________________________________                               nonmember ___________

                                         Surplus                                     Loans and
Capital $ ________________               and profits $________________               investments $ _______________


Condition figures are as of ____________________________________________________________


Is the above change in status final or merely preliminary to a further change, and if preliminary, what further change is
     contemplated?


Is the case of conversions and successions, were financial difficulties responsible to any extent for the change in status?


Remarks:
   (In the case of suspended banks reopened for business, give the change in capital account, the assessment paid by
        stockholders, etc.)




                                                            47
Reserves’ lexicon approached its final form and its research staff assimilated the lessons that they had
learned, the Board of Governors authorized a comprehensive revision of the panoply of forms used to gather
information on the status of banks.
         In 1929, the Board of Governors introduced the documents devised via that endeavor: the St. 6386
series of forms. Form St. 6386a reported bank consolidations. The Federal Reserve defined consolidation in a
de facto rather than de jure sense.

        A consolidation is the corporate union of two or more ongoing banks into one bank which
        continues under a single charter, either new or old. The term is used not in a legal or
        technical sense, but in an economic sense, the essential feature being that the business of two
        or more going banks becomes concentrated under one charter and one management. The
        method of effecting the consolidation, whether by purchase of assets, assumption of deposit
        liabilities, exchange of stock, or other procedure, varies with circumstances and is
        unessential for the present purpose. What is here described as a consolidation is frequently
        designated by the terms “merger,” “absorption,” “amalgamation,” “combination,” or
        “purchase,” according to different points of view. It includes those cases where one bank
        absorbs another and turns it into a branch. It also includes those cases where a given bank is
        absorbed by two or more banks, which distribute its business among themselves. A
        consolidation is not a simple transaction like a conversion, a liquidation, a primary
        organization, etc., but is inevitable complicated by the fact that these other transactions are
        incidental to it. That is, a consolidation as often as not entails a voluntary liquidation and the
        issuance of a new charter; but these attendant circumstances should not obscure the
        important fact that a concentration of banking has been effected by the transaction as a
        whole (Goldenweiser et. al. 1931, pp. 87-88).

Form St. 6386a recorded these transactions and the attendant circumstances. Details included the name of the
absorbing bank, the fate of offices and charter of the bank being absorbed, and whether the banks
consolidated because they faced financial difficulties or in order to avoid suspension.
        The latter information helped distinguish between the categories of consolidation and suspension.
The distinction involved several simple rules. First, a bank that merged with another bank was classified as a
consolidation if it was “not at any time closed to depositors, even though the reason for the consolidation or
succession may have been financial difficulties encountered by the bank (Federal Reserve memo, November
18, 1929).” Second, a transaction was classified as a consolidation if the assets and liabilities of a weak bank
were transferred to another bank, and then, the denuded bank suspended and surrendered its charter
(Goldenweiser et. al. 1931, p. 88). Third, a transaction was classified as a terminal bank suspension if at the
time of absorption or merger the bank had been closed for at least one business day.
        Form St. 6386b reported bank suspensions. According to the Federal Reserve’s financial lexicon, a
bank suspension occurred when payments were halted

        to the public either temporarily or permanently by supervisory authorities or by the bank’s
        board of directors on account of financial difficulties, regardless of whether or not the bank
        is ultimately classed as a suspension by the supervisory authorities (Federal Reserve memo,
        November 18, 1929)

and regardless of whether or not the depositors ultimately suffered losses. A suspension had to last overnight.
A bank that closed its doors in the morning and reopened them in the afternoon did not fit into the
classification. A suspension had to include the cessation of normal banking business. A bank that slowed
withdrawals by holding depositors to the agreements that they signed when opening accounts and requiring
them to provide 30, 60, or 90 days notice of savings withdrawals did not fit into the classification. A bank
which, without actually closing, obtained agreements from depositors to waive a portion of their deposits or
to defer the withdrawal of a portion of their deposits was not classified as a suspension. A bank that closed


                                                       48
during a special holiday declared by civil authorities and remained closed only during such holiday or part
thereof was not classified as a suspension.
         Form St. 6386c reported changes in the status of financial institutions, including voluntary
liquidations and the reopening of suspended banks. A voluntary liquidation occurred when a bank’s directors
paid off all depositors and creditors in full, sold the remaining assets, distributed proceeds to stockholders,
annulled the bank’s charter, and abandoned the banking business. Some voluntary liquidations were orderly
affairs arranged months in advance. Others resembled suspensions. A sudden shock, such as the death of the
founder, forced a bank to close its doors, and the discouraged board of directors decided to repay depositors
rather than attempt to reopen the institution. The latter case was classified as a voluntary liquidation, rather
than a suspension, as long as the winding up of the bank’s business did not require the intervention of
regulators or courts, and as long as the owners of the bank could repay all creditors the full value of their
claims.
          A reopening occurred when a suspended bank resumed operations. A bank could resume operations
voluntarily at any time until regulators used legal powers to take authority over the institution or the courts
appointed a receiver to liquidate the bank. After either event, a bank could reopen only with the consent of
judicial authorities. In certain circumstances, reopening also required the agreement of creditors such as
depositors and stockholders. In many cases, reopenings entailed the reorganization of affairs. Depositors
waived rights to portions of their deposits. Stockholders waived their original capital and paid assessments of
up to 100% of the value of their stock. In most cases, these reorganizations appear to have been voluntary
agreements among the interested parties, facilitated by banking authorities on some occasions and laws in
some states.
         A reopening could involve an array of incidental transactions, such as changes in the name, charter,
capital stock, and legal status of a bank. As with consolidations, the entire package of transaction was
recorded as a single event. Rules indicated how to handle confusing cases. For example,

          A reopening consequent upon consolidation of two or more suspended banks should be
          classed as a single reopening. If a suspended national bank reopens as a State bank, however,
          or vice versa, the transaction must be accounted as a primary organization and not as a
          reopening (Federal Reserve memo, November 18, 1929).

Thus, if two banks suspended operations, merged a few days later in the morning, and reopened that
afternoon, the Federal Reserve recorded two suspensions, one reopening, one liquidation, and no
consolidations. The bank whose charter continued in use was listed as reopened. The bank whose charter
lapsed was listed as liquidated. If two banks suspended operations, reopened a few days later in the morning,
and merged that afternoon, however, the Federal Reserve recorded two suspensions, two reopenings, and one
consolidation. If a national bank suspended operations, changed to a state charter, and then reopened for
business with exactly the same staff, depositors, and borrowers, the Federal Reserve recorded one national
bank suspension, one national bank liquidation, and the opening (i.e. primary organization) of a newly state-
chartered bank. If a similar national bank suspended operations, reopened for business, and then adopted a
state charter, however, the Federal Reserve recorded one suspension, one reopening, and one conversion
from national to state charter.
         Completing forms St. 6386c and St. 6386a involved implementing algorithms to determine how to
classify complex transactions. Completing the 6386b form required additional knowledge, judgment, and
effort. The 6386b form attributed bank suspensions to one or more of five common causes (definitions from
Federal Reserve memo, November 5, 1930).16 The first was slow, doubtful, or worthless paper. The term
worthless paper indicated an asset with little or no value. The term doubtful paper meant an asset unlikely to
yield book value. Examples included loans to businesses in financial difficulties and securities such as stocks
16
     Note that a sixth option existed. Agents completing St. 6386b forms could check a box entitled “other cause” and
     add a description of the phenomenon. The form also contained space for written remarks. About one-third of all
     forms contained such additional and/or extended comments.


                                                           49
and bonds which had depreciated since purchase. The term slow paper meant an asset likely to yield full
value in time, but whose repayment lagged or that could not be converted to full cash value at short notice.
An example was a loan to a profitable corporation with cash-flow problems struggled to make timely
payments. The term structure prevented the bank from calling in the unpaid balance. Uncertainty over the
value of the stream of payments prevented the bank from selling the loan at face value.
          The second common cause of suspension was failure a banking correspondent. Correspondents were
banks with ongoing relationships facilitated by deposits of funds. Services rendered by correspondents
included extending lines of credit, clearing checks, absorbing exchange charges, redeeming coupons from
bonds, conducting wire transfers, supplying coins and cash, and facilitating investments in stocks and bonds.
A typical situation involved a small state bank outside a reserve city (called a country bank) that deposited
funds in a large national bank in a reserve city (called a city bank) and received services in return. Such
deposits often formed a large portion of country banks’ legal reserves. In many cases, the suspension of the
city bank precipitated the suspension of the country bank, because the latter lost its reserves and linkages to
the wider financial system.
          The third and fourth common causes of suspension were the failure of a large debtor and
defalcation. Of particular interest were debtors with connections to the bank via overlapping ownership,
interlocking directorates, or intermingled management. Defalcation was a monetary deficiency in the
accounts of a bank due to fraud or breach of trust for which the management was legally liable.
Embezzlement was a common example.
          The fifth common cause of suspension was heavy withdrawals. Some banks experienced such large
withdrawals that they could no longer continue operations. These deposit declines could be dramatic events
in which multitudes of small-account holders lined up in the streets outside of banks hoping to empty their
accounts. But, long queues of despondent depositors could be a symptom, rather than a cause, of a bank’s
demise. Significant deposit losses usually occurred before ordinary men and women lined up on the streets
outside of their banks. Businesses, banks, and wealthy individuals possessed the ability to transfer funds
quickly via wire or check to other financial institutions. They often also possessed better-than-average
information about financial events and transferred large sums out of banks in weeks before ordinary
individuals panicked over the safety of their savings or banks suspended payments on deposits. Researchers
at the Federal Reserve called these events invisible runs.
          The Board of Governors spent several years refining this checklist and teaching representatives how
to complete the form. Instructions were straightforward. If acts for which management faced criminal
liability precipitated the suspension of payments, check the box labeled defalcation. If the failure of a
correspondent or debtor precipitated the suspension of payments, check the appropriate box and note the
name of the institution or individual. If withdrawals reduced the liquidity of a bank to the point that it could
not continue operations or forced the bank to sell assets at fire sale prices, and thus to choose between
suspending payments or suffering insolvency, check the box for heavy withdrawals. If bad assets
accumulated to such an extent that a bank could not continue operations, either because it could not maintain
the necessary cash flow, because it could no longer absorb the losses, or because auditors determined it to be
insolvent, check the box for slow, doubtful, and worthless paper. Place the check in the column labeled
primary cause if that factor alone forced the bank to suspend operations. Place the check in the column
labeled contributing cause if that factor aggravated or accelerated the bank’s demise.
          Agents often checked multiple boxes, indicating that multiple causes contributed to a bank’s
suspension. The most common combination was heavy withdrawals and slow, doubtful, and worthless paper.
That should be no surprise. Withdrawals forced a bank to suspend payments only if the bank could not
convert assets to cash quickly enough to cover claims against it. Bad assets would not force a bank out of
business if it retained sufficient deposits and eventually covered its losses. Runs and frozen assets, in other
words, could be flip sides of the same coin.
          Differences did exist, however, between the asset and liability side of the balance sheet. Agents
attempted to communicate these distinctions by marking primary and contributing causes in particular
patterns. If the problems precipitating suspension arose on the asset side of a bank’s balance sheet, agents
checked slow, doubtful, or worthless paper as the primary cause and withdrawals as a contributing cause or


                                                      50
not at all. Checking paper as the primary cause indicated that problems with the bank’s assets necessitated
suspension regardless of other factors. The banks’ assets possessed little value. Collections had fallen far
behind scheduled. The capital was impaired. The bank was or would soon be insolvent. Checking
withdrawals as a contributing cause indicated that depositors’ demands exacerbated the situation.
Withdrawals could complicate asset problems in several ways. A run on a bank on the edge of insolvency
might hasten its demise. Fears of runs might force a bank to hold large reserves of liquid assets, such as cash,
rather than large portfolios of remunerative assets, such as loans, preventing the bank from earning profits
and writing off bad debts. In an effort to satisfy depositors’ demands, a bank might sell so many of its good
assets that only bad assets remained, or a bank might borrow against so many of its better investments, that it
could not earn enough profits to retire its substandard loans.
         If the problems precipitating suspension arose on the liability side of the bank’s balance sheet, agents
checked heavy withdrawals as the primary cause and paper as a contributing cause or not at all. Checking
withdrawals as the primary cause indicated that deposits declined to such an extent that the bank could not
continue operations. Its reserves of cash were depleted. It could not longer convert assets to currency. It
could not satisfy depositors’ demands. Checking paper as the contributing cause indicated that the condition
of the bank’s assets exacerbated the situation. Doubtful and worthless assets could neither be sold nor
rediscounted. Slow assets could not be converted to cash quickly enough to alleviate a run. Substandard
assets of any kind reduced banks’ liquidity and prevented them from converting resources to cash.
         If problems arose equally on both sides of the balance sheet, agents checked both withdrawals and
paper as primary causes. In this case, the bank’s position was doubly difficult. Its assets appeared so
problematic that insolvency approached, and its depositors withdrew so much of their savings that illiquidity
loomed. Checking two primary causes indicated that either factor alone would have caused the closure of the
bank.

Data Sources and Cross-Validation

          The Board of Governors strove to gather information about causes of suspension from the man on
the spot who knew the facts of the issue at hand. Annotations on the forms reveal these efforts. Comments on
hundreds of forms indicate that the information agrees with the receiver’s report or was taken “From
receiver’s report as of date of closing,” a phrase often imprinted with an ink stamp. Federal Reserve agents
often communicated directly with receivers, requesting additional information or inquiring about complex or
unclear cases. Receivers’ replies appear on many forms. For example, the receiver for Mayo’s Money
Exchange Bank of San Antonio, Texas, stated “the primary cause of failure was due to investments of funds
in stocks and bonds representing real estate investments.” The Central Bank and Trust Company of Chicago,
Illinois, which was the liquidation trustee of the Mecca Bank of Mecca, Indiana, stated the bank should be
classified as a voluntary liquidation because “all of the creditors will be paid off in full within a reasonable
period.” A letter dated 6 October 1932 and written by F. E. J. Bower, the receiver for the First National Bank
of Bradley Beach, New Jersey, described the “reorganization plan as follows: Creditors were to waive 40%
of claims against the closed bank, total amounts of such waiver equal 90% of present liabilities. Old stock of
bank ($100 par) to be surrendered and then resold at $25 per share in this way raising $125,000.”
          The Division of Bank Operations also consulted call reports and examination reports and
communicated directly with bank examiners and banking departments. Examples abound. The examiner of
the Central National Bank in Bartleaville, Oklahoma, which suspended on March 22, 1930, classified
“$235,000 of assets as worthless and $164,000 as doubtful.” The examiner of the First National Bank of
Bixby, Oklahoma, which suspended on February 18, 1929, stated “the suspension of this bank is chargeable
directly to top heavy and other ill-advised loans made during the period of inflation following the recent war,
together with the incompetency of succeeding officers in the matter of enforcing any effective policy of
collection over the following period of deflation.” On 28 February 1931, a letter from the Bank
Commissioner of Connecticut stated




                                                       51
        the Central Fairfield Trust Company of Norwalk, now the Merchants Bank and Trust
        Company, resumed business on Friday, February 20, 1931. The name of the institution was
        changed by special act of the legislature. While the name has been changed, it is still the
        same corporation which has resumed business upon the discharge of the temporary receiver
        appointed by the courts.

In January 1930, a telegram from the Indiana State Banking Department explained the complicated series of
transactions surrounding the suspension of the Argos State Bank of Argos, Indiana, and its reopening under a
new charter. In March 1933, the Utah State Bank Commissioner reported that Gunnison Valley Bank of
Gunnison, Utah, would reopen shortly. On 27 March 1930, an employee of the Division of Bank Operations
with the initials M.F. called Mr. Gough of the Comptroller of Currency after “examination of agent’s reports
proved inadequate.” Mr. Gough explained that the myriad of transactions reported for the town of Bartow,
Florida, pertained to the closure of a single institution, the Polk County National Bank, which unsuccessfully
attempted to shed dubious assets, change its charter, and establish itself as a new bank under a different name
in hopes of saving itself.
         The Division of Bank Operations also contacted institutions and individuals with local knowledge of
particular banks. Local courts provided access to liquidation records, names and addresses of court-appointed
receivers, and opinions about suspended banks under their jurisdiction. Local postmasters provided another
means to attain such information. For example, on 10 December 1930, a letter from the postmaster at Sandia,
Texas, informed the Federal Reserve that W.T. Mumme, the private bank in the town, ceased operations and
liquidated voluntarily.
         For country banks, a good source of information was their banking correspondent. Correspondents in
reserve cities held deposits of county-bank clients, provided clients with services such as check clearing and
wire transfers, and monitored clients’ financial health and creditworthiness. Correspondents frequently
replied to inquiries concerning the closures of the clients. Many examples exist. The correspondent of Juan
McKeyes and Company, a private bank in Lawton, Michigan, wrote that McKeyes suspended operations on
May 9, 1932 due to the financial consequences of grape crop failures in the area, and reopened on June 2nd of
that year

        after its depositors of their own volition had signed waiver agreements providing that no
        funds except such as are deposited after the bank reopened would be withdraw for a period
        of five years. Under the circumstances the court having jurisdiction over its affairs dismissed
        the receivership petition.

The Continental Illinois Bank and Trust Company, which was the correspondent of the Commercial Bank of
Wapellow, Iowa, stated that the latter closed its doors on October 13, 1931, because the …

        bank unwisely expanded loans to care for needs of borrowers in communities where banks
        had suspended and found itself unable to meet shrinkage in its deposits due to unrest among
        its own customers.

The Valley National Bank of Des Moines, Iowa stated that its client, the Farmers and Merchants Bank of
Scranton, Iowa, suspended operations primarily because it was “loaded with slow, doubtful, and worthless
paper.”
         Banks provided information about their own conditions. Reopened banks answered inquiries about
the cause of their temporary suspensions and the conditions under which they reopened. Banks entering into
voluntary liquidation released public statements explaining how and why. Even the management of failed
banks provided information in instances when Federal Reserve agents contacted them directly. For example,
in the fall of 1930, Harry M. Wilcox, the President of the Citizens Bank of North Adams, Michigan, replied
to an inquiry about the cause of his bank’s suspension by stating “general business depression and decline in
land value caused the bank to close its doors.” Federal Reserve agents could gather this information because


                                                      52
they possessed the legal authority to compel truthful testimony. The law required bankers to answer their
inquiries. Untruthful respondents could be prosecuted for perjury. Federal Reserve agents seeking answers
from reticent witnesses could ask the Office of the Comptroller of Currency (OCC) for assistance. OCC
examiners could compel a response, since they possessed investigative powers identical to secret service
agents.
         Federal Reserve agents consulted the publications of the state banking departments.17 Most banking
departments published annual reports. A few published biennially. Many banking departments also published
summaries of bank changes in the interim. Periodicity varied across states. Indiana published a monthly
bulletin. The New York State Banking Department published a weekly bulletin with detailed descriptions of
the causes of each state bank suspension. The New York Superintendent of Banks also released an
announcement at the time of each bank suspension, stating the reasons why it was “deemed unsafe and
inexpedient to permit the institution to continue in business.” The Federal Reserve banks also compiled
monthly summaries of bank changes, which they forwarded to the Board’s Division of Bank Operations.
         Federal Reserve agents also consulted an array of business periodicals and popular dailies. Citations
to the following appear on the 6386 forms:

               •   Commercial and Financial Chronicle
               •   Bankers’ Monthly
               •   New York Sun
               •   New York Times
               •   Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia
               •   Rand McNally Bankers Directory
               •   Reports of R.G. Dunn & Company

Numerous newspapers from locales around the United States were also cited, but the typists who transcribed
the newspaper clippings merely stated that their source was a ‘local newspaper’ without additional
bibliographic details.
         Each of these sources possessed its own strength. Federal Reserve officers had direct and continuous
contact with the management of member banks and the ability to comment credibly on their competency.
Correspondents could also provide vivid and valuable testimony on this issue. Correspondents had ongoing
relationships with the management of client banks, and tracked the quality of their clients’ portfolios in case
decisions had to be made about the extension of credit. Call, examiners’, and receivers’ reports yielded
financial data including the kind, quality, and quantity of assets possessed by a bank on the date of
suspension and the patterns of deposit inflows and outflows before that date. Examiners of all national and
most state banks classified assets according to the categories good, slow, doubtful, and worthless, which the
Federal Reserve used on its suspension forms. Receivers of national and state banks also listed assets and
estimated values. Discussions with examiners, receivers, correspondents, and bankers provided expert
opinions about phenomena that they observed, often over a period of years. Particularly useful are their
opinions about the quality of the management and the importance of correspondent linkages. Newspapers
provided detailed descriptions of events that interested their readers, such as defalcations and bank runs, and
on important financial events in their hometowns, such as the closing and reopening of local banks. Much of
the information provided by these sources could come from nowhere else.
         The Federal Reserve Board incorporated all of this information into the 6386 forms by creating a
nationwide reporting network. The law required member banks to report changes in status to their local
Federal Reserve Bank. Similar regulations required national banks to report such information to the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency. Federal Reserve agents at district and branch banks completed initial drafts
of the forms from information at their disposal and forwarded the forms to the Board of Governors in
17
     Katherine Tunis, head of the research library of the Board of Governors, reports that the Board’s library retained
     copies of all publications from the state banking departments until the late 1970s, when to conserve shelf space, the
     library sent all of these publications to the libraries of the Federal Reserve district banks.


                                                            53
Washington, where the Division of Bank Operations checked the information against available sources
(including copies of the materials submitted to the OCC and routinely forwarded to the Federal Reserve),
sorted and tabulated the forms, compiled aggregate statistics, and disseminated the results. Nonmember
banks reported to state authorities, which cooperated in the Federal Reserve’s data-collection endeavors by
forwarding the relevant information. The Federal Reserve cultivated contacts with state agencies, and during
the Depression, subsidized the salaries of state employees who worked part time on Board businesses.
         In complicated, unclear, and unresolved cases, the Division requested additional information and
researched the events in greater depth. The definitive determination of the cause of a bank suspension often
took several months. The archives contain preliminary, in-process, and final reports for many banks. These
duplicates accumulated as agents incorporated additional information into their analysis and updated their
conclusions. Information flowed to the Division of Bank Operations as institutions and individuals replied to
Federal Reserve requests for information. In several cases, the materials collected by the Division, such as
examiners’ reports, telegrams from receivers, press clippings, etcetera, remain clipped to the 6386 forms,
although routine procedure appears to have been to discard the source material after reaching a definitive
determination of the cause of a bank’s failure
         The Board’s efforts continued throughout the Depression. After the national banking holiday, the
Board joined forces with the Office of the Comptroller of Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. With funding from the Works Project Administration, this regulatory triumvirate strove to
construct a data base containing information from all banks operating in the United States since 1929. As
part of the process, the Board of Governors rechecked the 6386 forms against the records of the state banking
bureaus, the OCC, and the Rand McNally and Polk corporations. The Board published the initial results of
this reconciliation in the Federal Reserve Bulletin for September, 1937. Further publications were planned,
but the project lapsed as the Board allocated resources towards other projects.




                                                     54
Bibliography

Bernanke, B. S. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression.”
     American Economic Review, June 1983, (73), pp. 257-276.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1929. “Memorandum Regarding Preparation of Reports
       of Changes in Status of Member and Nonmember Banks,” Memo: November 18, 1929. National
       Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject File, 421.113.

-----   1930. Committee on Branch, Group and Chain Banking, “Bank Changes – Definitions of Terms,”
        Memo: November 5, 1930. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject
        File, 421.113-1.

-----   1931. Committee on Branch, Group and Chain Banking. “Comments Regarding Preparation of Form
        F.” 23 November 1931. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject File,
        421.113-1, Forms and Instructions.

-----   1937. “Bank Suspensions in the United States.” Federal Reserve Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: Board
        of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. September, 1937.

----- Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve System, 1943.

----- All Bank Statistics, 1896-1955. Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve System, 1959.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. “Contagion and Bank Failures During The Great Depression:
    The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic.” American Economic Review, December 1997, 87(5), pp. 863-
    883.

----- “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During the Depression.” American Economic Review,
      December 2003, 93(5): pp. 1615-1646.

Carlson, Mark. “Are Branch Banks Better Survivors? Evidence from the Depression Era.” Economic Inquiry,
     January 2004, (42), pp. 111-126

Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. “The Great Depression and the Friedman-
     Schwartz hypothesis,” Working Paper 0318, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 2004.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, & Liquidity,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 1983, Vol. 91, pp. 401-419.

Eichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Friedman, Milton and Schwartz, Anna J. 1971. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Goldenweiser, E. A., et al. 1931. Bank Suspensions in the United States, 1892-1931. Volume 4. Material
      prepared for the information of the Federal Reserve System by the Federal Reserve Committee on
      Branch, Group, and Chain Banking.

Hamilton, David. “The Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930, Another View.” Journal of Southern History
       November 1985, (51), pp. 581-608.


                                                    55
Hori, Masahiro. New evidence on the causes and propagation of the great depression. Dissertation. Ph.D. in
       Economics. University of California, Berkeley, May 1996.

Kennedy, Susan Estabrook. The Banking Crisis of 1933. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky,
    1973.

Lucia, Joseph. 1985. “The Failure of the Bank of the United States: A Reappraisal.” Explorations in
        Economic History 22 (October): 402-16.

McFerrin, James B. 1939. Caldwell and Company. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Meltzer, Allan H. “Monetary and Other Explanations for the Start of the Great Depression.” Journal of
     Monetary Economics 2 (1976): 455-72.

----- A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1, 1913-1951. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Mitchener, Kris James. 2004. Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability during the Great Depression.
       NBER Working Paper 10475. May 2004.

Gary Richardson. “The Records of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in the National Archives of the
     United States.” Financial History Review (forthcoming June 2006).

Richardson, Gary and William Troost. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics During the Great
     Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal Reserve Border in Mississippi, 1929 to
     1933..” UC Irvine Mimeo, 2005.

Romer, Christina. “The Nation in Depression.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol 7, No. 2 (Spring,
    1993), pp. 19-39.

Temin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York: W.W. Norton, 1976.

---- Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.

United States, Bureau of the Census. Historical statistics of the United States, colonial times to 1970.
        Bicentennial Edition. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1975

Wheelock, David. “Member Bank Borrowing and the Fed’s Contractionary Monetary Policy During the
    Great Depression.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking November 1990, (22) pp. 409-426.

White, Eugene. 1984. “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” Journal of Economic History 44
        (March): 119-38.

Wicker, Elmus. 1980. “A Reconsideration of the Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930.” Journal of
       Economic History 40 (September): 571-83.

-----   1996. The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Young, R. A. “Memorandum Regarding Preparation of Reports of Changes in Status of Member and
       Nonmember Banks.” Memo: November 18, 1929. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal
       Reserve Central Subject File, 421.3, Group and Chain Banking (1924-1929).


                                                      56
