                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT DROVE FIRST YEAR PREMIUMS IN STAND-ALONE MEDICARE DRUG
                               PLANS?

                                           Kosali I. Simon
                                          Claudio Lucarelli

                                        Working Paper 12595
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12595


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006W




We thank the Cornell Center for Consumer Pharmaceutical Research, funded by the Merck Philanthropic
Arm for financial support. We thank Anirban Mukerjee, Megan Tracz, Veronica Conte, Rebecca Lee,
and Christine Marschilok for helping us gather the plan data used in this paper, and to Vicki Lanier
and Evelyn Hermes DeSantis for help with selecting pharmaceutical lists. John Cawley, Jack Hoadley,
Sean Nicholson and Steve Pizer provided helpful comments. All errors and opinions expressed are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Kosali I. Simon and Claudio Lucarelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Drove First Year Premiums in Stand-Alone Medicare Drug Plans?
Kosali I. Simon and Claudio Lucarelli
NBER Working Paper No. 12595
October 2006
JEL No. I11,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

Medicare's Part D offers heavily subsidized new drug coverage to 22.5 million seniors to date, of whom
16.5 million are in stand-alone drug plans (Department of Health and Human Services, 2006). The
government delegated the delivery of the benefit to private insurance companies arguing that market
incentives would lead them to provide coverage at the lowest price possible. The massive entry of
plans and the large variety of actuarial designs and formularies offered make it complicated to assess
how insurers set premiums during this first year of the program. This paper presents the first econometric
evidence on whether premiums in the stand-alone drug plan markets are driven by the relevant factors
predicted by insurance theory. Using data gathered from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
we measure a plan's generosity as the simulated out of pocket payments for different sets of drugs.
We also identify the listed full drug prices by each insurer and merge these with other plan and geographical
characteristics to test predictions about how insurers set premiums. We find evidence that a) the number
of insurers in a market is big enough such that it does not appear to influence premiums, b) the full
drug prices listed appear to be reflected to some degree in the premiums charged c) plan characteristics
such as the provision of extra coverage are reflected in higher premiums, but overall there is a weak
relationship between premiums and simulated out of pocket payments for different sets of drugs d)
the institutional setting and regional market characteristics affect the firms' bidding behavior and their
resulting premiums. Insurers appear to have responded strongly to program incentives such as the
automatic enrollment of dual Medicaid-Medicare beneficiaries into low cost plans. As data for 2007
are made available, it will be important to see if plans follow similar pricing strategies in subsequent
years of this program.

Kosali I. Simon
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
N227 MVR Hall, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
kis6@cornell.edu

Claudio Lucarelli
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
cl443@cornell.edu
1. Introduction


           The 2003 Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) created a new market for
prescription drug coverage in which premiums are heavily subsidized. The subsidy was a
key feature in attracting private insurers to participate, as it is unlikely that an
unsubsidized stand-alone prescription drug benefit for the elderly would survive due to
adverse selection (Pauly and Zeng ,2003). Medicare beneficiaries have the option of
adding a stand-alone drug plan to their Fee-for-Service Medicare services, or joining a
county-level private-sector comprehensive Medicare Advantage plan that includes
prescription drug coverage as well as other Medicare services through a managed care
insurer. CMS also provides subsidy of 28% of the total drug cost to employers that
continue to offer drug coverage to their retirees to discourage “crowd-out”.4
           The market is still in its infancy, but there is much public concern about how it is
functioning. This paper focuses on the stand alone plans, which have enrolled 16.5
million of the 22.5 million Part D enrollees. A total of 1,429 different insurance plans
owned by approximately 70 different companies are available in 34 regions into which
the country is divided. MMA sets standards for plan design and for oversight in a
competitive bidding process to determine premiums, but plans have considerable
freedom. There is substantial variation in the premiums charged, and in the design of the
benefits, but no systematic econometric analysis has investigated how premiums are
affected by benefit design or market factors. While certain features of plan design such
as the deductible are evident when plans are selected by consumers (and are observable in
a summary file released by CMS), plans can differ in other aspects such as prices
negotiated with pharmaceutical companies and the co-payments required from the
beneficiaries for different drugs. These are attributes researchers and consumers can only
observe through web queries and an examination of the plan’s formulary (Hoadley et al,
2006).5 An analysis of the premium setting behavior of Part D plans without taking into

4
  A comprehensive explanation of the implementation of the MMA can be found in Hoadley (2006), Gold (2006a,b) and MedPAC
(2005, 2006), and in the H.R. 1 act itself (U.S. Congress, 2003)
5
  There are two important caveats regarding the posted full prices. One is that insurer/PBM negotiations with pharmacies/
manufacturers will be reflected in drug prices as well as rebates, and we are unable to observe rebates. Second, it appears that insurers
sometimes did not report a full price of a drug to CMS, and in these cases CMS imputed the prices with average wholesale prices. It is
not known to what extent this was done, nor does CMS officially acknowledge this, but to the extent that this happens, one should be
cautious in interpreting the results of this variable. (Personal communication with Jack Hoadley, August 2006). A formulary file is
available for purchase from CMS, but does not list prices.



                                                                   2
account these prices, formulary design and cost-sharing details would be potentially
misleading if insurers are relatively more generous in setting visible plan features. We
obtained data on less visible plan features (drug prices, formulary design and cost
sharing) for each PDP plan by repeatedly querying the plan finder tool implemented by
Medicare, for ten sets of drugs. We processed the source code of each resulting web page
to create a database of plan attributes to supplement data provided by CMS in data sets.
          In addition to the importance of plan characteristics in determining premiums, the
institutional setting also created certain incentives that may have influenced plan
behavior. For example, insurers were concerned about low enrollment, and knew that
being designated by CMS as a “low income subsidy” (LIS) eligible plan would guarantee
automatic enrollment of the dual Medicaid-Medicare eligible population. In our analysis
we take into account the institutional details as well as the regional attributes that may
affect plans’ behavior, making this another contribution of our paper.
          We proceed by first describing the institutions governing this market and then
surveying the budding literature on this topic. We then describe our hypotheses, and the
data used to test them. We conclude with a discussion of the results and what they tell us
about insurer premium setting in this first year of the program.


2. The Medicare Part D Market


          Medicare Part D was signed into law as part of MMA 2003 and went into effect in
January 2006. Unlike the Hospital Insurance (Part A) and the Supplemental Medical
Insurance (Part B), the delivery of the new benefit has been completely entrusted to the
private sector. Private companies can provide the new benefit as either stand-alone plans,
called Prescription Drug Plans (PDPs), or they can offer it together with Parts A and B as
Medicare Advantage plans (MA-PDs).6 Medicare beneficiaries can enroll in these plans
by paying a subsidized premium. Open enrollment took place from November 15th 2005
to May 15th 2006, during which time the elderly could make decisions about participating
in this market. Although MMA specifies a standard drug benefit, the law allows
deviations from that design as long as the modified plans are actuarially equivalent to the
6
 Before the enactment of MMA, private plans could also provide the benefits of Parts A and B of Medicare as Part C, later named
Medicare+Choice. However, the benefits of Parts A and B have been delivered mainly through the traditional fee-for-service
Medicare, with private plans accounting for 15% of the total Medicare enrollees in 2000 and 12% in 2005. (Kaiser Family Foundation,
2005)



                                                                3
standard benefit.7 Beneficiaries are locked in to their current plan for a full year, but are
allowed to switch plans each open enrollment period at a premium that is community
rated.
            The standard drug benefit design specified in MMA for year 2006 comprises a
deductible of $250 and three coverage zones where the fraction of the additional drug
dollar covered by the insurer varies substantially. Figure 1 shows how out of pocket drug
expenses vary with total drug spending in the different coverage zones of the plan. After
the deductible is exhausted, the elderly are covered 75% for the next $2,000 spent in total
prescription drug expenditure (initial coverage zone, ICZ), 8 0% between $2,250 and
$5,100 (so the next $2,850) of total drug expenditure, the infamous doughnut hole zone,
and 95% after the $5,100 threshold (catastrophic coverage zone). Thus, at the point that
catastrophic coverage begins, the beneficiary has spent $3,600 out of pocket ($250 in
zone 1, $500 in zone 2, and $2,850 in region 3). Beneficiaries may buy their drugs at
pharmacies (the insurer may have a network of preferred pharmacies, outside of which
cost sharing is higher), and the plan may also allow the use of mail order purchasing
which may often be cheaper. Plans are allowed to use utilization controls such as prior
authorization, quantity limits9 and step therapy for drugs (Hoadley, 2005). Formularies
can be closed (allowed to exclude any payment for certain drugs) or open in the sense
that all drugs are covered by not on the same terms. Formularies are reviewed by CMS to
ensure that there are no egregious attempts to discriminate against certain illnesses, that
all drugs in certain classes are covered, and to make sure that at least two drugs from each
class are included on the formulary, but it is not known to what extent these rules were
enforced.10
           Insurance companies can deviate in plan design from the standard benefit
described above and offer a variety of plans as long as they satisfy certain requirements.11
For example, an insurer can offer plans with lower or no deductibles and higher

7
  To the extent that the plan is more generous in actuarial terms than the standard benefit, the additional premium associated with the
extra coverage is not subsidized by CMS.
8
  Recall that spending on drugs not on the formulary does not count towards this $2,000 or any other amounts.
9
  To clarify, a quantity limit does not mean that there is a maximum amount of the drug that can be dispensed for the year. A quantity
limit is the maximum amount that can be dispensed at one time.
10
   CMS asked US Pharmacopeia to develop a new set of classes for this specific purpose (Hoadley, 2005).
11
   These are a) they should provide the same catastrophic coverage as the standard benefit (same cost sharing rule of 5% and same
threshold of $3,600 in true out of pocket expenses) b) the deductible should not be higher than the standard benefit’s deductible of
$250 c) assure actuarial equivalency of i) the value of total coverage (eg if they remove the deductible, the cost sharing in the initial
coverage zone should be set higher than 25%), ii) cannot increase the threshold at which the 3rd coverage zone ends (the end of the
donut hole) and iii) cannot change the threshold at which the 3rd coverage zone starts (start of the donut hole). These details are
contained in the 2003 MMA



                                                                    4
coinsurance rates for the initial coverage zone, or offer plans with tiered cost sharing in
the initial coverage level as long as the tiered structure is equivalent to the standard 25%
coinsurance rate.12 Private insurers have taken advantage of the ability to offer modified
plans and only nine percent of the 2006 plans have the standard benefit design. In
addition to benefit designs that are identical or actuarially equivalent to the standard
benefit, insurance companies can also offer enhanced plans, i.e., coverage that is more
generous than the standard benefit. In fact, firms could design up to three benefit
packages per region, as long as one of them was standard or actuarially equivalent to a
standard plan (Hoadley et al, 2006).13
            To implement the new Medicare benefit, the country was divided into 34 regions
in the case of PDPs and 26 regions in the case of MA-PDs (see Figure 1 from CMS for a
map of the PDP regions).14 To participate in these markets, the insurance companies
submit bids (separate bids for each region, even if they design just one plan to be offered
nationally) stating their expected cost per beneficiary of providing the basic drug
coverage. The expected cost is calculated with the understanding that CMS (and not the
individual insurer) is responsible for 80% of drug costs that are incurred in the
catastrophic zone.15 This is required by MMA 2003, and is referred to as the reinsurance
feature of Part D which lessens fears of adverse selection among private insurers.16 CMS
will also ask plans to separately inform them of the cost of covering an individual if CMS
were to not provide this reinsurance, in order to asses the total amount by which CMS
subsidizes the coverage. This reporting is also required by MMA to make sure that
CMS’s total subsidy to Part D (which includes the subsidy through reinsurance and the
‘direct subsidy’ paid prospectively to the insurer) on average comes to 74.5% of the total
cost of providing this new coverage.

12
   For example, a company cannot offer a plan with higher initial coverage limit higher than $2,250 (in 2006) that has a higher co-
insurance rate above the deductible since this would violate condition iii) in footnote 11.
13
   However, the costs of the extra benefit will not be subsidized by the government, and therefore, the beneficiaries will have to pay an
additional premium at the market rate. Enhanced plans must submit separate bids, in which it is made clear what portion of the plan is
standard and what part is additional. On average, the monthly premium for enhanced benefits is $10 higher per month than the
premium for basic coverage (standard or modified). An example of enhanced benefits would be provision of coverage within the
doughnut hole. It is also important to note that such coverage is considered additional to the standard Part D benefit and will not count
towards reaching the catastrophic coverage threshold.
14
   The regions are composed of one or more states, and were set by the government at the beginning of year 2005. The regions were
established to meet the MMA requirement of having no fewer than 10 and no more than 50 regions in all, and to maximize the
availability of plans to eligible individuals regardless of health status, with particular attention to rural areas. Most (25) PDP regions
consist of one state, six consist of two states pooled together, one consists of three states, one consists of four states, and one consists
of seven states.
15
   This means that only 15% of the catastrophic cost will be paid by the insurance company as the remaining 5% is the beneficiary’s
liability by the plan design.
16
   MMA also calls for ‘risk corridors’ (which will be explained later) to further reduce adverse selection fears and incentives to cream
skim.



                                                                     5
           The bidding process was such that CMS set a plan’s premium according to how
much that plan’s bid was above or below the national average bid. Under certain
assumptions, the plan’s bid is simply a constant dollar amount above their premium so
that analyzing premiums is tantamount to analyzing bids. Plans were also insulated to a
large degree from losses (and profits) by reinsurance (CMS would pay for 80% of the
catastrophic costs), rate adjustment based on observed risk characteristics of those who
enrolled, and risk corridors (CMS guaranteed protection from losses and denied plans the
ability to keep substantial profits). Appendix 1 contains a discussion regarding the
mechanical setting of plan premiums and these risk reduction mechanisms. Plans also
understood the subsidies to low-income beneficiaries (which would reduce price
elasticity of demand) and that dual Medicaid-Medicare beneficiaries would automatically
be enrolled in plans that met a certain threshold for premiums regionally. Appendix 2
details these special provisions for low-income beneficiaries.


3. Hypotheses
           Premium setting of PDP plans during the first year is worth studying for several
reasons. First, insurers could be testing out the water in this unfamiliar market and may
price in idiosyncratic ways that will differ from their long run strategy. Humana is the
clearest example of this; their Vice President and Chief Actuary has publicly announced
that their strategy is to offer generous benefits at a low cost the first year to maximize
enrollment and transfer customers to their MA products in the long run (Bertko, 2005).
Thus, we expect to find a strong insurer specific component to the bids even after
controlling for all other observable features.17
           Second, we test whether the number of competitors in a market influences an
insurer’s bid. Given that each market had over 10 insurers participating, it is likely that
the threshold has passed beyond which the number of competitors will affect the
premiums (Bresnahan and Reiss, 1991). However, this assumes that the insurers knew
ahead of time how many competitors they would face in a market. Insurers were asked to
file intentions to participate in bidding prior to submitting bids, and although CMS
revealed the total number of insurers who expressed interest, they did not break it down


17
  Note that empirically we will not be able to disentangle price differences that result from a strategy such as one that deliberately
undercut prices from those that result due to unobservable differences such as reputation of the insurer.



                                                                    6
by region. Insurers may still have gained good knowledge, eg through press releases from
insurers, that they would face a substantial degree of competition in each market.
           Other market characteristics we predict will influence bid amounts include the
expected usage in a region (with premiums being lower in areas where drug use is
relatively lower),18 the fraction of the population that will receive low-income subsidies
above the Medicaid level (expecting that premiums will be higher in these regions if this
implies lower price elasticity of demand), the fraction of the population on Medicare
Advantage plans in 2005, and the size of the market (whose effect is unclear; for plans
that are national or near national, the size of the market in a particular region may not be
the relevant measure for economies of scale if price negotiations with pharmacies through
PBMs happen at a national level. On the other hand, larger markets may mean lower
marketing costs per covered life). The share of the market that is in Medicare Advantage
is also likely to be relevant to PDP pricing decisions. If higher MA enrollment suggests
that the remaining market is negatively selected on health,19 we expect premiums to rise
with MA market share. On the other hand, to the extent that the same insurers are present
in the MA market, they may price lower to attract beneficiaries they hope to later enroll
in their MMA products which they may consider more profitable, and also may have
lower prices because of lowered marketing costs.20 Thus, our theoretical prediction of the
effect of MA market share is ambiguous.21
           Third, we test the extent to which the premiums reflect plan features related to
their generosity. The main factor that should drive premiums in a competitive insurance


18
   Average monthly premiums in 2006 varied from $31.76 in Region 32 (California) to $41.62 in Region 21 (Louisiana) (See
Appendix Table A4). At the same time, geographical variation in health care use in general is large (e.g. Wennberg, Fisher, and
Skinner, 2002). Although the Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA, the trade association for Pharmacy Benefit
Managers {PBMs} who help insurers implement formularies) argues that eliminating unnecessary geographical variation in utilization
is one of the goals of including cost-control measures in Part D formularies,18 we expect that at least in the short run, these
geographical differences will persist and be built into premiums. (The President of PCMA is reported saying this in a news release
May 15th 2006 in response to a Dartmouth Atlas report (http://releases.usnewswire.com/GetRelease.asp?id=65876)) The Dartmouth
Atlas of Health Care in Michigan finds substantial small-area variation in prescription drug use among a population enrolled in the
Michigan Blue Cross Blue Shield Plan (Wennberg and Wennberg, 2006). Under the assumption that similar variation exists across
states and regions, we expect that regions with higher utilization of drugs will see higher premiums. To the extent that seniors are
constrained in their drug use because of the lack of drug coverage prior to MMA 2003, this would be an underestimate of the
differences in regional utilization that would surface under Part D. In that case, measures of the health status of different regions
would be more indicative of the differences in usage that would occur once MMA covered drugs. Insurers used sophisticated models
and expert actuarial services to forecast costs in the bidding process, thus the measures used here to test theories should only be
considered approximations to shed light on pricing strategies.
19
   See for example Riley et al. (1994), Morgan et al. (1997), Brown et al. (1993) who find evidence of favorable selection; however
other papers such as Dowd et al (1995) and Rogers and Smith (1995) do not.
20
   If Part D is marketed through the same channels as Medigap plans, the insurer’s presence in the Medigap market may be the most
important variable for the marketing costs story.
21
   We do have access to a 2006 MA market share measure, which is measured at the parent organization level and nationally. Ideally,
we would have liked to use a measure that is predetermined (i.e. not from 2006) and which varies by region too. We use the 2006 MA
market share variable in some specification to see if pricing differed by MA market share of the PDP insurers.



                                                                 7
market is the expected payout, which is the risk of a claim multiplied by the amount of
coverage in the event of a claim, plus some loading cost. Medicare Part D could be
viewed partly as an insurance plan and partly as a simple subsidy as customers are asked
to select plans based on drugs they already take, and because of the high persistence of
drug use in this population (Coulson and Stuart, 1992). Thus, our first prediction from a
textbook model of premium determination is that increases in the generosity of the plan
will increase the premium.22 This includes the extent to which plan formularies are
inclusive, the extent to which they apply tools of utilization management such as prior
authorization,23 whether they cover drugs during the doughnut hole zone. We also
measure the generosity of a plan as the total out of pocket costs associated with certain
sets of drugs. We aim to create a full picture of the plan’s formulary and cost sharing
structure in parsimonious ways.
           Fourth, we test whether incentives created by program rules, such as the reward
for low-premium plans in terms of automatic conferment of dual Medicaid-Medicare
enrollees with no marketing costs incurred, influenced the design of plans. This assumes
that plans used a strategy of deciding ahead of time whether (and which plan) they would
pitch as a low premium plan that would qualify for LIS status (by equation A.3. in the
appendix) and that they knew what approximate benchmarks to anticipate. To the extent
there is uncertainty on the part of plans as to the premium needed to qualify for LIS
status, these estimates should be viewed with caution as this may simply capture the fact
that this plan has a negative residual.
           Thus, premiums are expected to be a function of plan characteristics, some of
which are observable to the econometrician (Xi) unobservable plan characteristics ( ) and
region-specific attributes (Xj)
[1] Pij = f ( Xi, Xj , ε )
           There are many other unobservable firm characteristics that remain unmeasured.
Some firms are likely to have a competitive edge, because of experience and data
gathered from offering a drug discount card prior to 2006 (Gold, 2006). Prior experience
in the MA market should also have helped, as would having strategic partnerships with

22
   This abstracts from possible moral hazard and adverse selection that could occur as plans are more or less generous. MMA’s risk
adjustment reduces the fear of adverse selection in theory, but it nevertheless possible that part of the reason that premiums would rise
with generosity is due to adverse selection and moral hazard.
23
   But this does not tell us the extent to which these utilization tools were enforced. We cautiously use a measure of complaints about
the plan as indicative of how much these measures were used.



                                                                   8
marketing channels, advertising direct to consumers, or negotiating power with pharmacy
networks through PBMs. If the different firms and plans owned by the same parent
companies have access to the same marketing channels etc, the error structure may be
correlated across these observations. We account for this by seeing if our results are
robust to clustering the standard errors at the parent organization level. We also see if our
results are sensitive to clustering at the formulary level or the plan name level. Some
insurers use the same formulary across all their products, while others vary them over
products and regions. A formulary (list of drugs for which insurer will cover expenses at
all) does not imply the same cost sharing necessarily- for example we found instances of
differences in cost sharing amounts for the same drugs even when plans shared the same
formulary. A unique plan name that appears in different regions could also share
unmeasured characteristics (in addition to measured characteristics which we include in
the regression). Last, we use parent-organization fixed effects to capture all unobservable
parent organization characteristics and inform us about how insurers set premiums among
their different plan options. This also tests our first hypothesis about the existence of
large fixed insurer components to the bids.

4. Literature Review
       The deep interest in this topic has produced a number of descriptive papers
already taking advantage of data available through CMS. MedPAC (2005, 2006) contain
excellent chapters that together with the original legislation (US Congress, 2003) provide
a thorough background on Medicare Part D’s introduction. Several papers present a first
look at the premiums and plan features by region. Among these are Frakt and Pizer
(2006), Gold (2006b), and MedPAC (2005 and 2006). Gold (2006a) also considers the
history and strategic positions of the participating insurers. Gold (2006a) and Hoadley et
al (2006) point out that of all PDP plans, most are being offered by 10 national parent
entities (they have a plan in each of the 34 regions) and four near-national ones (they
have a plan in at least 30 but fewer than 34 regions), so the market is more concentrated
in terms of the players than it first seems.
       Hoadley et al (2006) provide a very detailed comparison of the formularies and
out of pocket medication costs of the largest 14 insurers at the drug level for the lowest
premium plan they offer. They consider the formulary treatment of a large number of



                                               9
brand name and generic drugs by different insurers and plans. They find that across plans,
there are substantial differences in whether drugs are placed on the formulary at all, and
in the treatment given to ones on the formulary (eg in terms of cost sharing, and whether
utilization management tools are used). They find that the most commonly used cost
sharing arrangement among the plans studied is a three- tier system with copays around
$5/$25/$53 for generic, preferred brand and non preferred brand. Some plans also have a
separate tier for ‘specialty drugs’ which are biotechnical drugs etc. CMS issued
guidelines stating that plans must cover two drugs in each drug category, at least one of
each key drug type, and required all drugs be on the formulary in 6 specific classes
(anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antineoplastics, antipsychotics, antiretrovirals, and
immune suppressants) (Hoadley et al 2006). But this does not restrict the prices charged.
Plans were also allowed to design a classification system that differed from the one CMS
used and were allowed to request exceptions to these coverage requirements; it is not
known how much these were used.
           One point to keep in mind here and in the out of pocket simulations conducted in
this paper is that the true impact of differences in drug prices and cost sharing across
plans may be smaller than measured to the extent that beneficiaries work with their
physicians to find drugs that are cheaper on their plan’s terms but are just as effective in
treating their condition-or to the extent that patients succeed in requesting that drugs they
take be covered or moved to a lower cost sharing tier. Similarly, the actual stringency of
step therapy approvals and prior authorization requests are not known, and would tend to
reduce the generosity of the plan.
           Some organizations have issued additional reports recently, including the Kaiser
Foundation in July 2006 on the extent to which Medicare Part D plans covers HIV
medications (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2006),24 and the Lewin Group in April 2006 on
the coverage of chronic conditions medications in different PDP plans (Lewin, 2006).
           There are several relevant papers that have anticipated the effects of Part D, e.g.
Stuart et al (2005) looks at how the benefit structure creates a ‘rollercoaster’ in drug
coverage during a year, Yang et.al (2004), Lucarelli (2006), Shang (2006) and Pizer et al
(2006) study how beneficiaries’ behavior and outcomes are likely to change in response


24
   The Kaiser Foundation website also contains a tool that allows one to look at the distribution of premiums within a region, among
other things.



                                                                 10
to the enhanced availability of drug coverage. But, to our knowledge, there is no
systematic analysis yet of actual Part D plan premiums.


5. Methods and Data
           Our paper will test the hypotheses above using data on premiums and plan
characteristics of plans offered during 2006. The CMS Landscape file contains basic
characteristics of each plan (premium, deductible, coverage during the gap, number of
top 100 drugs that are on the plan’s formulary or not etc), 25 but there are many other
ways in which plans may differ in generosity. Notably, the Landscape file does not tell us
about the prices of drugs faced by consumers under different plans. There is wide
variation in this regard as already shown in Hoadley et al (2006). These are the
characteristics of plans that are likely to be most relevant to consumers as they determine
out of pocket expenses.
           Our strategy in measuring plan generosity is to simulate out of pocket drug
expenses (not counting the premium) annually, as well as just under the initial coverage
zone (ICZ), for beneficiaries taking 10 hypothetical sets of drugs. They are not meant to
be representative of what any given beneficiary actually consumes, but rather these lists
contain the most widely used drugs, as well as drugs that are important for other reasons
explained in Hoadley et al (2006), thus would give us a good sense of the generosity of a
certain plan relative to others. We conduct this exercise for each of the 1,429 plans using
the plan finder tool on the CMS website.26 Ideally, we would want to see how the plan
treated the universe of all drugs. This is not feasible (the CMS plan finder tools allows a
maximum of 25 drugs at one time, and there tens of thousands of different drugs
available through Part D), nor would that be desirable, as simulating the out of pocket
costs involves pushing the person into the catastrophic region when the number of drugs
taken is large. Thus, to balance the desire to include as many drugs as possible but not to
give undue weight to catastrophic coverage features of a plan, we created different drug
lists that contained all the top 100 drugs among seniors as defined by CMS, 27 all the top

25
   This is available for download from [http://www.medicare.gov/medicarereform/map.asp] {access date May 2006}.
26
http://www.medicare.gov/MPDPF/Public/Include/DataSection/Questions/MPDPFIntro.asp?dest=NAV|Home|Questions|Welcome#Ta
bTop. We use Network Query Language to read directly from source pages to avoid any transcribing errors.
27
   Although CMS refers to there being a list of top 100 drugs (eg in saying that certain plans cover x/100 of the top 100 drugs), this list
was not made publicly available (MedPAC, 2006). We obtained this list from a participating insurer and verified it against a list used
by a state publicly in its consumer information.



                                                                   11
200 drugs by sales in 2004, and all the disease specific drugs identified in Hoadley et al
(2006). These fit into 8 lists of 25 drugs each. We then created two additional drug lists
which consisted of the top 5, and a random set of 5 drugs, from the top 100 drugs in order
to give weight to the initial coverage zones of the plans. These 10 lists can be seen in
Appendix Table A3. For all 10 lists, we also specifically measured the monthly out of
pocket costs under just the initial coverage zone of the plan. Together, the simulated
generosity measures generated by these lists should represent a comprehensive way to
gauge the plan, rather than entering each drug price under each coverage region
separately. We also create an average of the 10 simulated measures for the annual and the
ICZ measures, as we find high correlation between the different measures.
           With additional queries on the plan finder tool, we also recovered the full price of
a drug listed by an insurer, as well as the prices under the different coverage zones for
each plan for each of the 200 or so drug.28 In Appendix Table A3, we also show the
average full price for the top 25 drugs.29As the CMS drug tool requests dosage and
monthly quantities when creating drug lists, we consulted with an academic-hospital
based pharmacist and a practicing pharmacist to ensure that we entered the most common
dosages of the drugs.
           As noted already, these measures will differ from actual simulated costs to the
extent that patients are able to switch to different drugs that are covered. If the degree of
switching is constant across plans, this should not affect us, but if there is more ability to
switch in more generous plans, this is a caveat that should be kept in mind. We are
similarly unable to gauge the extent of non-price utilizations measures, such prior
authorization. To correct for this, we use a measure of the number of top 100 drugs for
which the plan requires prior authorization, which is included in the CMS Landscape file.
           We obtain two measures of insurer characteristics from other CMS data sets. We
use the recently released Part D enrollment file to calculate the parent organization’s
market share in the non-PDP market, 30 and we use the Medicare Complaint Tracking



28
   As can be seen from descriptive statistics presented later, we were not able to find prices for all plans for all lists. In most cases, this
was due to CMS not including certain plans in certain months-presumably due to insurer failure to include prices. We collected prices
in June and July of 2006-and when we returned to re-collect missing data in August, the website format had changed so that the ‘drug
details’ page is no longer available. We use the top 25 list which has all but two insurers included.
29
   The top 25 list of drugs actually translated to only 24 drugs as two drugs on the CMS list only matched to one on the plan finder
tool. We nevertheless continue to refer to this as the “top 25” drugs throughout the paper.
30
   This is available at http://www.cms.hhs.gov/prescriptiondrugcovgenin/02_enrollmentdata.asp?



                                                                     12
Module for the consumer complaint rate for PDP plans (complaints per 1,000 enrollees)
in the general, 31 and the general number excluding the pricing complaints categories.32
           The last set of variables we add to this database is market (PDP region)
characteristics from the Kaiser Foundation’s State Health Facts website. These include
the total number of Medicare beneficiaries in the region,33 the percent in Medicare
Advantage as of 2005,34 the percent who are under 150% of FPL in 2004,35 the percent
who are dual eligible in 2003,36 and the number of prescriptions taken per capita in that
region37. When data were missing from State Health Facts for population characteristics
(% of population over 65 under 150% of poverty), we used March Current Population
Survey data to create an average from the three most recent years. Ideally, we would
capture the size of the market as those Medicare beneficiaries who do not currently have
drug coverage as generous as part D in terms of coverage and premiums. As there is no
known measure of this by region, we use the total number of Medicare beneficiaries,
conditional on the distribution in Medicare Advantage and in Medicaid. We also include
the number of unique insurers in the market which we create from the plan data.
           Our data set consists of one observation for each of 1,429 plans that were offered
in the PDP market. We test the predictions presented in the Hypotheses section through
OLS regressions of the form
(2) Pij = f ( Xi, Xj , ε )
where Xi, consists of plan characteristics described above, and Xj consists of region-
specific attributes. We first run regressions of the form Pij = f ( Xi, ε ) where the only
plan measure is the 10 alternative simulated out of pocket expenses, for the annual
version as well as just the initial coverage zone (ICZ). These results are presented in
Table 2. We next explore whether we can present results from just one average index for

31
   These data are available only for June 2006, and come from
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/PrescriptionDrugCovContra/downloads/MemoCompliancePerformance_06.30.06.pdf
32
   We subtract out the pricing section measure as it is not clear whether this refers to pricing of the drugs or the premiums, and because
these are determined using 2006 data and could be endogenous to pricing.
33
   The Kaiser Family Foundation, statehealthfacts.org.CMS Statistics: Medicare State Enrollment, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, website at http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MedicareEnRpts/m
34
   The Kaiser Family Foundation, statehealthfacts.org. Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. analysis of CMS Geographic Service Area
Files.
35
   The Kaiser Family Foundation, statehealthfacts.org.Kaiser Family Foundation estimates based on the Census Bureau'        s March 2005
Current Population Survey (CPS: Annual Social and Economic Supplement).
36
   The Kaiser Family Foundation, statehealthfacts.org. Urban Institute estimates based on data from the Medicaid Statistical
Information System (MSIS) prepared for the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.
37
   The Kaiser Family Foundation, statehealthfacts.org. Calculations based on Vector One(TM):National from Verispan, L.L.C.: Special
Data Request, 2005 and U.S. Census Bureau, Annual Population Estimate, http://www.census.gov/popest/datasets.html.
This variable is for the whole population, not just those over age 65. In future versions, we hope to calculate a measure for those over
age 65 from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey.



                                                                   13
brevity, and continue to a regression specification that includes other measures that our
discussion suggests may be important. Table 4 contains the results from these
regressions, where the set of plan characteristics are: the average index across all drug
lists for the annual out of pocket measure; an indicator for whether the plan is LIS-
eligible; and the number of top 100 drugs that need prior authorization. The market
characteristics are: the per capita number of prescriptions used; the number of dual
Medicaid-Medicaid eligible people (in thousands); the percent of the region’s seniors
who are in Medicare Advantage; the number of Medicare beneficiaries in the region (in
thousands); the percent of seniors in the region under 150% FPL; and the number of
insurers in the market. We estimate three different specifications; one for all plans, one
excluding enhanced plans, and the last excluding LIS eligible plans. In Table 5 we
include an alternative set of plan characteristics that excludes the out of pocket measures,
but includes the same set of market characteristics. The new plan characteristics are:
average negotiated price for the top 25 drugs; the number of top 100 drugs on the
formulary; whether the plan covers generics in the gap (brand as well or only generic);
whether the plan is actuarially equivalent or enhanced, as opposed to standard; the annual
drug deductible; whether the plan is LIS eligible; and the number of top 100 drugs
needing prior authorization. In unreported results, we added the out of pocket (average
across all drug lists) measure, for this top 25 average price list and for a few other drug
lists. These results showed that the information contained in the drug list is part of our out
of pocket generosity measure, and the inclusion of the out of pocket measure caused the
coefficients on the drug price variable to diminish to be statistically insignificantly
different from zero. Thus, our last table, Table 6, goes back to using our comprehensive
out of pocket measure (instead of the drug price variable) and includes all the plan
characteristics and region characteristics included thus far. It shows the effects of
accounting for parent organization fixed effects as well as different levels (parent
organization, formulary and plan name) clustering of standard errors.


6. Descriptive Statistics
       A high degree of price dispersion characterizes the Medicare PDP market, as can
be seen from the first histograms in Figure 3 of monthly premiums for all 1,429 plans.
The second histogram in Figure 3 shows the distributions once we remove enhanced


                                              14
plans, which have an unsubsidized component. This reduces the right tail of the
distribution as enhances plans are on average $10 more a month. The next set of
histograms show the distribution of the simulated out of pocket measures of the plans
(just the annual measures, which we divide by 12 to make comparable with monthly
premiums). There are 11 shown; the first is the average of the 10 lists. This shows a fair
degree of variation that is less normally distributed relative to premiums. Most of the
indices have a set of plans closely situated together in a somewhat normal distribution,
with some plans always being outliers. Inspecting the data revealed that the plans that
were outliers in one index tended to also be outliers in all indices.
       As these indices reflect plan differences in prices negotiated with pharmacy
networks, in the formulary, in how drugs are ‘tiered’ as well as in copays attached to
different tiers in different coverage zones, we separate out the portion that resulted from
price negotiations by showing the histograms in Figure 5. The distribution of negotiated
drug prices is similar in that there are some plans that are consistent outliers; moreover,
these tended to be the same insurers who were outliers in Figure 5. This suggests that
variation in negotiated prices may be responsible for a large part of variation in the
simulated out of pocket costs across plans.
       Table 1 shows the sample statistics of our data set. For most variables, we have
information on the universe of plans-notable exceptions are prices of certain drug lists as
explained above. Overall, this is a market where average premiums are $37.43 a month,
with a standard deviation of $12.86.


7. Regression Results
       The first regression results we present test the theory that premiums should reflect
the generosity (OOP) of the plan. In Table 2, each coefficient represents a different
regression where monthly premiums are regressed on just one generosity index. In the
first column, there are 10 different indices showing a plan’s annual OOP divided by 12,
and in the second the index measures the OOP per month in the first coverage zone. The
sign on all the different drug lists used in both ways of measuring generosity indicate that
premiums rise with the out of pocket payments of the plan, contrary to a simple set up of
competitive insurance markets where premiums reflect only generosity along this
measure. A log/log specification (not shown) indicated an elasticity of .13 of the


                                              15
premium with respect to the annual monthly average of out of pocket expenses for the top
5 drugs.
         Our intention in using multiple drug lists was to see whether our results would be
sensitive to the types of medications and the coverage zones under consideration. The
results so far indicate that the different indices move in similar ways. In Table 3 we show
the correlation coefficients between the different indices. These are consistently high,
regardless of whether we look at all coverage zones or just the initial one. In unreported
results, we also looked at the correlation between the initial and all coverage zones
measure for each drug list, and found those also to be high. Those correlation coefficients
varied between .91 and .98 with the average being about .95. We also looked at the extent
to which the average prices of the drugs on the list were correlated with the generosity
measures. The range was between .45 and .93 and was very similar for the annual OOP
measure as it was for the ICZ measure. Thus, from here on our regressions mainly use a
comprehensive measure that averages between the 10 lists, and only presents the annual
index.
         The institutional details of the market suggest that certain plan, ownership unit
and market characteristics may influence premiums, and our next specification presents
those results. Table 4 shows that the out of pocket measure is still positive and
statistically significant, although its magnitude is fairly small (0.004 in the first column)
as in the earlier set of results. This implies that as the out of pocket expenses rises on
average by one dollar (per month), the premium rises by four tenths of one cent (per
month). The number of drugs placed on prior authorization is statistically significant in
the first and third columns, indicating that placing one more drug on the PA list will
increase monthly premiums by 11 to 19 cents. In contrast to the generosity measure,
whether the plan is designated LIS-eligible reduces the premium by 16 to 14 dollars a
month, about 40% of the average premium of plans. If the plans that were eventually
designated LIS eligible are ones that plans anticipated will meet that target because the
insurers anticipated the benchmark correctly, this indicates that plans valued this feature
substantially, holding plan generosity constant. In terms of market characteristics, plans
that have more dual eligible members in the region are priced slightly lower and this is
not statistically significantly different from zero in non LIS plans. The percent of
Medicare beneficiaries who were in managed care entities in 2005 has an impact on


                                              16
premiums-having one more percentage point in managed care in 2005 lowers premiums
by 16 to 19 cents per month. The total number of Medicare beneficiaries in the region
increasing by one thousand increases the premium by two tenths of a cent a month in the
first specification, but is not statistically significant in others. Having one more
percentage point of the population under 150% FPL (the qualification for the premium
subsidy) increases the premiums by 18 to 22 cents a month. This result is consistent with
the possibility that plans expected lower price elasticity in these regions because of the
premium subsidy. On the other hand, it is surprising if we expected that this also captured
general poverty in the region, in which case we could expect insurers to set lower
premiums in these regions. The number of insurers in the market does not affect the
premium in any statistically significant manner. In unreported results, we added the two
questionable market measures-the MA market share and the complaint rate. Both were
statistically insignificant when we clustered standard errors at the parent organization
level, but when we did not, the complaint rate variable was negative and statistically
significant.
        Table 5 contains the results from a model that excludes the out of pocket measure
but includes alternative plan characteristics. It shows that plans with lower listed drug
prices have lower premiums. The magnitude suggests that the average drug price in the
top 25 drugs increasing by one dollar increases monthly premiums by 64 cents, which is a
substantial pass-through of negotiated prices to gain enrollment through lower premiums.
As mentioned, there are two reasons why this should be interpreted cautiously- drug
prices do not necessarily reflect the rebates that may be negotiated, and the CMS website
may sometimes have shown enrollees imputed prices when plans failed to submit them.
In unreported regressions, we included both the out of pocket generosity measures along
with the drug prices of 5 lists for which we had prices for over 1,000 plans, and this
inclusion always caused the drug price variable to become statistically insignificant, as
one would expect because the out of pocket calculation takes drug prices into account.
For this reason, we exclude drug prices but include the out of pocket spending variables
in later regressions in Table 6.
        Table 5 also shows that including more top 100 drugs on the formulary increases
premiums by 26 cents per drug, and including coverage in the gap adds $9 (generics) to
$23 (generics and brand). Being an actuarially equivalent plan adds $3 relative to a


                                              17
standard design, indicating that insurers believed that deviating from the standard design
would be popular among beneficiaries. Once we account for gap coverage, enhanced
plans do not sell for more than standard plans. Premiums fall by almost one cent for
every dollar increase in the annual deductible, and being a LIS plan reduces premiums
again by a substantial amount; $14. The effect of prior authorization lists and the average
Rx use in the region are not statistically significant effects. The number of dual eligibles
in the region decreases premiums, as does the percent of beneficiaries in managed care
products. The size of the Medicare population in a region and the percent of them who
are eligible for a premium subsidy lead to increases in premiums.
       We then proceed to include only the average OOP measure in Table 6, where we
include all other control variables used so far and explore the sensitivity of our results to
various assumptions about the structure of the variance-covariance matrix. The first
column of Table 6 shows the same specification as Table 5 except we use the average
OOP measure instead of drug prices. The second column clusters the standard errors by
parent organization. There are 51 unique parent organizations in the data. The only
results that lose statistical significance is the $3 associated with actuarially equivalent
plans, and the effect of the annual deductible. The effect of the number of dual eligibles
in the region and the size of the Medicare population gain statistical significance. Next,
we cluster standard errors at the level of the fomulary behind the plan; there are 101
different formularies used. CMS reports which plans share formularies (recall that this
does not necessarily mean that they share the same cost sharing structure). The results are
virtually unchanged from column 2, as is the case where we cluster on plan name (there
are 361 different plan names). The last column includes parent organization fixed
effects. Using variation within an insurer yields results similar in sprit to the other
regressions for most of the variables, although the magnitudes vary somewhat. The
magnitude of the OOP measure is even smaller than before, but is still positive and
statistically significant. The drug deductible again has a negative and statistically
significant effect on premiums. Within a plan, premiums are $9 lower for LIS plans, a
number that is about $3 smaller than all plans in general. However, this suggests that the
LIS variable is not simply capturing random low-prices as even within an insurer, the
plan designated as the LIS one is on average 9 dollars cheaper even after controlling for




                                              18
all else.38 The adjusted R2 of this regression is 0.82, as opposed to about .6 when parent
fixed effects are not included.
           As a final robustness check, we estimated this last column excluding two insurers
whose strategies may not be representative of others. UHC-Pacificare and Humana went
on to command a large share of eventual enrollment,39 and while this may be an
indication of a successful premium setting strategy, we would like to see if the basic
stories told here hold for other insurers too. An inspection of the fixed effect for Humana
in the earlier fixed effects specifications shows that relative to Aetna, Humana’s
coefficient is 25 dollars less (standard error of $1.2), consistent with the strategy
announced by Humana (Bertko, 2005). However, the regression results are strikingly
similar when the 93 plans belonging to Humana were dropped from the 1429 plans. We
next dropped UCH-Pacificare, whose fixed effect was only 3 dollars less (standard error
of $1.01) relative to Aetna. After dropping the 174 plans that belonged to this insurer, the
results were once again strikingly similar to the results using the full set of plans.
8. Discussion
           This paper takes a first look at factors that theory suggests would be important in
setting premiums in this highly regulated Medicare PDP market. We create simulated out
of pocket measures that capture many features of a plan’s generosity that are not easily
available for research. We find that simulated out of pocket measurers consistently fail to
show a negative relationship with premiums. This is potentially due to the fact that
insurers appear to have followed very different strategies as shown by the insurer fixed
effect coefficients. We find some evidence that lower drug prices are reflected in lower
premiums, but the fact that rebates are not measured and that there is some doubt as to the
quality of the data suggest caution in interpretation until CMS clarifies this issue.
           Several other factors appear to have been influential in plan premium setting, such
as targeting the automatic enrollment of dual Medicaid-Medicare enrollees (although
these results have to be interpreted with caution as they assume that insurers had
reasonable expectation of the benchmarks they would need to reach). Other regional
characteristics such as the share of the Medicare market already in managed care

38
   We also estimated Table 6 without the low-income eligible subsidy indicator and found our results to be qualitatively unchanged,
except for the coefficients on the plan type (actuarially equivalent and enhanced) indicators.
39
   The largest PDP parent organization enrolled 27% of the market (UHC-Pacificare), and the second (Humana) enrolled 18%. There
are 3 other parent organizations with more than 5% of enrollment each (Wellpoint Inc, Member Health Inc and WelllCare Health
Plans Inc) (CMS, 2006).



                                                                19
products appear to matter, although our predictions regarding this variable were
ambiguous.
       The risk management strategies and community rating used in this market may
have encouraged plans to concentrate more on increasing the size of the client base rather
than selectively enrolling a few good risks, although this will be known only once
detailed enrollment data are available.
       Several caveats hold, some of which are stated above. In interpreting these results,
it is important to keep in mind that the measures of generosity and PDP market
characteristics are only approximations to what is probably included in an insurer’s
sophisticated actuarial model, and the only intention of this paper is to test certain
theories rather than mimic the insurer’s model. The factors that drive second and
subsequent year pricing are likely to change-for example, if one expects inertia in plan
choice, then the incentive may be greatest to enroll customers the first year when they are
most elastic in their enrollment decisions. The first year may also represent a shot in the
dark, and insurers may refine their strategies as they gain more experience in this market.
It will be important to monitor the pricing behavior of plans in future years as new data
become available starting October 15th 2006.
       .




                                              20
8. Bibliography

Bertko J. Medicare: Humana’s Strategic Actuarial Positioning. Presentation at Medicare
Educational Session with Bear Stearns Investors, New York, N.Y. October 12, 2005 and
cited in Gold, 2006. (Accessed by authors at http://media.corporate-
ir.net/media_files/irol/92/92913/medicare.pdf, July, 2006).

Bresnahan T, Reiss P. Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets. Journal of
Political Economy 1991;99 (5); 977-1009.

Brown R, Clement D, Hill J, and Retchin S, Bergeron J. Do Health Maintenance
Organizations Work for Medicare? Health Care Financing Review 1993; 15:7-23.

CBO. A Detailed Description of CBO’s Cost Estimates for the Medicare Prescription
Drug Benefit. Technical Report; Congressional Budget Office 2004 .

Coulson NE, Stuart B. Persistence in the Use of Pharmaceuticals by the Elderly. Journal
of Health Economics, 1992;11(3), 315-328.

Frakt A. and Pizer S. “A First Look at the New Medicare Prescription Drug Plans”
Health Affairs 2006;25; 252-261.

Gold M.a. The Landscape of Private Firms Offering Medicare
Prescription Drug Coverage in 2006. Kaiser Family Foundation report. March 2006.

Gold M. b. Premiums and Cost-Sharing Features in Medicare’s New Prescription Drug
Program, 2006 Kaiser Family Foundation report. May 2006.

Hoadley J . The Effect of Formularies and Other Cost Management
Tools on Access to Medications: An Analysis of the MMA and the Final Rule. Kaiser
Family Foundation. 2005.

Hoadley J, Hargrave E, Cubanski, J and Neuman, T. An In-Depth Examination of
Formularies and Other Features of Medicare Drug Plans. Kaiser Family Foundation
report. 2006.

Kaiser Family Foundation. The Role of Part D for People with HIV/AIDS:
Coverage and Cost of Antiretrovirals Under Medicare Drug Plans. July 2006.

Kaiser Family Foundation. Medicare Advantage Factsheet. April 2005.

Lucarelli, C. An Analysis of the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit. Ph.D. Dissertation,
The University of Pennsylvania. 2006.

Lewin Associates. Chronic Health Conditions & the New Medicare Part D Benefit:
Savings on Frequently Used Medications. Lewin Associates report. April 2006.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC). Report to the Congress: Issues in a
modernized Medicare program, June 2005.



                                           21
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC). Report to the Congress: Increasing
the value of Medicare, June 2006.

Morgan, R, Virnig, B, DeVito, C and Persily, N. The Medicare-HMO Revolving Door--
The Healthy Go In and the Sick Go Out. The New England Journal of Medicine.
1997;337;3; 169-75.

Pauly, M and Zeng, Y. Adverse Selection and the Challenges to Stand-Alone Prescription
Drug Insurance. NBER Working Paper #9919. 2003.

Pizer, S, Feldman, R and Frakt, A. STORMCLOUDS ON THE HORIZON:
Adverse Selection Predicted for Medicare Prescription Drug Plans. Working paper. 2006.

Riley, G, Tudor, C, Chiang, Y, and Ingber, P. Health Status of Medicare Enrollees in
HMOs and Fee-for-service in 1994. Health Care Financing Review 1994;17; 65-76.

Shang, B. The Cost and Health Effects of Prescription Drug Coverage and Utilization in
the Medicare Population. Ph.D. Dissertation 2006. Pardee Rand Graduate School.

U.S. Congress. Public Law 108-173. Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and
Modernization Act of 2003.

Dowd, B, Feldman, R, Moscovice, I, and Wisner, C. An Analysis of
Selectivity Bias in the Medicare AAPCC. Health Care Financing Review 1996;17; 3557.

Rogers, J and Smith, K. Do Medicare HMOs Reduce Fee-for-Service Costs?
Price Waterhouse: Washington, D.C. 1995.

Stuart, B, Briesacher, B, Shea, D, Cooper, B, Baysac, F and Limcangco, M.R. Riding The
Rollercoaster: The Ups And Downs In Out-Of-Pocket Spending Under The Standard
Medicare Drug Benefit. Health Affairs 2005;24; 1022-1031.

Wennberg, J, Fisher, E and Skinner, J. Geography and the Debate over Medicare Reform.
Health Affairs 2002. Web Exclusive W96.

Wennberg, J, and Wennberg, D. Practice Variation and Use of Prescription Drugs
(Chapter 7) Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care Michigan. 2006. Available at
http://www.bcbsm.com/atlas/practice.shtml

Yang, Z, Gilleskie, D, and Norton, E. Prescription Drugs, Medical Care, and Health
Outcomes: A Model of Elderly Health Dynamics. NBER Working paper No. 10964.
2004.




                                           22
Figure 1: The Design of Part D Drug
Coverage




                                                                              Catastrophic coverage




                                                 Doughnut hole

       Deductible
                        Initial Coverage




Note:
The graph above shows how the insurance benefit translates total prescription drug costs
(x axis) to out of pocket costs for a beneficiary (y axis). Source: Author depiction of
standard plan details announced by CMS.

Figure 2:




        Source: CMS (http://www.cms.hhs.gov/PrescriptionDrugCovGenIn/Downloads/PDPRegions.pdf)




                                                       23
Figure 3: Distributions of Premiums
                                                        Distribution of Premiums, All Plans                                                                                           Distribution of Premiums, Without Enhanced Plans




         .04




                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                                                                                                                                    .04
         .03




                                                                                                                                                      .03
  Density




                                                                                                                                                Density
   .02




                                                                                                                                                    .02
         .01




                                                                                                                                                    .01
         0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                     0                   20                    40                60                     80                         100                      0                           20                        40                                     60                 80
                                                             Monthly premiumin 2006 dollars                                                                                                            Monthly premiumin 2006 dollars




Figure 4: Distribution of Out of Pocket Spending

                               Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                                 Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                               Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones
      .002




                                                                                                                    .015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .005
      . 0015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .004
                                                                                                                    .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .003
 D ensity




                                                                                                              Density




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Density
  .001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .002
                                                                                                                    .005
      5. 0e-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .001
      0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                         500             1000             1500         2000                           2500                     0                          500                          1000                                 1500                          0           500              1000             1500                     2000
                                   Average of the 10 Annual OOP Measures (/12)
                                                                                                                                                    Monthly Average of Annual OOPfor Top 25 Drugs                                                               Monthly Average of Annual OOP for #26-50 of Top 100


                               Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                            Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                                    Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones
                                                                                                                        .008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .05
     .006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .04
                                                                                                                        .006
      .004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .03
                                                                                                               Density
Density




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Density
                                                                                                                .004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .02
     .002




                                                                                                                        .002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .01
                                                                                                                        0
     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                 0                   500              1000             1500                            2000                    200                400             600              800                                 1000                               0                   50                   100                            150
                               Monthly Average of Annual OOP for #51-75 of Top 100                                                         Monthly Average of Annual OOP for #76-100 of Top 100                                                               Monthly Average of Annual OOP for Random 5 from Top 100


                               Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                                Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                                   Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones
     4.0e-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .0015
                                                                                                                    .008
     3.0e-04




                                                                                                                    .006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .001
 Density




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Density
                                                                                                              Density
2.0e-04




                                                                                                               .004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5.0e-04
     1.0e-04




                                                                                                                    .002
     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                    0




                 0                                 5000                           10000                                              400            600                800               1000             1200       1400                           0              1000                      2000                    3000      4000
                                  Ditto for Remainder of Top 200 by Sales in 2004                                                               Ditto for Set 1 of Top Disease List, not elsewhere listed                                                          Ditto for Set 3 of Top Disease List, not elsewhere listed



                                     Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                          Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones
                                                                                                                   .04
    .006




                                                                                                                   .03
       .004




                                                                                                              Density
Density




                                                                                                               .02
    .002




                                                                                                                   .01
                                                                                                                   0
    0




                         400             600               800               1000              1200    1400                    0                         50                           100                            150
                                     Ditto for Set 2 of Top Disease List, not elsewhere listed                                                     Monthly Average of Annual OOPfor Top 5 Drugs




                                                                                                                                                                             24
Figure 5: Distribution of Negotiated Drug Prices
                                                                                                                   Distribution of Average Drug Prices by List                                            Distribution of Average Drug Prices by List
                   Distribution of Average Drug Prices by List




                                                                                       .2
   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                       .25
                                                                                       .15




                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
   .3




                                                                                                                                                                                        .15
                                                                                    Density




                                                                                                                                                                                    Dens ity
D ens ity




                                                                                     .1
  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                       .05
   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                       .05
                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                       0
   0




             20        25                 30               35                  40             45              50                55                 60                   65   70                    50         55                   60                65     70
                            Average Price for Top 25 Drugs                                                             Average Price for #26-50 of Top 100                                                     Average Price for #51-75 of Top 100




                                                                                                                       Distribution of OOP Spending, First Coverage Zone
                        Distribution of OOP Spending, All Coverage Zones                                                                                                                                Distribution of OOP Spending, First Coverage Zone
      .008




                                                                                                   .005




                                                                                                                                                                                         .04
                                                                                                   .004
      .006




                                                                                                                                                                                         .03
                                                                                                  .003
                                                                                              Density
  Density




                                                                                                                                                                                     Density
   .004




                                                                                                                                                                                      .02
                                                                                                   .002
      .002




                                                                                                                                                                                         .01
                                                                                                   .001
      0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                   0




             200          400                  600                   800             1000                 0                       500                         1000           1500              0                   50                          100               150
                         Monthly Average of Annual OOPfor #76-100 of Top 100                                              First Coverage Zone Monthly OOPfor Top 25 Drugs                                  First Coverage Zone Monthly OOPfor Top 5 Drugs




                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                           Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Variable                                                                                                     N          Mean       St. Dev.     Min           Max
Monthly premium                                                                                                  1429      37.43        12.86         1.87     104.89
Indicator for being an LIS eligible plan                                                                         1429       0.29        0.45          0.00        1.00
# of top 100 drugs on the formulary                                                                              1429      93.44        6.63      75.00        100.00
# of top 100 drugs needing prior authorization                                                                   1429       9.56        9.06       0.00         44.00
# of top 100 with copays under $20 in ICZ                                                                        1264      61.35       13.15      20.00         95.00
Annual drug deductible                                                                                           1429      92.25      115.79       0.00        250.00
# Medicare beneficiaries in region (in thousands)                                                                1429   1,256.23      933.07      51.15       4,157.83
Percent of seniors under 150% FPL in 2004 in region                                                              1429      24.22        5.25      15.69          41.00
# Dual eligible in region (in thousands) in 2003                                                                 1429     191.00      185.38       9.00         955.00
Average # drugs per capita in region, 2004                                                                       1429      10.87        2.17       6.50          15.50
% of Medicare beneficiaries in MMC in region, in 2005                                                            1429      11.09        9.80       0.00          33.36
Average Full price for List 1 (top 25)                                                                           1400      28.91        3.63      23.29         37.77
Average Full price for List 2 (26-50)                                                                             813      53.33        7.31       44.28         69.25
Average Full price for List 3 (51-75)                                                                            1129      56.84        6.67       48.17         70.55
Average Full price for List 4 (76-100)                                                                            813      53.33        7.31       44.28         69.25
Average Full price for List 6 (rest of top sales)                                                                1328     419.06       13.01      275.84        446.27
Average Full price for List 7 (first set of remainder of disease specific list)                                  1127      47.42        3.38       41.97         53.68
Average Full price for List 8 (second set of remainder of disease specific list                                   615      49.04        3.88       42.16         55.13
Average Full price for List 9 (third set of remainder of disease specific list)                                  1125     146.27        3.69      137.06        155.13
Average monthly OOP List 10                                                                                      1429      62.76       28.29       19.96        137.22
Average monthly OOP List 3                                                                                       1429     660.88      379.86      343.43      1,744.37
Average monthly OOP List 2                                                                                       1429     668.87      387.12      326.45      1,682.46
Average monthly OOP List 6                                                                                       1429   3,684.93    2,613.98      644.11     11,207.90
Average monthly OOP List 4                                                                                       1429     516.23      184.60      253.10      1,024.02
Average monthly OOP List 5                                                                                       1429      56.08       32.38       14.96        150.54
Average monthly OOP List 8                                                                                       1429     702.60      311.43      325.10      1,356.82
Average monthly OOP List 9                                                                                       1429   2,259.54    1,080.52      409.35      3,818.18
Average monthly OOP List 7                                                                                       1429     603.74      280.19      311.27      1,357.59
Average monthly OOP List 1                                                                                       1429     484.44      307.31      275.43      1,411.73
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 10                                                                                      1429      58.28       31.14       19.31        137.18
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 3                                                                                       1429     713.16      368.22      301.04      1,744.33
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 2                                                                                       1429     672.84      382.27      264.56      1,682.42
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 6                                                                                       1429   5,217.91    2,593.53    1,085.97     11,207.87
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 4                                                                                       1429     452.34      196.72      205.46      1,023.98
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 5                                                                                       1429      51.54       34.26       15.00        150.50
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 8                                                                                       1429     672.91      279.37      263.52      1,356.78
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 9                                                                                       1429   2,421.42      939.60      540.93      3,772.43
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 7                                                                                       1429     675.96      251.36      262.33      1,357.55
Monthly OOP in ICZ, List 1                                                                                       1429     398.01      336.70      134.47      1,411.69
Indicator for actuarially equivalent plan                                                                        1429       0.48        0.50        0.00          1.00
Indicator for standard plan design                                                                               1429       0.09        0.29        0.00          1.00
Indicator for enhanced plan design                                                                               1429       0.43        0.49        0.00          1.00
Covers generics in the gap                                                                                       1429       0.13        0.34        0.00          1.00
Covers generics and brand name drugs in the gap                                                                  1429       0.02        0.15        0.00          1.00
Parent co.’s share in 2006 MA market                                                                             1429       0.04        0.07        0.00          0.19
Parent co.’s PDP complaint rate in 2006                                                                          1294       3.03        1.37         0.3           6.3
Number of unique insurers in the region                                                                          1429       15.5        1.89          10            19




                                                                                        26
Table 2: Effect of Out of Pocket (OOP) Indices on Premiums
                         Average monthly
  Index based on List#        OOP          Monthly OOP in ICZ
List 10                           0.025**               0.051***
                                    (0.01)                (0.01)
List 3                           0.003***               0.003***
                                  (0.001)               (0.001)
List 1                           0.006***               0.005***
                                  (0.001)               (0.001)
List 7                           0.006***               0.009***
                                  (0.001)               (0.001)
List 9                           0.001***               0.002***
                                 (0.0003)             (0.0004)
List 8                             0.0005                0.003**
                                  (0.001)               (0.001)
List 5                            0.025**               0.048***
                                    (0.01)                (0.01)
List 4                            0.004**               0.008***
                                  (0.002)               (0.002)
List 6                           0.001***             0.0008***
                                 (0.0001)             (0.0001)
List 2                           0.006***               0.007***
                                 (0.0009)             (0.0009)
Average of all lists             0.005***             0.004***
                                 (0.0007)             (0.0007)

Observations                             1429                     1429
Standard errors in parentheses. ICZ stands for initial coverage zone
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                 27
             Table 3: Correlation Coefficients Between Different Out-of-pocket Measures
                                                        Average monthly OOP
      List     1          2          3           4           5         6                  7           8            9           10
       1           1.00
       2           0.88       1.00
       3           0.93       0.84       1.00
       4           0.89       0.85       0.93        1.00
       5           0.92       0.84       0.88        0.88        1.00
       6           0.80       0.77       0.83        0.80        0.73       1.00
       7           0.84       0.79       0.83        0.88        0.80       0.89              1.00
       8           0.68       0.68       0.76        0.81        0.65       0.87              0.84         1.00
       9           0.47       0.46       0.56        0.65        0.45       0.74              0.73         0.83        1.00
      10           0.82       0.75       0.83        0.78        0.88       0.71              0.71         0.69        0.45           1
                                                            Monthly OOP in ICZ
      List     1          2          3           4             5          6               7           8            9           10
        1          1.00
        2          0.86       1.00
        3          0.91       0.81       1.00
        4          0.92       0.86       0.93        1.00
        5          0.93       0.86       0.90        0.97        1.00
        6          0.72       0.64       0.74        0.67        0.66         1.00
        7          0.81       0.74       0.85        0.87        0.84         0.79            1.00
        8          0.77       0.67       0.82        0.82        0.77         0.82            0.90         1.00
        9          0.45       0.38       0.55        0.52        0.44         0.78            0.64         0.69        1.00
       10          0.82       0.78       0.88        0.91        0.89         0.60            0.82         0.81        0.43           1
                              Table 4: Premium Regressions-Basic RHS variables
                                                                                                                   Non-LIS eligible
                                                                        All Plans       Non-Enhanced Plans             plans
Average (annual per month) OOP all lists                                0.004***               0.006***                 0.006***
                                                                        (0.0005)               (0.0004)                (0.0008)
LIS eligible plan                                                       -16.25***             -14.138***                    -
                                                                          (0.60)                 (0.46)                     -
# of top 100 drugs needing prior authorization                          0.115***                 -0.034                 0.187***
                                                                          (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.04)
Average # drugs per capita in region, 2004                                 0.087                  0.131                  0.071
                                                                          (0.14)                 (0.12)                  (0.18)
# Dual eligible in region (in thousands) in 2003                         -0.009*                -0.006*                  -0.009
                                                                         (0.005)                (0.004)                  (0.01)
% of Medicare beneficiaries in MMC in region, in 2005                   -0.164***              -0.195***               -0.159***
                                                                          (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.05)
# Medicare beneficiaries in region (in thousands)                        0.002*                   0.001                  0.002
                                                                         (0.001)                (0.001)                 (0.001)
Percent of seniors under 150% FPL in 2004 in region                     0.210***               0.181***                 0.222***
                                                                          (0.06)                 (0.05)                  (0.08)
Number of Insurers in the region                                          -0.044                 -0.073                  -0.015
                                                                         (0.181)                (0.152)                 (0.242)
Observations                                                                    1429                         821                   1020
R-squared                                                                        0.39                       0.64                    0.1
Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%



                                                                 28
Table 5: Premium Regressions: Including All RHS Variables Except OOP measure
                                Variable                                Coefficient
         Average drug price, List 1                                       0.639***
                                                                            (0.07)
         # of top 100 drugs on formulary                                  0.262***
                                                                            (0.04)
         Covers generics in gap                                           9.290***
                                                                            (0.85)
         Covers generics and brands in gap                               23.226***
                                                                            (1.72)
         Actuarially equivalent plan                                      3.035***
                                                                            (0.98)
         Enhanced plan                                                      1.001
                                                                            (1.32)
         Annual drug deductible                                          -0.008***
                                                                           (0.003)
         LIS eligible plan                                              -14.056***
                                                                            (0.67)
         # of top 100 drugs needing prior authorization                    -0.035
                                                                            (0.03)
         Average # drugs per capita in region, 2004                         0.068
                                                                            (0.13)
         # Dual eligible in region (in thousands) in 2003                 -0.009**
                                                                           (0.004)
         % of Medicare beneficiaries in MMC in region, in 2005           -0.168***
                                                                            (0.03)
         # Medicare beneficiaries in region (in thousands)                 0.002**
                                                                           (0.001)
         Percent of seniors under 150% FPL in 2004 in region              0.255***
                                                                            (0.05)
         Number of insurers in the region                                  -0.045
                                                                           (0.167)
         Observations                                                        1400
         R-squared                                                           0.54
         Standard errors in parentheses
         * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                              29
                   Table 6: Effect of Clustering Standard Errors and Adding Insurer Fixed Effects
                                                                              Cluster on   Cluster on plan
                                          No cluster or FE Cluster on P.O.     formulary        name       With P.O. FE
Average OOP all lists                           0.008***          0.008***      0.008***       0.008***      0.002***
                                                (0.001)            (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.001)
# of top 100 drugs on formulary                 0.411***           0.411*        0.418**        0.411*       0.511***
                                                 (0.04)             (0.23)        (0.21)        (0.22)         (0.04)
Covers generics in gap                          9.504***           9.504**      9.449**        9.504**       6.228***
                                                 (0.81)             (4.40)        (4.17)        (3.99)         (0.65)
Covers generics and brands in gap              22.741***         22.741***    22.740***       22.741***     37.794***
                                                 (1.61)             (5.08)        (3.91)        (5.37)         (1.25)
Actuarially equivalent plan                     3.017***            3.017          3.01         3.017          0.268
                                                 (0.93)             (2.36)        (2.54)        (2.89)         (0.78)
Enhanced plan                                     1.92               1.92         2.046           1.92         1.509
                                                 (1.24)             (4.98)        (3.92)        (4.99)         (1.11)
Annual drug deductible                          -0.01***            -0.01         -0.01*         -0.01      -0.022***
                                                (0.003)            (0.007)        (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.00)
LIS eligible plan                             -12.589***         -12.589***   -12.503***     -12.589***     -9.457***
                                                 (0.64)             (1.81)        (1.55)        (1.56)         (0.48)
# of top 100 drugs needing PA                    0.014              0.014         0.015         0.014        0.235***
                                                 (0.03)             (0.18)        (0.15)        (0.14)         (0.04)
Average # drugs per capita                       0.043              0.043         0.072         0.043          0.128
                                                 (0.12)             (0.09)        (0.07)        (0.07)         (0.08)
# Dual eligible in region                        -0.005           -0.005***     -0.006**      -0.005***      -0.005*
                                                (0.004)            (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
% of beneficiaries in MMC                      -0.145***          -0.145***    -0.139***      -0.145***     -0.134***
                                                 (0.03)             (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)
# Medicare beneficiaries                         0.001             0.001**       0.001*         0.001          0.001
                                                (0.001)            (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
Percent of seniors under 150% FPL               0.212***          0.212***      0.221***       0.212***      0.204***
                                                 (0.05)             (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.03)         (0.03)
Number of insurers in the region                  0.049             0.049         0.017         0.049         -0.029
                                                (0.157)            (0.176)       (0.133)       (0.114)        (0.105)
Observations                                      1429               1429          1425          1429           1429
R-squared                                          0.56              0.56          0.56           0.56          0.82
Standard errors in parentheses. P.O. stands for parent organization
(insurer)
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                 30
Appendix 1: Translating Medicare PDP Bids to Premiums

           Let Bij represents the bid of plan i in region j for coverage that is reinsured. CMS
computes the average (A) of the bids nationally for all the standard and actuarially
                                                  J ,I
equivalent plans (thus, A= 1/ N [                           Bij ] ).40 The premium for plan Pij will then be set at
                                                j =1,i =1


some fraction of the average bid A, plus (or minus) the amount by which plan ij’s bid was
above (or below) the national average A [Pij=Bij-A+xA]. The base premium, xA, is set
to meet CMS’s statutory requirement in terms of paying 74.5% of a plan’s total cost
(assuming no reinsurance). In other words, CMS is required to pay a certain percent
(74.5%) of the total private sector cost as subsidy, and they are doing so by taking
responsibility for the bulk of the catastrophic cost as well as by paying plans a certain
fixed amount prospectively. The average plan will have a total cost of TC , and a
premium P (which the customers see) of 0.255* TC . Assuming that the subsidy given in
the form of reinsurance is a fraction r of the total costs of coverage, [thus
0.255 TC =xA=x(1-r) TC so x=0.255/(1+r)] then we can express the average plan’s
premium as
           [A.1.] P =[0.255/(1-r)]A.
           Thus, the premium for plan ij is
           [A.2.] Pij=Bij-A+ [0.255/(1-r)]A.
           If r and A are constants from the firm’s perspective (even if A is not known ahead
of time), then their premium is just their bid minus a fixed amount. 41
           We illustrate the bidding process with an example in Table A.1., assuming for
simplicity that there are only 3 plans in the nation. Following CBO (2004), we assume
that plans estimate reinsurance to be worth a constant 27% of the total cost.42 In this




40
    The national average monthly bid for 2006 was $92.3 per covered life, as reported in a CMS press release
(http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Downloads/ptcd2006_20050809.pdf) In computing the national average in
subsequent years, the bids will be weighted by the plan’s average number of enrollees in the most recent reference month with data. In
2006, the stand-alone PDPs were weighted equally, and the MA-PD plans were weighted by their previous year’s enrollment.
41
   In practice, the reinsurance amount is calculated and paid out to plans at the end of the year based on actual experience.
42
   This is an estimate used by CBO (2004) but it is surprisingly consistent with the actual reinsurance rate that insurers used. As the
average national monthly bid for 2006 was $92.3, and the base beneficiary premium for 2006 was $32.2, we can work backwards
through formula [1]. This calculation shows that on average, plans estimated the reinsurance feature accounted for 27% of their total
cost. The base beneficiary premium of $32.3 can be found on CMS’s website, eg
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/apps/media/press/release.asp?Counter=1530



                                                                   31
example, the national average A corresponds to $100 per month. Thus, the base premium
is $35 per month by [A.1.] and the plans individual premiums are adjusted by Bij-A.
       Understanding the premium determination process has two implications. One is
that studying the determinants of the premium is equivalent to studying the ‘bid’, and
second that plans have incentives to offer lowest bid possible if they aim to attract
beneficiaries with lower premiums (for coverage that is equal in other ways). The direct
subsidy is paid prospectively to the firm as a fixed up-front dollar amount, with some risk
adjustments along age, sex, disability, and the presence of certain chronic conditions.43
       The second mechanism used to limit the insurance risk of the firms is the risk
corridor system. Under this system, plans that have actual costs that exceeded their
expected costs (after accounting for the reinsurance feature) by a sufficiently large
amount, may receive additional payments to compensate for those losses. In the same
way, if plans make larger than expected profits due to actual costs being lower than the
expected ones, the plans would have to return those extra profits to the government. For
years 2006 and 2007, the plans will be responsible for all the profits and losses that are
within a band of 2.5% from their expected costs. If the actual costs are bigger (smaller)
than the expected costs by more than 2.5% but less than 5% the government will pay
(receive) 75% of the amount in that range. If the actual costs differ with the expected
costs by more than 5% then the government will pay 80% of the amount beyond 5% in
the case of losses and receive 80% of the amount beyond 5% in the case of profits. Table
A2 illustrates how the risk corridor system works.
       In setting up the institutional relationship with insurers, CMS thus includes three
features-reinsurance, risk corridors and a risk adjustment of the prospective payment- to
reduce fears of adverse selection and incentives to cream skim. We next turn to
discussion additional institutional details as they affect beneficiaries.




43
  The exact coefficients that are used in risk adjustment can be found at
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/DrugCoverageClaimsData/02_RxClaims_PaymentRiskAdjustment.asp


                                              32
Appendix 2: Additional Subsidies Received by Low-income Beneficiaries
        In additional to the general subsidy of 74.5% of the average plan’s cost, MMA
also includes provisions regarding the coverage of low-income beneficiaries. The low-
income (defined as incomes being below 150% of the poverty level) elderly will receive
additional subsidies which will depend on their income and assets in specific ways. The
dual eligible population (those eligible for Medicare and Medicaid) will be automatically
enrolled by CMS in a low income subsidy (LIS) eligible plan, although they may switch
to another LIS eligible plan if they wish and continue to pay no premium, no deductible,
and not face a doughnut hole. They will pay no co-payments once they reach catastrophic
coverage, but they will face copayments before that point of roughly $1-3 for generics
and $2-5 for brand name drugs. The dual eligible population in nursing homes receives
their drugs at no charge always. The elderly that are not dual eligible but have incomes
below 135% of the federal poverty line will receive the same benefit as someone who is
dual eligible (and will be reimbursed a sum equal to the LIS benchmark for that region so
they are free to select a non-LIS plan and pay a nominal premium, and are not auto-
enrolled for obvious reasons) (Gold, 2006a). The non-dual eligible population that is
between 135% and 150% of poverty line will pay a premium that will increase along a
sliding scale up to the regular monthly payment for people above 150% of poverty line,
they will have a deductible of $50, and they will face a constant 15% coinsurance until
catastrophic coverage is reached, after which they will face a regular coinsurance rate of
5%. As the dual eligible population is randomly and equally enrolled in LIS plans,
insurance plans were expected to find it attractive to be given this designation to reduce
uncertainty in size of enrollment. A plan is LIS eligible if its submitted bid is below the
“low-income benchmark premium”. The benchmark is computed regionally as the greater
of the average premiums of PDPs and MA-PDs, and the lowest PDP premium (in case
this first number is lower than the lowest PDP, as only PDP plans will be designated
“LIS” eligible). Formally, the benchmark premium for LIS in region j is:
[A.3.] Kj=max{(1/(NPDP+NMA-PD))(      j   PijPDP +   j   PijMA-PD), mini{PijPDP}}
Where NPDP is the number of PDP plans, NMA-PD is the number of MA-PD plans, PijPDP is
the premium of PDP plan i in region j , and PijMA-PD is the premium of MA-PD plan i in
region j.



                                               33
Table A1: Hypothetical Example to Illustrate the Medicare Part D Bidding Process
Average amount in dollars per enrollee per                   Low-cost Plan          Average-cost          High-cost plan
month                                                                               Plan
Expected total cost (TCij)                                          127                  137                     147
Expected reinsurance payments (27% of line                          -34                  -37                     -40
1, rounded to nearest dollar)= r*TCij
Plan’s bid for providing coverage Bij                                93                    100                   107
Base Premium P(bar)                                                  35                     35                    35
Beneficiary Premium                                                  28                     35                    42

Premium as a share of Total Cost (%)                                22.0                  25.5                   28.5
Source: Adapted from CBO (2004)
Table A2: Example to illustrate risk reduction strategies used by CMS in the first year (2006)
(Average amount in dollars per enrollee per year)                      Plan 1              Plan2                Plan 3
Expected Cost                                                              1,500                 1,500             1,500
  -Expected reinsurance payments                                            500                  500                500
  =Net Expected Cost                                                       1000                  1000              1000
Actual Benefit Cost                                                        1,425                 1,485             1,650
   -Actual Federal Reinsurance Payments                                     475                  495                550
   =Net Actual Benefits                                                     950                  990               1,100
   Initial Profit/loss                                                       50                   10               -100
Risk corridor
     Between 2.5% and 5%                                                   -18.75                  0               18.75
     Above 5%                                                                0                     0               40.00
Total                                                                      -18.75                  0               58.75
 Final Profit/loss                                                         31.25                 10.00            -41.25
% difference between expected and actual costs                              5.0                   1.0              -10.0
Source: CBO (2004). Note: The plans will be responsible for all the profits and losses that are within a band of 2.5% from their
expected costs. If the actual costs are bigger (smaller) than the expected costs by more than 2.5% but less than 5% the government
will pay (receive) 75% of the amount in that range. If the actual costs differ with the expected costs by more than 5% then
the government will pay 80% of the amount beyond 5% in the case of losses and receive 80% of the amount beyond 5% in the case of
profits.:


Table A3: Drug Lists and Prices
                                                   Drug lists
               1     Drugs # 1-25 of top 100 list
               2     Drugs # 26-50 of top 100 list
               3     Drugs # 51-75 of top 100 list
               4     Drugs # 76-100 of top 100 list
               5     Random 5 drugs from the top 100 list
               6     Of those drugs on top 200 of sales in 2004, ones not collected elsewhere
               7     Disease specific lists from Hoadley (2006), list 1
               8     Disease specific lists from Hoadley (2006), list 2
               9     Disease specific lists from Hoadley (2006), list 3
              10     Top 5 drugs (from CMS list of top 100 drugs for seniors)



                                                                  34
Drug List and Average Full Prices
(Top 24 drugs)
                                        Average
List 1                                  Price          Standard Deviation
ATENOLOL TAB 50MG                              $7.04      $5.50
DIGOXIN TAB 0.125MG                            $7.03      $1.77
DILTIAZEM CD CAP 180MG/24                     $33.50      $3.18
ENALAPRIL MALEATE TAB 5MG                     $13.64      $8.83
FUROSEMIDE TAB 40MG                            $4.17      $1.67
FOSAMAX TAB 70MG                              $73.53      $4.34
GLIPIZIDE TAB 5MG                              $4.92      $2.19
HYDROCHLOROTHIAZIDE TAB 25MG                   $3.66      $1.26
HYDROCODONE/ACETAMINOPHEN TAB 5-500MG          $6.09      $4.04
ISOSORBIDE MONONITRATE TAB 20MG               $12.15      $4.25
LEVOTHYROXINE SODIUM TAB 100MCG                $8.21      $1.56
LIPITOR TAB 10MG                              $76.16      $3.30
LISINOPRIL TAB 10MG                           $11.01      $4.72
LOVASTATIN TAB 20MG                           $28.05    $12.18
METFORMIN HCL TAB 500MG                        $8.72      $3.38
METOPROLOL TARTRATE TAB 50MG                   $4.97      $2.88
NORVASC TAB 10MG                              $66.32      $6.31
PLAVIX TAB 75MG                             $133.88     $22.20
POTASSIUM CHLORIDE ER TAB 20MEQ ER            $11.11      $3.05
PREDNISONE TAB 5MG                             $3.09      $1.37
PROPOXYPHENE/ACETAMINOPHEN TAB 65-
650MG                                         $5.84      $1.45
TRIAMTERENE/HCTZ CAP 37.5-25                  $7.78      $1.65
WARFARIN SODIUM TAB 5MG                      $12.99      $3.58
ZOCOR TAB 20MG                              $140.63      $5.40




                                                        35
Additional Drug Lists
List2                        List 3                              List 4                                List 6                  List 7                             List 8                         List 9
allopurinol tab 300mg        advair diskus mis 250/50            actos tab 15mg                        allegra tab 180mg       amoxapine tab 50mg                 acebutolol hcl cap 200mg       aceon tab 4mg
altace cap 10mg              alprazolam tab 0.5mg                albuterol sulfate neb 0.083%          aranesp sol 100mcg      bupropion hcl sr tab 150mg sr      altoprev tab 60mg er           aciphex tab 20mg
ambien tab 10mg              aricept tab 10mg                    avapro tab 300mg                      avonex kit              bupropion hcl tab 100mg er         betaxolol hcl tab 10mg         actos tab 30mg
                                                                                                       duragesic dis
amitriptyline hcl tab 25mg   avandia tab 4mg                     benazepril hcl tab 20mg               25mcg/hr                clomipramine hcl cap 50mg          bisoprolol fumarate tab 5mg    altace cap 10mg
amoxil tab 500mg             captopril tab 25mg                  codeine phosphate tab sol 30mg        effexor tab 75mg        cognex cap 10mg                    carteolol hcl sol ophth 1%     atacand tab 32m
                             cephalexin monohydrate cap
celebrex cap 200mg           500mg                               crestor tab 10mg                      elestat dro 0.05%       desipramine hcl tab 50mg           cholestyramine pow 4gm         benicar tab 20mg
clonidine hcl tab 0.1mg      ciprofloxacin hcl tab 500mg         cyclobenzaprine hcl tab 10mg          enbrel inj 25mg         doxepin hcl cap 50mg               colestid tab 1gm               chlorpropamide t
diovan tab 160mg             coreg tab 6.25mg                    folic acid tab 1mg                    epogen inj 10000/ml     effexor tab 75mg                   dynacirc-cr tab 5mg            didronel tab 400m
glyburide tab 5mg            cozaar tab 50mg                     gemfibrozil tab 600mg                 gleevec tab 100mg       effexor xr cap 75mg                hydrochlorothiazide tab 25mg   forteo sol 750/3m
lisinopril/hctz tab 20-
25mg                         detrol tab 2mg                      glyburide/metformin hcl tab 2.5/500   lovenox inj 40/0.4ml    ergoloid mesylates tab 1mg oral    hyzaar tab 100-25              fosinopril sodium
lotrel cap 10-20mg           diovan hct tab 160-25mg             humulin 50/50 inj 50/50               neulasta inj 6mg/0.6m   exelon cap 3mg                     labetalol hcl tab 200mg        glipizide er tab 10
nexium cap 40mg              doxazosin mesylate tab 4mg          lantus inj 100/ml                     neurontin cap 300mg     fluvoxamine maleate tab 100mg      levatol tab 20mg               glipizide tab 5mg
nifedipine cap 20mg          evista tab 60mg                     lescol cap 20mg                       paxil tab 20mg          imipramine hcl tab 25mg            maprotiline hcl tab 50mg       glyburide microni
oxycodone hcl tab 5mg        flomax cap 0.4mg                    lorazepam tab 1mg                     pravachol tab 40mg      namenda tab 10mg                   mirtazapine tab 15mg           glyset tab 25mg
paroxetine hcl tab 20mg      fluoxetine hcl cap 20mg             meclizine hcl tab 25mg                prilosec cap 40mg cr    nardil tab 15mg                    nadolol tab 40mg               inspra tab 25mg
premarin tab 0.625mg         ibuprofen tab 600mg                 naproxen tab 500mg                    procrit inj 40000/ml    nefazodone hcl tab 200mg           niaspan tab 500mg er           mavik tab 4mg
protonix tab 40mg            levaquin tab 500mg                  nitroglycerin dis 0.4mg/hr            remicade inj 100mg      nortriptyline hcl cap 25mg         nicardipine hcl cap 20mg       miacalcin spr 200
ranitidine hcl tab 150mg     lexapro tab 10mg                    omeprazole cap 20mg                   risperdal tab 1mg       parnate tab 10mg                   nimotop cap 30mg               micardis tab 80m
verapamil hcl tab 120mg      prevacid cap 30mg dr                oxybutynin chloride tab 5mg           rituxan inj 100mg       paxil cr tab 25mg                  pindolol tab 5mg               pamidronate diso
                                                                 phenytoin sodium extended cap
xalatan sol 0.005%           spironolactone tab 25mg             100mg                                 seroquel tab 25mg       prozac weekly cap 90mg             sotalol hcl tab 80mg           prandin tab 2mg
                             sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim tab
zoloft tab 50mg              400-80mg                            propranolol hcl tab 80mg              taxotere inj 80mg/2ml   surmontil cap 50mg                 sular tab 20mg cr              precose tab 50m
gabapentin tab 300mg         tramadol hcl tab 50mg               singulair tab 10mg                    topamax tab 25mg        vivactil tab 10mg                  welchol tab 625mg              skelid tab 200mg
quinapril hcl tab 10mg       trazodone hcl tab 50mg              terazosin hcl cap 5mg                 viagra tab 100mg        cymbalta cap 60mg                  wellbutrin xl tab xl 300mg     spironolactone ta
                                                                 timolol maleate ophthalmic gel        zithromax sus
actonel w/ calcium tab       zetia tab 10mg                      forming sol 0.5% op                   200/5ml                 citalopram hydrobromide tab 20mg   tricor tab 145mg               teveten tab 600m
azithromycin tab 500mg       pravastatin sodium tab 40mg         glimepiride tab 2mg                   zyprexa tab 5mg         razadyne tab 8mg                   felodipine er tab 5mg er       zometa inj 4mg/5




                                                                                                       36
Table A4: Distribution of Plans, Premiums and Generosity Across Regions
                           Monthly    Average OOP All coverage Zones
     Region     # Plans    Premium    per month, Top 5 drugs
          21          40      41.62                             739.88
          20          39      40.75                             732.64
            8         39      40.53                             746.61
          23          43      40.19                             765.92
          15          43      40.15                             787.99
          12          42      39.75                             683.40
          11          44      39.72                             696.08
          19          41      39.53                             728.55
            9         46      39.16                             797.43
            6         53      38.43                             757.12
            1         42      38.29                             830.94
          31          45      37.89                             730.65
          18          42      37.83                             796.94
            7         42      37.82                             788.80
          24          41      37.72                             806.16
            5         48      37.64                             717.82
          22          48      37.48                             658.06
          10          43      37.40                             774.08
          13          41      37.14                             773.22
          34          28      37.02                             829.16
          14          44      36.96                             785.54
          25          42      36.58                             739.90
          17          43      36.10                             719.66
          27          44      36.05                             731.40
          16          46      35.76                             717.33
            2         45      35.50                             719.28
            4         45      35.30                             760.24
          30          46      34.84                             784.19
          29          45      34.54                             726.33
          28          44      34.50                             744.87
          26          44      34.15                             769.37
            3         47      33.49                             648.95
          33          30      33.39                             787.78
          32          48      31.76                             730.43




                                      37
