                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FURTHER TESTS OF ABORTION AND CRIME:
                A RESPONSE TO DONOHUE AND LEVITT (2001,2004, 2006)

                                          Theodore J. Joyce

                                        Working Paper 12607
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12607


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




I thank Christopher Foote, Andrew Racine, Steven Levitt and Robert Kaestner for helpful comments
as well as seminar participants at the NBER Health Economics Program, Carnegie Mellon's Heinz
School of Public Policy, American Enterprise Institute, University of Rochester, and University of
Illinois, Chicago. Silvie Colman provided terrific research assistance. I am responsible for all errors.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Theodore J. Joyce. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Further Tests of Abortion and Crime: A Response to Donohue and Levitt (2001,2004, 2006)
Theodore J. Joyce
NBER Working Paper No. 12607
October 2006
JEL No. K14,K4

                                               ABSTRACT

The association between legalized abortion and crime remains a contentious finding with major implications
for social policy. In this paper, I replicate analyses of Donohue and Levitt (2001, 2004, 2006) in which
they regress age-specific arrests and homicides on cohort-specific abortion rates. I find that the coefficient
on the abortion rate in a regression of age-specific homicide or arrest rates has either the wrong sign
or is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant when adjusted for serial correlation. Efforts
to instrument for measurement error are flawed and attempts to identify cohort from selection effects
are mis-specified. Nor are their findings robust to alternative identification strategies. A convincing
test of abortion and crime should be based on an exogenous change in abortion that had a demonstrable
effect on fertility. Thus, I analyze changes in abortion rates before and after Roe to identify changes
in unwanted fertility. I use within-state comparison groups to net out hard to measure period effects.
I also follow Donohue and Levitt (2004) and average the effects of abortion on crime over 15 to 20
years of the life of a cohort to lessen the impact of the crack epidemic. I find little support for a credible
association between legalized abortion and crime.

Theodore J. Joyce
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
Ted_Joyce@baruch.cuny.edu
                                             I. Introduction

        The debate as to whether legalized abortion lowers crime has leaped from academic

journals to mainstream discourse with the huge success of Freakonomics.1 In the Chapter titled,

“Where Have All the Criminals Gone?” Levitt and Dubner summarize academic work by Levitt

and co-author John Donohue, which shows that a one-standard deviation increase in the abortion

rate lowers homicide rates by 31 percent and can explain upwards of 60 percent of the recent

decline in murder.2 If one accepts these estimates, then legalized abortion has saved more than

51,000 lives between 1991 and 2001, at a total savings of $105 billion. But the policy

implications go beyond crime. If abortion lowers homicide rates by 20 to 30 percent, then it’s

likely to have affected an entire spectrum of outcomes associated with well-being: infant health,

child development, schooling, earnings and marital status. Similarly, the policy implications are

broader than abortion. Other interventions that affect fertility control and that lead to fewer

unwanted births—contraception or sexual abstinence—have huge potential payoffs. In short, a

causal relationship between legalized abortion and crime has such significant ramifications for

social policy and at the same time is so controversial, that further assessment of the identifying

assumptions and their robustness to alternative strategies is warranted.

        Several researchers have challenged Donohue and Levitt’s results and others have voiced

skepticism (Joyce 2001, 2004a, 2004b; Lott and Whitely forthcoming; Foote and Goetz 2005;

Cook and Laub 2003; Dinardo, forthcoming; Miron and Dills 2006). In published replies to

Joyce (2004a) and Foote and Goetz (2005), Donohue and Levitt (2004, 2006) contend that their

1
  See Freakonomics: A Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything. By Steven D. Levitt and Stephen
J. Dubner (New York: William Morrow, 2005)
2
  In Donohue and Levitt (2001), the coefficient on the effective abortion rate in the homicide regression is




                                                      1
results become stronger when they address key criticisms of their original work. They show that

the association between abortion and crime is strengthened if they use abortions by state of

residence and not state of occurrence and if they instrument abortions for measurement error.

They argue that if one looks at the association between abortion and crime over the life-cycle of

criminals and not simply at a point in time their results hold. Finally, they concede that the

association between age-specific arrests and abortion rates declines when they adjust for

population, but that the estimates remain statistically significant and are of a meaningful

magnitude.

        In the analyses that follow, I show that the magnitude of the association between

legalized abortion and age-specific crime rates is modest if appropriately scaled and statistically

insignificant if corrected for serial correlation. I show that their heavily parameterized models

are fragile. The coefficient on the abortion rate flips signs but remains statistically significant

with minor changes in the specification. I contend that Donohue and Levitt’s attempt to

instrument the abortion rate against measurement error is not credible because the instrument is

endogenous by construction. In the second half of this paper, I provide alternative strategies for

identifying the effect of Roe v Wade on crime. First, I limit the analyses to the crime and arrest

rates of cohorts born immediately before and after Roe v Wade. This is the only period during

which the change in fertility rates represents an identifiable and plausibly exogenous decrease in

unwanted childbearing. I then regress age-specific crime rates on abortion rates between 1971

and 1974 in the 45 states that legalized abortion after Roe. I lessen the measurement error by

only using cohorts for which data on abortion exist. I gain greater statistical precision from a

continuous proxy of unwanted childbearing; and I preserve the quasi-experimental design, since


–0.121. Their new “best” estimate is –0.166, an increase of 37 percent (Donohue and Levitt 2004). Based on the
new estimates, homicide was 31.5 percent lower in 1997 than it would have been in the absence of abortion, up



                                                        2
the identifying variation in abortion rates is driven primarily by legalization. All totaled, I find

no consistent association between abortion and crime among cohorts born in the years just before

and after abortion became legal. Simple time-series plots offer little evidence of substantial

cohort effects. Regression analyses underscore what seems apparent from the time-series plots:

the association between legalized abortion and crime rates is weak and inconsequential. I

conclude that the lack of robustness to alternative specifications and identification strategies

undermines a causal interpretation of Donohue and Levitt’s findings.



     II. Data, Empirical Model and Limitations: Donohue and Levitt (2001, 2004, 2006)

Data

         I focus on the regressions of age-specific crimes and crime rates as analyzed by Donohue

and Levitt (2001, 2004, 2006).3 The age-specific analyses provide the most direct test of

abortion and crime because the state-specific crime rate of each cohort is directly associated with

the state-specific abortion rate that existed roughly one year prior to the cohort’s year of birth.

The data consist of arrests by state, year and single year of age for persons 15 to 24 years of age.

These are from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports and are used extensively by criminologists.


from their original estimate of 22.9 percent.
3
  Donohue and Levitt (2001) also present results from regressions of total crime rates on an average measure of
abortion exposure for all ages, what they term the “effective abortion rate.” The notion, however, that one could
test for cohort effects without being able to identify cohorts seems strained. For instance, there is no obvious way to
distinguish cohort from period effects without age-specific crime rates (Joyce 2004a). Second, these regressions
include no controls for state-year shocks which Joyce (20004b), Foote and Goetz (2005) and Donohue and Levitt
(2006) show to be important. Third, the effective abortion rate is a poorly measured and highly aggregated proxy of
exposure to abortion. For instance, Donohue and Levitt (2001) only have data on abortion from 1973. They assume
that the abortion rate is zero for cohorts born between 1960 and 1972 or they backcast from 1973 to 1970 for the
five early-legalizing states. As a result, the number of cohorts with any measured exposure to abortion is extremely
limited in the first half of their sample, 1985-1991. In addition, they use fixed weights from 1985 to assign
exposure in the construction of the effective abortion rates. In that year teens accounted for 16 percent of all arrests
for murder; by 1991 they accounted for 26 percent of arrests for murder. Thus, the effective abortion rate
underestimates the exposure to abortion among teens during a period in which the dramatic rise in the total homicide
rate between 1985 and 1992 rate was driven almost entirely by individuals less than 25 years of age (see also Lott
and Whitley forthcoming; Blumstein, Rivara and Rosenfeld 2000).


                                                           3
The second source of data consists of homicide offenders from the FBI’s Supplemental

Homicide Reports (SHR). These are also available by state, year and single-year of age; unlike

the arrest rates, however, all ages are identified. The SHR have reports on approximately 90

percent of all known homicides, but the proportion of reports of offenders with complete

information on age and race is approximately 68 percent (Fox and Zawitz 2004). The FBI uses

known reports of victims to impute age and race of offenders in cases where offenders are not

known.4

        I use abortions by state of residence as estimated by the Alan Guttmacher Institute from

1973 to 1987. I augment these data with the number of abortions as collected by the Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention in 1971 and 1972. The CDC initiated its abortion surveillance in

1969. However, 1971 is the first year in which there were annual data from all 50 states and the

District of Columbia by state of residence. The CDC reported 480,259 legal abortions in 1971

and 586,760 in 1972, a total of 1,067,019 in the two years prior to Roe. Of these 477,525 were to

residents of Alaska, California, the District of Columbia, Hawaii, New York and Washington,

the states in which abortion was de facto or de jure legal. Thus, there were over 589,000

abortions to women from states that did not fully legalize abortion until Roe (Centers for Disease

Control 1972, 1973). Donohue and Levitt do not count these abortions in their analyses.




4
 I use the SHR series with the imputed homicides in my replication of Donohue and Levitt (2004), but I use the
non-imputed homicide series in subsequent analyses. Inferences are not sensitive to the choice of imputed and non-
imputed series.


                                                        4
Empirical model

         The basic model of arrests and homicides by single year of age as used by Donohue and

Levitt (2001, 2004, 2006) is as follows:

         LnC ajt = β A jt − a −1 + Agea + λ j + φt + χ c + eajt                (1)

where Cajt is the natural logarithm of arrests or homicides for age group a, in state j, and year t

and cohort c; Ajt-a-1 is the state abortion rate in year t-a-1.5 Thus, arrests of 24-year olds in 1990

in state j are correlated with the abortion rate in state j in 1965 (t-24-1). Other versions of the

model include interactions of age (Age), state (λj), and year (φt) fixed effects.



Limitations

    1. Underestimation of the standard errors

         Donohue and Levitt (2004) include arrests and homicides by single-year of age for 15 to

24 year olds from 1983 to 1998. There are potentially 7,140 cells (10 ages * 14 years * 51

states) and synthetic cohorts range from 1961 to 1983. Abortion rates, however, only vary by

state and year beginning in 1973. Consequently, only 510 cells in their analysis includes have a

unique abortion rate and over 60 percent of the state-age-year cells are assigned an abortion rate

of zero. In their estimation of equation (1), Donohue and Levitt correct the standard errors for

clustering within year of birth and state. This adjusts for the repeated use of the same abortion

rate as each cohort ages.6 However, such clustering imposes unrealistic restrictions on the

correlation of residuals within states and across cohorts. Consider the regression of homicides

by single year of age. Donohue and Levitt (2001, 2004, 2006) assume that the residual

5
  Donohue and Levitt (2001,2004,2006) refer to the ratio of abortions to births as the abortion rate. Demographers
refer to the abortion rate as the ratio of abortions to women 15 to 44 years of age. For consistency with Donohue
and Levitt, I will refer to the ratio of abortions to births as the abortion rate unless specifically noted otherwise.



                                                           5
associated with homicides of 18-year olds in New York in 1990, for example, is uncorrelated

with the residual of homicides of 19-year olds in New York in 1990 or with the residual of 18-

year olds in New York in 1989. However, a simple analysis of residuals is not consistent with

such restrictions. 7      As a result, Donohue and Levitt (2001, 2004, 2006) underestimate the

standard errors on the abortion rate by neglecting to account for this more general pattern of

residual correlation (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004).



2. Estimating the magnitude of effects

         Donohue and Levitt’s most widely cited estimates are based on a regression of total crime

rates on the effective abortion rate (Donohue and Levitt 2001, Table 4; 2004, Table 1). Their

preferred estimates indicate that an increase of 100 abortions per 1000 live births in the effective

abortion rate, roughly one standard deviation, is associated with a 16.6 percent decrease in total

homicides.8 However, since only half the population of criminals was exposed to legalized

abortion by 1997, the full impact of legalized abortion will not be felt until roughly 2017

(Donohue and Levitt 2001, p.415). In other words, the impact of abortion on any one cohort is,

on average, 33.2 percent (16.6/.50).9 Donohue and Levitt confirm this expectation when they

introduce the analysis of age-specific arrest rates. They write, “On average, about half of those


6
  For instance, arrest rates of 15-year olds in 1991, arrest rates of 16-year olds in 1992, arrest rates of 17-year olds in
1993, etc., are all associated with the abortion rate in 1973 since they were all assumed to be born in 1974.
7
  I estimated the first-order auto-regressive coefficient from the residuals of a regression of the natural logarithm of
arrests for 18-year olds on the abortion rate with state and year fixed effects. The coefficient on the AR1 regressor
was 0.579 (n=775) for violent arrests, 0.616 (n-775) for property crime and 0.221 for murder (n=631). I obtained
the similar estimates for each of the other age groups. I also estimated residual regressions with higher order lags
that suggest a more complicated pattern of serial correlation.
8
  See Table 1, column 2, top panel of Donohue and Levitt (2004). This is their preferred estimate because they use
abortions by state of residence and not state of occurrence, as in the original paper, to construct the effective
abortion.
9
  In that same paragraph Donohue and Levitt (2001, p. 415), make the prediction that as each new cohort is exposed
to legalized, the total homicide rate would be expected to fall 1% per year. Assume all homicides are committed by
those 15 to 50 years of age. If each new cohort exposed to legalized abortion reduced the total homicide rate by 1
percent, then the homicide rate of this newly exposed cohort fell by 35% (1% times 35 age groups).


                                                             6
arrested are under the age of 25. Thus, to generate the crime reduction in Table IV (the 16.6

percent above) requires coefficients on young arrests that are twice as large as the coefficients on

overall crime” (Donohue and Levitt 2001, p. 410; author’s insertion in italics).

         These are huge effects and much greater than the estimated effect of the actual abortion

rate on age-specific arrest rates. For instance, an increase of 100 abortions per 1000 live births is

estimated to lower violent and property crime arrests by between 1.5 and 4.0 percent (Donohue

and Levitt 2001, Table VII). However, in their presentation of the results, Donohue and Levitt

(2001) multiply the coefficient on the abortion rate (β in equation (1)) by 350, which suggest that

the abortion rate lowered arrest rates by 5 to 14 percent.10 Such scaling is unjustified since no

cohort between 1972 and 1986 was ever exposed to an increase in abortion of that magnitude.

Indeed, the standard deviation of the abortion rate in their sample is 134 per 1000 live births.

Alternatively, the weighted mean of the abortion rate increased from 135 in 1971 to 295 in 1974,

a change of 160 during a period of its most rapid growth. Thus, a more appropriate scaling of

effects suggests that arrests fell between 1.9 and 5.4 percent.11 If I use their most recent

estimates (Donohue and Levitt 2006), a one standard deviation increase in the abortion rate

lowers violent and property crime arrest rates by 0 to 3.6 percent, changes that are statistically

insignificant when adjusted for serial correlation.



3. Crimes versus crime rates

         In their most recent paper, Donohue and Levitt (2006, Table 5) show that the analysis of

arrest rates as opposed to arrests reduces the coefficient on the abortion rate by over 60 percent


10
   The 350 represents the difference in the abortion rate in the top versus the bottom tertile of states (Donohue and
Levitt (2001, p. 412). They do not indicate the year in which this difference existed.
11
   The coefficients from Table VII of Donohue and Levitt (2001) range from -0.15 to -0.040. Multiply each by 1.35
which is standard deviation in the abortion rate divided by 100.


                                                          7
for violent crime arrests (-0.046 to -0.021) and eliminates the associations with property crime

arrests altogether (-0.024 versus 0.001). This is not surprising they argue, since one mechanism

by which abortion reduces crime is through cohort size. But it is not clear that a regression of

the level of arrests on the abortion rate captures the effect of both cohort size and selection.12

Moreover, it is difficult to demonstrate an association between abortion rates and fertility rates

beyond the immediate period of legalization. Fertility rates in the early and later legalizing

states converge in 1976, yet the abortion rate in the early legalizing states is almost double that of

later legalizing states (Joyce 2001). In other words, there is no evidence that much higher

abortion rates in the early legalizing states after 1975 are associated with lower fertility rates.

Thus, there is no cohort size effect after 1975. Donohue and Levitt (2004) acknowledge as much

and argue that abortion improves the timing of births and not completed fertility.13



4. Correcting for measurement error in abortion

         There are two sources of state-level data on abortion. The Centers for Disease Control

and Prevention (CDC) compiles data on abortion as recorded by state health agencies. In most



12
   Let a linear modal of total crimes to age group a be as follows: Cijt=α0+ α1Aijt-a where Cijt and Aijt-a are crimes and
abortions to individual i in state j and years t and years t-a, respectively. Summing both sides of the equation
within each state we obtain, Cjt= α0Njt+ α1Ajt-a where Cjt ,Ajt-a and Njt are the total number of crimes, abortions and
population respectively in state j and year t for age group a. The aggregate specification, therefore, is a regression
of Cjt on Njt and Ajt-a. In this specification it could be argued that α0 captures the effect of cohort size on crime and
α1 the effect of selection. But this specification remains problematic because Njt measures not only cohort size but
includes many in the population who were not born in state j and thus unaffected by abortions in year t-a. In other
words, Texas may have more crime not because there were fewer abortions in year t-a, but because there were large
inflows of individuals not born in the state. Thus, it seems extremely difficult to identify cohort size effects.
Dividing Cjt by Njt in the equation above, one obtains a regression of crime per capita on the abortions per birth
appropriately lagged:, Cjt/Njt = b0+ b1Ajt-a /Njt-a. where Njt-a is births in year t-a, a proxy for population Njt. Donohue
and Levitt (2001,2004, 2006), however, regress Cjt on Ajt-a /Njt-a. They claim that the coefficient on the abortion rate
in this specification captures the effect of both cohort size and selection, but they do not explain why.
13
    Ananat, Gruber and Levine (2004) find that the effect of early legalization of abortion was concentrated among
women whose completed fertility fell from one child to no children. It is less likely that these women represent
mothers who would have given birth to children at high-risk for criminality, which suggests that the impact of
smaller cohorts on crime, even during the period of legalization, is probably minimal at best.



                                                             8
states, abortion providers are required by law to report induced terminations as part of the vital

registration system. In six states reporting to the local health agency is voluntary and in three

other states the requirement to report is not a state statute but a regulation promulgated by the

state health agency (Saul 1998). The Alan Guttmacher Institute (AGI) is the other source of

data on abortion. The AGI researchers survey abortion providers periodically as to the number

of abortions performed at the facility. The number of abortions as measured by AGI exceeds

estimates from the CDC by about 15 percent, but differences vary widely by state. Importantly,

both the CDC and AGI measure abortions by state of occurrence. Researchers at AGI then

estimate abortions by state of residence based on the proportion of abortions in a state to non-

residents as reported by the CDC. The AGI researchers then use another algorithm by which to

assign the total number of non-resident abortions in the state of occurrence to a state of residence

(Henshaw and Van Vort 1992). In other words, there are several sources of possible error in

AGI’s estimates of resident abortion rates that are linked to the CDC reporting errors in

potentially complicated ways.14

        Donohue and Levitt (2001) use abortions by state of occurrence as collected by AGI in

their original analysis. In subsequent work they use AGI’s estimates of abortions by state of

residence (Donohue and Levitt 2004, 2006). However, in the most recent analysis they use

abortions by state of occurrence as published by the CDC as an instrument for AGI’s abortions

by state of residence. The identifying assumption is that the measurement errors in the two

estimates are uncorrelated. But this is clearly questionable given that the AGI estimate of

abortions by state of residence relies on CDC data for its construction. In a footnote Donohue

and Levitt couch the assumption of uncorrelated measurement errors. They argue that if the

14
  For instance, the CDC may under or overestimate the proportion of abortions to non-residents in state A There is
also error in how AGI researchers assign non-resident abortions that occur in state A to individual states B, C, D,



                                                         9
measurement errors in the two series are positively correlated, then instrumental variables

estimates of abortion on crime will be biased downwards in absolute value. But this assumption

is also speculative because there are multiple sources of error and no gold standard with which to

assess them. Indeed, instrumenting the resident abortion rate by the occurrence rate may put back

the error that the resident rates was estimated to fix. 15 In short, the instrumented estimates of

abortion on crime in Donohue and Levitt (2006) lack credibility.




etc, based only on the proportion of all non-resident abortions obtained in state A.
15
   To see this consider the following:

Let R i = abortions to residents of state j regardless of the state in which they occur.
Let R jj = abortions to residents of state j that occur in state j
Let R jk = abortions to residents of state j that occur in state k
Let O j = abortions that occur in state j regardless of state in which women reside
Let O jj = abortions to women that reside in state j and that occur in state j
Let O kj = abortions to women that reside in state k but which occur in state j
Note that Rjj = Ojj.
Donohue and Levitt' s first stage is :
R j = β0 + β1O j which can be rewritten as :
R jj + R jk = β 0 + β1(O jj + Okj )

Thus, the correlation between Rj and Oj will be driven by Rjj and Ojj. In words, the predicted Rj
measures the variation in Rj that overlaps with Oj, which is simply Rjj. But the reason one uses Rj instead of
Oj is to capture abortions Rjk. But this variation is likely lost by instrumenting. One ends up with a
" resident - occurrence" rate, which largely defeats the purpose of using Rj to begin with.
A tangential point is that Rjk and Okj are likely to be negatively correlated . States in which many residents leave for an
abortion (R jk ) are likely to be states in which relatively few non - residents obtain abortions (O kj ). Abortions performed
outside the state of residence are probably a major sourceof measurement error, which would appear to be
 negatively and not positively correlated as suggested by Donohue and Levitt (2006).



                                                                10
             III. Replication and Re-estimation of Donohue and Levitt (2004, 2006)

         In this section I replicate Donohue and Levitt’s estimates of the effect of abortion on age-

specific arrest rates. I scale the effects by showing the impact of a one standard deviation

increase in the abortion rate. I then adjust the standard errors for serial correlation A major

limitation of arrests is that they reflect both underlying violence as well as deterrence.

Homicides, by contrast, are a more straightforward and relatively well-reported measure of

crime. Thus, I apply Donohue Levitt’s specification to an analysis of age-specific murder

arrests and homicide rates. Finally, I show the sensitivity of Donohue and Levitt’s specification

to various interactions of age, state and year fixed effects.



1. Serial correlation, scaling of effects and murder

         The specification in column (1) of Table 1 replicates Donohue and Levitt’s results for

violent crime and property crime arrest rates (Donohue and Levitt 2006, Table 5). I also show

results for age-specific murder arrest rates and age-specific homicide rates from the same

specification. The estimates in column (2) are from the identical model as in column (1) but the

standard errors are adjusted for clustering within state. In column (3) I limit the sample to

cohorts born between 1974 and 1981. These are the only cohorts for which Donohue and Levitt

have actual data on abortion.16 Donohue and Levitt (2004) argue that the assumption of a zero

abortion rate for the 1961-1972 cohorts should bias their estimates towards the null. If correct,

16
  Joyce (2004a) presented results from a similar regression of log arrests for cohorts born between 1974 and 1981.
He found no association between arrests and abortion rates (See Joyce 2004a, Table 1, row 7). In their reply to
Joyce, Donohue and Levitt indicate that when they use abortions by state of residence and not occurrence and when
they extend the data to 1998, “two of the three coefficients become negative and statistically significant” (Donohue
and Levitt (2004), footnote 1, p. 36). Donohue and Levitt never report these results. I have estimated those
regressions using arrest rates and not arrests and adjusted them for serial correlation. The coefficients on the
abortion rate in regressions of violent crime, property crime and murder arrest rates is small and statistically
insignificant or has the wrong sign (available upon request). The results in column (3) of Table 1 above are from a




                                                         11
then the estimates in column (3) should provide the strongest association between abortion and

crime.

          Several results in Table 1 are noteworthy. First, only the abortion coefficient associated

with violent crime arrest rates has the correct sign and is statistically significant (column 1).

However, when I adjust the standard errors for a general form of serial correlation, the estimate

is no longer significant. Moreover, the effect of a one-standard deviation increase in the abortion

rate is modest, reducing arrest rates by only 3.5 percent. If I limit the sample to cohorts born

between 1974 and 1981, the effect of a one-standard deviation increase in the abortion rate rises

to -4.6 percent, but is not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. The remaining results provide

no evidence that abortion is associated with crime. Seven of the remaining 9 coefficients have

the wrong sign. Even when I limit the sample to years in which Donohue and Levitt have

abortion data, there is no evidence of an association.17



2. Lack of robustness

         The specification used by Donohue and Levitt in their most recent work is highly

parameterized and the estimates are sensitive to the set of fixed effects that are included. Recall

that there are 10 age groups, 51 states and 14 years. With no missing data or cells with zero

events, their model has 7,140 potential observations and 1,291 parameters, which is between two

and six times more parameters than were included in their original specifications (Donohue and


similar specification but with the inclusion of state-year fixed effects. This precluded the inclusion of 15-year olds
born in 1983. We also dropped 15 and 16 year olds born in 1982.
17
   The other point is that the standard errors of the coefficients in column (3) are more than 2.5 times greater than
those in column (1). Donohue and Levitt include literally thousands of observations for the 1960-1972 cohorts in
which the association the between abortion rate and crime cannot even be estimated. However, by appending those
cohorts to the analysis, Donohue and Levitt shrink the standard errors without adding any information on the key
variable of interest. I would contend, therefore, that the standard errors in column (3) provide a more realistic
estimate of the level of precision with which the association between the abortion rate and age-specific crime rates
can be estimated.


                                                          12
Levitt 2001, 2004). In their original paper and in their reply to Joyce, Donohue and Levitt

included state, age and year fixed effects (Donohue and Levitt 2001, 2004). In some

specifications they added state and age interactions and in others they added cohort fixed effects.

Their estimates were relatively stable across specifications. However, Donohue and Levitt did

not include state and year interactions as claimed, which was noted by Foote and Goetz (2005).

In response to Foote and Goetz (2005), Donohue and Levitt re-estimated their models with state

and year interactions. Their estimates fell by half.

         In Table 2, I show the fragility of their estimates as one builds from their original

specifications to their most recent. Estimates in columns (1) and (2) include the same set of

fixed effects as Donohue and Levitt used in their earlier papers. Note that the dependent variable

in each case is the age-specific arrest or homicide rate.18              Consider the estimates for violent

crime arrest rates in the top row. The coefficient in column (1) indicates that the abortion rate is

positively associated with the violent crime arrest rate (β=0.018; t-ratio =3.0); addition of state-

age interactions in column (2) leads to the opposite inference: abortion rates lower violent crime

arrest rates (β= -0.031; t-ratio = -4.4); inclusion of state-year interactions (column 3) causes the

coefficient to flip sign again but it remains highly statistically significant ((β= 0.065; t-ratio=

6.5). Finally with the addition of year-age interaction, we obtain the result reported in Donohue

and Levitt (2006; Table 5) as shown in column (5). The pattern of coefficient instability is

characteristic of the other three outcomes. Moreover, the vast majority of estimates is

18
   Donohue and Levitt (2001, 2004) used arrests not arrest rates in their earlier work, although they frequently
referred to them as arrest rates. For instance, in their original paper they introduce the section of arrests by single
year of age as follows: “As a further test of our hypothesis, we analyze arrest rates by single year of age “(Donohue
and Levitt, 2001, p. 311). In Table 1 of Donohue and Levitt (2004) the sub-title for the last two rows is “ln(arrest
rates by single year of age)” and yet the results are from regressions of log arrests and not log arrest rates. The title
in Table 2 of Donohue and Levitt (2004) also refers to the homicide rate when in fact their outcome is homicides.
The distinction is more than semantic. Donohue and Levitt (2004) contrast their specification based on homicides to
Joyce’s results which were based on homicide rates (Joytce, 2004a). Importantly, when Joyce (2004b) estimated




                                                           13
statistically significant but frequently have the “wrong” sign. Thus, the conclusion one reaches

as to whether abortion increases or decreases crime depends critically on the set of fixed effects.

        The fragility of the estimates reflects the lack of variation in the abortion rate. Despite

the large number of potential observations (7,140), the abortion rate varies only by state and year

and only for a subset of years (n=510). Although it is econometrically possible to include state-

year interactions, the practical consequence is that there remains too little variation in the

abortion rate with which to identify a robust effect on crime.



                                  IV. An Alternative Identification Strategy

        The sensitivity of the association between abortion and crime to population controls,

fixed effects and corrections for serial correlation presents a serious challenge to the Donohue

and Levitt hypothesis. However, a more fundamental problem is whether state abortion rates are

a useful proxy for unwanted childbearing. The availability of abortion affects the decision to

have sex, to use contraception, to carry to term if pregnant, to marry or to have a child outside of

wedlock. Stated differently, it is unclear whether states with greater abortion rates have lower

rates of unwanted childbearing. For instance, an increase in contraception or a decline in sexual

activity could lower both the abortion rate as well as the rate of unwanted childbearing. Indeed,

this seems to be the experience of U.S. teens over the past decade. The teen birth rate fell 21

percent between 1990 and 2000 while the teen abortion rate fell 40 percent over the same period

(Alan Guttmacher Institute 2004). Demographers estimate that 53 percent of the decline in teen

pregnancies can be attributed to decreased sexual activity and more effective contraception

(Santelli et al. 2004). The upshot is that without a demonstrable inverse association between state


the exact same model as Donohue and Levitt (2004, Table 2) with homicide rates and not homicides, the average
decline in homicide rate is small and statistically insignificant.


                                                       14
abortion rates and state fertility rates, there is no way to distinguish state variation in abortion

that is causally related to lower rates of unintended childbearing from variation in abortion due to

changes in sexual activity and contraception.19

          And yet, Donohue and Levitt never demonstrate a negative relationship between state

abortion rates and state fertility rates. In fact, they argue that such an association is unnecessary.

“…As long as the number of unwanted births falls, even if total births do not decline at all, one

would expect to see better life outcomes on average for the resulting cohort” (Donohue and

Levitt (2004, p. 33). But they never explain how to identify such changes. How, for example,

does one distinguish variation in state abortion rates due to changes in sexual activity and

contraception from variation in state abortion rates associated with unwanted births averted.

          For these reasons, my identification strategy has focused around the period of legalization

(Joyce 2004a, 2004b). It is only during this period that the price shock induced by legalization

leads to a significant increase in abortion and a documented fall in fertility (Sklar and Berkov

19
  Another way to demonstrate the difficulty of identifying the effect of abortion on crime is to sketch out the
underlying structural model.

(1 f ) Ct = α 0 + α1UWt − a
(2 f ) UWt − a = β o + β1 ARt − a −1
(3 f ) ARt − a −1 = λ0 + λ1Pt − a −1
(4 f ) Ct = γ 0 + γ 1Pt − a −1t
(5 f ) Pt -a -1 = b0 + b1Qt − a −1
(6 f ) Q t -a -1 = a0 + a1Pt − a −1

Let Ct be the crime rate in year t of age group a; let UWt-a be the rate of unwanted childbearing in year t-a; Let Art-a-
1 be the abortion rate in year t-a-1, let P t-a-1 be the price of abortion in year t-a-1 and let Q t-a-1 be the supply of
abortion providers. This is clearly a simple specification. A more complete structural model of abortion and crime
would include equations for contraception, sexual activity and pregnancy resolution. It would also contain the price
of a birth which would include the availability of welfare benefits, Medicaid and Head Start. The point I want to
emphasize is that Donohue and Levitt regress Ct on ARt-a-1 as if it were a reduced form. Certainly, abortion is pre-
determined, but the decision to abort may be made simultaneously with the decision to have sex, use contraception
and bear children. I estimate a version of equation (4f) above, but even this is problematic unless P t-a-1 varies
exogenously. This is because the demand and supply of abortion services is also endogenous. Soon after
legalization, markets for abortion services developed. Abortion providers located where demand was strongest.




                                                           15
1974; Joyce and Mocan, 1990; Gruber, Levine Staiger 1999; Angrist and Evans 1999; Charles

and Stephens 2006; Joyce 2001; 2004a). Most researchers have interpreted the fall in fertility at

this time as a decline in unwanted childbearing.

          The other advantage of a quasi-experimental design is that the change in the abortion

rate during this period is large and more plausibly exogenous than changes in later years.

Moreover, a difference-in-differences strategy based on abortion legalization provides a

transparent check as to the plausibility of the identifying assumptions. Cohorts exposed and

unexposed to legalized abortion should have similar levels and trends in crime prior to

legalization (Meyer 1995). Cohort effects present in a specific manner and should be noticeably

distinct from period effects (O’Malley, Bachman and Johnston 1984). As I show in the next

section, simple time-series plots of age-specific crime rates offer little if any evidence of any

meaningful cohort effect.



The Impact of Roe v. Wade on Crime

         In previous work I have used abortion legalization prior to Roe in a sub-sample of states

to test for an association between abortion and crime (Joyce 2004a). The national legalization of

abortion following Roe offers a second experiment that may be less contaminated by policy

endogeneity at the state level.20 The difficulty, as Donohue and Levitt (2004) point out, is that a

before and after analysis based on a national change assumes a uniform effect in all states and is


Thus, I emphasize results that are identified off of the change in the legalization of abortion, which I interpret as an
exogenous change in the price of abortion.
20
   Although the legalization of abortion in New York was a shock to many, including the leadership of the Catholic
Church, New York and California were clearly liberal states in which sentiment towards abortion was arguably more
permissive even prior to legalization (Lader 1974; Garrow 1998). Tietze (1973), for instance, estimates that two-
thirds of legal abortions in New York City between July, 1970 and June,1971 replaced illegal abortions from a year
earlier.



                                                           16
susceptible to confounding from broad trends. However, there was wide variation in legal

abortion rates in the 45 non-repeal states prior to Roe and marked differences in the change in

abortion rates following legalization. I take advantage of this variation in two ways. First, I

stratify states between those in which the change in the abortion rate between 1971 and 1973 was

above or below the median. I then use a DDD estimator for cohorts born from 1970 to 1975. In

the next set of analyses I follow Donohue and Levitt (2001, 2004, 2006) and estimate a version

of equation (1) but only for the cohorts born in 1972-1975. These two analyses address key

limitations of Donohue and Levitt’s identification strategy. First, changes in abortion

immediately after Roe are large and more plausibly exogenous than are changes that occurred in

the late 1970s and early 1980s. Second, Roe had a demonstrable effect on fertility and thus on

unwanted childbearing in states furthest from California, New York and Washington (Levine et

al. 1999). Third, I use cohorts born just prior to legalization to net out period effects that may

vary differentially between states above and below the median. And fourth, I use both an

indicator of abortion legalization as well as a continuous proxy for unwanted childbearing as

favored by Donohue and Levitt (2004). 21

         As evidence of the state-variation in abortion and its growth in the early 1970s, I show

resident abortion rates in 1971 and 1973 in the 45 states in which abortion became legal

following Roe in Table A1 of the Appendix. The average increase (weighted) in the abortion

rate was 41 abortions per 1000 live births between 1971 and 1973 in states at or below the

median and 142 in states above the median. I exploit this differential change by comparing

variation in crime from before to after Roe in states above and below the median. The


21
  …”Our original hypothesis, however, was based on a view that the mere act of abortion legalization is not
sufficient to equalize the costs (financial, social, and psychological) of abortion across time and place. Rather, our
model argues that abortion rates as a fraction of live births are a better proxy for the impact of legal abortion than is
the dichotomous indicator of legal status” (Donohue and Levitt 2004, p. 46-47.)


                                                           17
differential change in abortion among states above and below the median is 101 abortions per

1000 live births and is directly comparable to the scaling used by Donohue and Levitt (2001).

The relevant regression is as follows:



LnH ajt = β 0 + β 1 Exposed + β 2 ( Exposed * Above _ med ) + β 3 ( Exposed * After ) + β 4 ( Above _ med * After )
 + β 5 ( Exposed * Above _ med * After ) + Στ t + Σ λ j + eajt                   (2)
                                             t      j




The dependent variable, LnHajt is the natural logarithm of the homicide rate of age group a, in

state j and year t. Exposed is an indicator of age groups who were born between 1972 and 1975

and who go from unexposed to exposed to legalized abortion in utero. The omitted category is

the slightly older age groups who are born between 1970-1973 and thus, were unexposed to

legalized abortion in utero. After refers to the birth years 1974-75 and Above_med are states in

which the change in abortion from 1971 to 1973 was above the median. The model includes state

and year fixed effects. The coefficient, β5, estimates the difference-in-differences-in-differences

(DDD). For a concrete example, refer to the age-period-cohort diagram in Table 3. Consider

the homicide rates of 15- year olds in 1987 and 1988. They were born primarily in 1972-1973

and thus were in in utero prior to Roe. Fifteen-year olds in 1989 and 1990 are from the 1974-

1975 birth cohorts and thus were exposed to legalized abortion in utero. If legalized abortion

lowered crime, then the homicide rates of 15-year olds should decline from 1987-98 to 1989-90.

However, strong period effects could confound the impact of abortion. Thus, I use the change in

homicide rates among 17-year olds over the same period, 1987-88 to 1989-90, as the

counterfactual. Although exposed to the same period effects as the 15-year olds, the 17-year

olds were born prior to 1974 and thus unexposed to legalized abortion in utero.




                                                   18
                                                       V. Results

Time-series evidence

         Homicide rates and arrest rates for three categories of crime are shown in Figures 1-4.

The series are stratified by states in which the change in abortion rates between 1971 and 1973

was above the median versus states at or below the median (see Appendix Table 1A). In each

figure, the vertical line is the first year after which exposure (in utero) to legalized abortion

begins for the younger age group. If there is a strong cohort effect associated with legalized

abortion, then we should observe a moderation or decline in the crime rates of the younger age

groups in states with above median changes in abortion relative to the crime rates of both the

older age groups in the same states as well as the younger age groups in the below-median states.
22



         Figure 1 shows violent crime arrest rates of 21- and 23-year olds in the 45 states that

legalized abortion following Roe. There is a noticeable decline in violent crime arrests among

21-year olds starting in 1994 in states in which the change in abortion rates was above the

median between 1971 and 1973 and relatively little change in states with more modest growth in

abortion rates (at or below the median). The magnitude of the decline and its timing are

consistent with Donohue and Levitt’s hypothesis. However, there is a similar decline in arrest

rates among 23-year olds in the above median states two years before this older cohort is

exposed to legalized abortion. The factor driving down arrest rates among 21-year olds is having

a similar effect on 23-year olds, which undermines a causal link between abortion and crime.

Figure 2 displays homicide rates for 17- and 19-year olds also stratified by states with above and


22
  Cohort effects present distinctly from period effects. As Donohue and Levitt note, “ If abortion legalization
reduces crime, then we should see the reduction begin with, say, fifteen year-olds, about sixteen years after
legalization, then extend to sixteen year-olds a year later, and so on (Donohue and Levitt 2001, p. 411). Evidence of
period effects would be the coincident rise, peak and fall in homicide rates of different cohorts.


                                                         19
below median changes in abortion. Again, there is little evidence of a cohort effect. The

homicide rate of 17-year olds in the above median states continues to rise after exposure to

legalized abortion as does the homicide rate of 19-year olds. Indeed, the coincident peak in

homicide rates in all four series is more consistent with strong period effects than with any

meaningful cohort effect.    Figures 3 and 4 show time-series of homicide and property crime

arrest rates. Again, there is little evidence of any substantive cohort effect.



Regression results

       Regression results from the estimation of equation (1) are shown in Table 4. There are

four outcomes: homicide rates as measured by the Supplemental Homicide Reports (SHR) and

then arrest rates for murder, violent crime and property crime. I display only estimates of the

DDDs [β5 in equation (2)] and each estimate is from a separate regression. The bottom row is the

average DDD for the 1972-1975 cohorts between the ages of 13 and 26.23 I find no inverse

association between the legalization of abortion and crime. Only 6 of the 19 estimates

arenegative and none are statistically significant. The average of the DDDs within each crime

category is positive. For instance, homicide rates increased 5.8 percent more among the 1972-

1975 cohorts relative to the 1970-1973 cohorts in states at or above the median relative to states

below the median change in abortion rates between 1971-1973.

       Although the specification in equation (2) exploits the natural experiment afforded by

Roe, it does not fully take advantage of the state-by-state change in abortion rates from the

period immediately before and after legalization. Indeed, Donohue and Levitt (2004) consider

the abortion rate a better proxy for state-by-state variation in unwanted childbearing than the




                                                  20
dichotomous indicator of legalization. Thus, in the next set of regressions I use the specification

favored by Donohue and Levitt (2001, 2004) as shown in equation (1) above.24

         I show the coefficients on the abortion rate from the estimation of equation (1) in Table 5.

For each outcome, I show estimates without and then with state linear and quadratic trend terms.

The trend terms serve a similar role as the within-state comparison groups in the DDDs. In the

top panel, I use the resident abortion rate as reported by the CDC and AGI. In the bottom panel,

I use a resident abortion rate that I have re-weighted to approximate the state in which the mother

conceived.25 For homicides and murder arrest rates, the coefficient on the abortion rate is

positive but never statistically significant. The coefficients on violent and property crime arrest

rates are negative in six out of eight specifications, but relatively small in magnitude and never

statistically significant. For instance, the abortion rate increased by 150 abortions per 1000 live

births between 1971 and 1974 and the standard deviation was 88 abortions per 1000 live births

adjusted for cross-state movements. This is associated with a decline of 5.4 percent (p<0.21) in

violent crime arrest rates and 3.2 percent (p<0.38) percent in property crime arrest rates.

However, the association becomes positive in the case of violent crime and essentially zero in the

case of property crime when I adjust for state-specific trends. There is no association with

murder arrest rates or homicide offending rates in any specification.

23
   Donohue and Levitt argue that one should sum the coefficients in the a DDD analysis in order to capture the effect
of crime “….over the entire lives of the cohorts in question, not just one well chosen point in time when these
cohorts were in their teens.” (Donohue and Levitt 2004, p. 42)
24
   There are several important differences between their analysis and mine. First, I limit the sample to cohorts born
in 1972-1975 in the 45 states that legalized abortion with Roe in January, 1973.24 Each cohort is associated with the
resident abortion rate lagged approximately one year. The identifying assumption is that the dramatic decrease in the
“price” of an abortion induced by Roe caused an exogenous increase in abortion rates. The second difference is that
I use only cohorts for which actual abortion rates exist. Donohue and Levitt (2004) include birth cohorts from 1968-
1976 and they assume the abortion rate is zero for a large proportion of cells (Donohue and Levitt 2004, Table 3).
Finally, I adjust for curvilinear trends in crime rates within each state in selected specifications. I risk over-fitting
since the inclusion of state and year fixed effects as well as state-specific trend terms absorbs most of the variation
in the abortion rate. Nevertheless, if legalization induced sharp discontinuities in crime and abortion rates, then
there may be sufficient variation to detect an association between abortion and crime.



                                                           21
           One final concern is the small number of homicides or murder arrests in some age-state-

year cells. The observations with zero events are dropped in a logarithmic specification. This

occurs primarily in the less-populated states and among the youngest age groups. Regressions

weighted by state population lessen the impact of these observations. Nevertheless, I also

estimate models in which I treat homicides and homicide arrests as counts. I use a negative

binomial model to allow for over-dispersion and conditional maximum likelihood to adjust for

state fixed effects.       The results are presented in Table A2 of the Appendix. The coefficients on

the abortion rate are positive and statistically insignificant.



                                                   VI. Discussion

           I have tried to make two points in this paper. First, even if one accepts Donohue and

Levitt’s identification strategy, their estimates are small and statistically insignificant. The

coefficient on the abortion rate in a regression of age-specific homicide or arrest rates has either

the wrong sign or is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant when adjusted for serial

correlation. Efforts to instrument for measurement error are flawed and estimates are highly

sensitive to set of fixed effects and their interactions. The second point is that Donohue and

Levitt’s results are not robust to an alternative identification strategy. I have argued that a

convincing test of a link between abortion and crime should be based on an exogenous change in

abortion that had a demonstrable effect on fertility. Thus, I use the legalization of abortion

following Roe to identify effects of abortion on crime in the 45 states affected by the ruling. I

use within-state comparison groups to net out hard to measure period effects. I also follow

Donohue and Levitt (2004) and average the effects of legalization on crime over 10 to 20 years

of the life of a cohort. I find little support for their hypothesis.

25
     See Joyce (2004b, pp 14-15) for a description of the weighting procedure.

                                                           22
       I have also addressed the criticism by Donohue and Levitt (2004) that I use only a

dichotomous indicator of legalization and not the change in abortion rates as the relevant

treatment. With data on abortion from the CDC, I regress homicide rates among cohorts born

before and after Roe on abortion rates between 1971 and 1974. Changes in abortion rates during

this period are large, plausibly exogenous, and are associated with decreases in fertility. Again,

I find no consistent association between abortion and crime.

       Finally, I have never argued that unanticipated changes in unwanted childbearing would

have no effect on family and/or child well-being. The more relevant question is whether such

effects are large enough and our research designs credible enough to uncover such impacts 15 to

25 years later. Studies, for instance, that look at changes in outcomes in the years just after

legalization may be better able to detect immediate impacts and may be less confounded by hard

to measure period effects (Gruber, Levine and Staiger 1999; Klick and Stratmann 2003).

Results from studies that have examined more long-term consequences are mixed. Angrist and

Evans (1999) find significant effects of abortion legalization on teen fertility in the period right

after legalization, but uncover no effect on the subsequent earnings of cohorts exposed. They

speculate that longer-term outcomes may be “too far down the causal chain” . Charles and

Stephens (2006), by contrast, find evidence that cohorts exposed in utero are less likely to use

illicit drugs in high school. The decline in youth drug use, however, may be related to supply –

side diseconomies rather than decreases in demand by “more wanted” youth (Jacobson 2004).

        Studies of the effects of legalized abortion on well-being are more credible when the

change in fertility is more dramatic. A recent analysis of the Romanian ban on abortion in 1966

found that cohorts exposed to the ban, adjusted for compositional changes, committed more

crime than cohorts born just before (Pop-Eleches 2005). The author cautions, however, that




                                                  23
omitted period effects and not the cohort effect associated with the ban may explain differences

in crime among those born in the 1970s. Nevertheless, the Romanian intervention is unique

since total fertility rates doubled as a result of the ban, an exogenous change in fertility roughly

20 times greater than the change that occurred after early legalization in the United States

(Levine et al. 1999).      Sen (2003), on the other hand, argues that variation in teen abortion rates

explains 50 percent of the decline in total violent crime in Canada in the 1990s. However, the

teen abortion rate can explain only 1 percent of the 33 percent decline in teen fertility rates

between 1974 and 1988.26 Moreover, teen fertility rates and pregnancy rates rise in the year

after abortion is fully legalized, a result more consistent with moral hazard than fetal selection

(http://www.statcan.ca/english/kits/preg/preg3g.htm).

         In summary, the legalization or de-legalization of abortion may generate a credible

source of variation in unintended childbearing. However, identifying effects of such changes on

longer-term outcomes such as crime depends on the magnitude of the change as well as the

ability to net out hard to measure period effects. Regressions of current crime on lagged

abortion, as favored by Donohue and Levitt, are not robust to alternative identification strategies,

which at the very least calls into question a causal interpretation of their findings.




26
  There are other limitations with Sen’s study. He finds no association between teen abortion rates and homicide
rates, robbery rates or rates of property crime. The association with violent crime is limited to sexual and physical
assault. Finally, he lacks age-specific crime rates and thus his tests are weaker than those of Donohue and Levitt
(2001, 2004).


                                                          24
                                          Acknowledgements

        I thank Christopher Foote, Andrew Racine, Steven Levitt and Robert Kaestner for helpful

comments as well as seminar participants at the NBER Health Economics Program, Carnegie

Mellon’s Heinz School of Public Policy, American Enterprise Institute, University of Rochester,

and University of Illinois, Chicago. Silvie Colman provided terrific research assistance. I am

responsible for all errors.




                                               25
                                                    References


Angrist, Joshua, and William N. Evans. 1999. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of

       the 1970 State Abortion Reforms.” In Research in Labor Economics, ed. Ronald

       Ehrenberg, pp. 75-111. Westport, CT: JAI Press.

Alan Guttmacher Institute. 2004. “U.S. Teenage Pregnancy Statistics.” http://www.agi-

       usa.org/pubs/state_pregnancy_trends.pdf Accessed October 4, 2005.

Ananat, Elizabeth O., Gruber, Jonathan and Phillip Levine. 2004. “ Abortion Legalization and

       Lifecycle Fertility.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10705,

Bertrand, Marianne, Duflo, Esther and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We

       Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 117: 249-

       275.

Blumstein, Alfred. 2000. “Disaggregating the Violence Trends.” In The Crime Drop in

       America, ed. Alfred Blumstein and Joel Wolman, pp: 13-44. New York: Cambridge

       University Press.

Blumstein, Alfred. 1995. “Youth Violence, Guns, and the Illicit Drug Industry.” The Journal of

       Criminal Law and Criminology 86(1):10-36.

Blumstein, Alfred, Frederick Rivara, and Richard Rosenfeld. 2000. “The Rise and Decline of

        Homicide--and Why.” Annual Review of Public Health 21:505-541.

Centers for Disease Control. 1972. Abortion Surveillance Report--Legal Abortions, United

       States Annual Summary, 1971, Atlanta, Georgia: Centers for Disease Control.

Centers for Disease Control. 1973. Abortion Surveillance Report--Legal Abortions, United

       States Annual Summary, 1972, Atlanta, Georgia: Centers for Disease Control.




                                               26
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Melvin Stephens Jr. 2002. “Abortion Legalization and Adolescent

       Substance Use.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9193.

Cook, Philip, and John H. Laub. 1998. “The Unprecedented Epidemic in Youth Violence.” In

       Youth Violence, ed. Michael Tonry and Mark H. Moore, pp. 27-64. Chicago: University

       of Chicago Press.

Cook, Philip and John H. Laub. 2002. “After the Epidemic: Recent Trends in Youth Violence in

       the United States.” Crime and Justice: A Review of Research Volume 29. Chicago:

       University of Chicago Press.

Dinardo, John. “A Review of Freakonomics.” Journal of Economics Literature. Forthcoming.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2001. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime.”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 379-420.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2004. “Further Evidence that Legalized Abortion Lowered

       Crime: A Reply to Joyce.” Journal of Human Resources. 39(1):29-49.

Donohue, John, and Steven Levitt. 2006. “Measurement Error, Legalized Abortion, and the

       Decline in Crime: A Response to Foote and Goetz (2005).” National Bureau of Economic

       Research Working Paper 11987.

Foote, Christopher, and Christopher Goetz. “Testing Economic Hypotheses with State-Level

       Data: A Comment on Donohue and Levitt.” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working

       Paper 10-15, November 22, 2005.

Fox, James Alan. 2000b. “Demographic and U.S. Homicide.” In The Crime Drop in America,

       ed. Alfred Blumstein and Joel Wolman, pp: 288-317. New York: Cambridge University

       Press.




                                             27
Fox, James Alan. 2004. “Uniform Crime Reports [United States]: Supplemental Homicide

       Reports, 1976-1998.” [Computer File]. Inter-University Consortium for Political and

       Social Research versions. Boston, MA: Northeastern University, College of Criminal

       Justice [producer]; Ann Arbor: Michigan: Inter-University Consortium for Political and

       Social Research [distributor].

Fox, James Alan and Marianne W. Zawitz. 2004. “Weighting and Imputation Procedures for

       1976-2002 Cumulative Data File.”

       (http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide/imputationandweighting.htm)

Gruber, Jonathan, Phillip Levine, and Douglas Staiger. 1999. “Legalized Abortion and Child

       Living Circumstances: Who is the Marginal Child.” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       114(1):263-291.

Henshaw, Stanley and Jennifer Van Vort. 1992 Abortion Factbook. New York: Alan Guttmacher

       Institute.

Jacobson, Mireille. 2004. “Baby Booms and Drug Busts: Trends in Youth Drug Use in the

       United States, 1975-2000. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 1481-1512.

Joyce, Ted. 2001. “Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?” National Bureau of Economic

       Research Working Paper No. 8319, June.

Joyce, Ted. 2004a. “Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?” Journal of Human Resources.

       39(1):1-28.

Joyce, Ted. 2004b. “Further Tests of Abortion and Crime.” National Bureau of Economic

       Research Working Paper No. 10564, June.

Joyce, Ted and Naci Mocan. 1990. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Adolescent

       Childbearing in New York City.” American Journal of Public Health 80(3):273-278.




                                              28
Klick, Jonathan and Thomas Stratmann. 2003. “The Effect of Abortion Legalization on Sexual

       Behavior: Evidence from Sexually Transmitted Diseases.” The Journal of Legal Studies

       32(2):407-433.

Lader, Lawrence. 1974. Abortion II: Making the Revolution. New York: Beacon.

Levine, Phillip et al. 1999. “ Roe v. Wade and American Fertility.” American Journal of Public

       Health 89(2):199-203.

Levitt, Steven. 2004. “Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain

       the Decline and Six that Do Not.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 18(1):163-190.

Lott, John and John Whitley. Forthcoming. “Abortion and Crime: Unwanted Children and Out-

       of-Wedlock Births.” Economic Inquiry.

Meyer, Bruce. 1995. “Natural and Quasi-Experiments in Economics.” Journal of Business and

       Economic Statistics. 13(2): 151-161.

O’Malley, Patrick M., Bachman, Jerald G. and Lloyd Johnston. 1984. “Period, Age, and Cohort

       Effects on Substance Use Among American Youth, 1976-82.” American Journal of

       Public Health 74(7):682-688.

Pop-Eleches, C. 2005. “The Impact of an Abortion Ban on Socio-Economic Outcomes of

       Children: Evidence from Romania.” Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics,

       Columbia University

Saul, Rebekah. 1998. “Abortion Reporting in the United States: An Examination of the Federal-

       State Partnership.” Family Planning Perspectives. 30(5):244-247.

Santelli JS, Abma J, Ventura S, Lindberg L, Morrow B, Anderson JE, Lyss S, Hamilton BE

       2004. "Can changes in sexual behaviors among high school students explain the decline in

       teen pregnancy rates in the 1990s?" Journal of Adolescent Health 35:80-90.




                                               29
Sen, Anindya. 2003. “Does Increased Abortion Lead to Lower Crime? Evaluating the

       Relationship between Crime, Abortion and Fertility.” Manuscript. Department of

       Economics, University of Waterloo, Canada.

Sklar, June, and Beth Berkov. 1974. “Abortion, Illegitimacy, and the American Birth Rate.”

       Science185 (September).

Tietze, Christopher. 1973. “Two Years Experience with a Liberal Abortion Law: Its Impact on

       Fertility Trends in New York City.” Family Planning Perspectives 5(1): 36-41.




                                              30
                                         Figure 1. Violent Crime Arrest Rates among 21 and 23-Year Olds in 45 States that Legalized Abortion
                                                     after Roe, Stratified by States with Above and Below Median Increases in the
                                                                             Abortion Rate from 1971-1973*
                                800


                                700


                                600
Violent crime arrests/100,000




                                500


                                400


                                300
                                                                                                      Exposure to legalized abortion
                                                                                                      begins for 21-year olds
                                200


                                100


                                  0
                                      1980

                                             1981

                                                    1982

                                                           1983

                                                                   1984

                                                                          1985

                                                                                 1986

                                                                                        1987

                                                                                               1988

                                                                                                        1989

                                                                                                               1990

                                                                                                                      1991

                                                                                                                             1992

                                                                                                                                    1993

                                                                                                                                           1994

                                                                                                                                                  1995

                                                                                                                                                         1996

                                                                                                                                                                1997

                                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                  Age 21, above median                            Age 23, above median
                                                                  Age 21, below median                            Age 23, below median
                               Figure 2. Homicide Rates among 17 and 19-Year Olds in 45 States that Legalized Abortion after Roe,
                                Stratified by States with Above and Below Median Increases in the Abortion Rate from 1971-1973*



                   35


                   30
                                                        Exposure to legalized abortion
                                                        begins for 17-year olds
                   25
Homicide/100,000




                   20


                   15


                   10


                    5


                    0
                        1980

                                1981

                                       1982

                                              1983

                                                     1984

                                                            1985

                                                                   1986

                                                                          1987

                                                                                 1988

                                                                                        1989

                                                                                               1990

                                                                                                      1991

                                                                                                             1992

                                                                                                                    1993

                                                                                                                           1994

                                                                                                                                  1995

                                                                                                                                         1996

                                                                                                                                                1997

                                                                                                                                                       1998

                                                                                                                                                              1999

                                                                                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                        Age 17, above median                                 Age 19, above median
                                                        Age 17, below median                                 Age 19, below median
                                 Figure 3. Murder Arrest Rates among 18 and 20-Year Olds in 45 States that Legalized Abortion after
                                Roe, Stratified by States with Above and Below Median Increases in the Abortion Rate from 1971-1973*



                         60


                         50
Murder arrests/100,000




                         40


                         30


                         20

                                                                                                                             Exposure to legalized abortion
                         10                                                                                                  begins for 18-year olds



                          0
                              1980

                                     1981

                                            1982

                                                   1983

                                                           1984

                                                                  1985

                                                                         1986

                                                                                1987

                                                                                       1988

                                                                                              1989

                                                                                                     1990

                                                                                                            1991

                                                                                                                   1992

                                                                                                                          1993

                                                                                                                                 1994

                                                                                                                                        1995

                                                                                                                                               1996

                                                                                                                                                      1997

                                                                                                                                                              1998
                                                          Age 18, above median                         Age 20, above median
                                                          Age 18, below median                         Age 20, below median
                                        Figure 4. Property Crime Arrest Rates among 16 and 18-Year Olds in 45 States that Legalized Abortion
                                                     after Roe, Stratified by States with Above and Below Median Increases in the
                                                                             Abortion Rate from 1971-1973*


                                 4500

                                 4000

                                 3500
Property crime arrests/100,000




                                 3000

                                 2500

                                 2000
                                                             Exposure to legalized abortion
                                 1500
                                                             begins for 16-year olds

                                 1000

                                  500

                                    0
                                        1980

                                               1981

                                                      1982

                                                             1983

                                                                      1984

                                                                             1985

                                                                                    1986

                                                                                           1987

                                                                                                  1988

                                                                                                         1989

                                                                                                                1990

                                                                                                                       1991

                                                                                                                              1992

                                                                                                                                     1993

                                                                                                                                            1994

                                                                                                                                                   1995

                                                                                                                                                          1996

                                                                                                                                                                 1997

                                                                                                                                                                        1998
                                                                    Age 16, above median                          Age 18, above median
                                                                    Age 16, below median                          Age 18, below median
  Table 1. Estimated Effects of Abortion Rate on Age-specific Arrest
   and Homicide Rates (in logs): Replication of Donohue and Levitt
                                (2006)
                                              (1)               (2)               (3)

Ln violent crime arrest rate               -0.021*           -0.021            -0.039
                                           (0.008)           (0.013)           (0.019)

   Effect of 1 SD Δ                       [-0.035]          [-0.035]           [-0.046]

Ln property crime arrest rate               0.001             0.001             0.005
                                           (0.005)           (0.008)           (0.012)

   Effect of 1 SD Δ                        [0.002]           [0.002]           [0.006]

Ln murder arrest rate                       -0.004            -0.004            0.003
                                           (0.016)           (0.023)           (0.078)

   Effect of 1 SD Δ                       [-0.007]          [-0.007]           [0.004]

Ln homicide rate                            0.006             0.006             0.048
                                           (0.017)           (0.018)           (0.066)

   Effect of 1 SD Δ                        [0.010]           [0.010]           [0.057]

Cluster by state                             No                Yes               Yes
Cohort                                    1961-83           1961-83            1974-81
Figures in column (1) replicate results from Donohue and Levitt (2006, Table 5) for
violent and property crime arrest rates. The results for murder arrests and homicide rates
use the same specification. The unit of observation is the state-year-age cell. The sample
in columns (1) and (2) covers the years 1985-1998, ages 15-24 and cohorts 1961-83.
There are 6724 observations for violent crime arrests, 6730 for property crime arrests,
5715 for murder arrests and 5851 for the homicide rate. The sample in column (3) is
limited to cohorts for which abortion data exist in Donohue and Levitt (2006). Standard
errors in parentheses are adjusted for clustering within state and year of birth in column
(1), but are clustered by state in columns (2) and (3). The weighted mean and standard
deviation of the abortion ratio for the samples in columns (1) and (2) are 1.35 and 1.65,
respectively, and 3.02 and 1.19 for the samples in column (3).
 Table 2. Sensitivity of Abortion Rate Coefficient to Interactions of Age, State and
             Year Fixed Effects in Regressions of Age-Specific Crime
                             and Arrest Rates (in logs)
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
Dependent variable
Ln violent crime arrest rate           0.018**      -0.031***     0.065***      0.071***       -0.021**
N=6724                                (0.006)        (0.007)      (0.009)       (0.004)        (0.008)
R-squared                              0.846          0.901        0.912         0.964          0.970

Ln property crime arrest rate         -0.021**      -0.003        -0.035***     0.038***        0.001
N=6730                                (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.008)      (0.003)        (0.005)
R-squared                              0.861         0.908          0.931        0.979          0.983

Ln murder arrest rate                  0.002        -0.034*       0.051***      0.119***       -0.004
N=5715                                (0.013)       (0.016)       (0.014)       (0.009)        (0.016)
R-squared                              0.735         0.760         0.813         0.835          0.843

Ln homicide rate                      -0.024        -0.079***     0.068***      0.125***        0.006
N=5851                                (0.015)        (0.019)      (0.014)       (0.009)        (0.017)
R-squared                              0.668          0.683        0.789         0.797          0.810

State                                    X
State*Age                                              X                            X             X
Year*Age                                 X             X              X                           X
State*Year                                                            X             X             X

# of Parameters                         191           641           841           1174          1291

Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted for
clustering by state and year of birth following Donohue and Levitt (2004, 2006). There are potentially
7140 observations given 14 years (1985-1998), 10 age groups (15-24) and 51 states. Samples are less due
cells with zero observations or non-reporting. The number of parameters is the maximum that would be
included if there were no missing data. The specifications in columns (1) and (2) are used by Donohue and
Levitt (2001,2004). The specification is column (5) if from Donohue and Levitt (2006).
*** p.<.01; ** p<.05; * p<.10
                Table 3. Age-period-cohort diagram of arrest rates for 15 to 24 year olds

                                                   Year of Crime
                        85   86   87   88   89   90   91    92   93   94   95   96   97     98

                  70    15   16   17   18   19   20    21   22   23   24
Year of Birth




                  71         15   16   17   18   19    20   21   22   23   24
                  72              15   16   17   18    19   20   21   22   23   24
                  73                   15   16   17    18   19   20   21   22   23   24
                  74                        15   16    17   18   19   20   21   22   23     24
                  75                             15    16   17   18   19   20   21   22     23
  Table 4. DDD Estimates of Changes in Log Homicide Rates and Log Arrest Rates in 45 States
                    Following Roe vs. Wade for Birth Cohorts 1972-1975
               Age Groups                                                         Arrest Rates
Years Exposed Unexposed Homicide Rate                           Murder                Violent             Property
  (1)         (2)          (3)                (4)                    (5)                   (6)                  (7)

85-89       13-14        15-16         0.054 (0.214)           ---         ---       ---         ---      ---         ---
87-91       15-16        17-18         0.019 (0.135)         0.068 (0.164)         0.019 (0.062)        0.011 (0.036)
89-93       17-18        19-20         0.180 (0.098)         0.027 (0.086)         0.009 (0.046)       -0.008 (0.025)
91-95       19-20        21-22        -0.026 (0.083)         0.177 (0.084)*        0.029 (0.035)       -0.011 (0.028)
93-97       21-22        23-24         0.134 (0.123)         0.091 (0.127)        -0.024 (0.031)       -0.013 (0.033)
95-99       23-24        25-26        -0.047 (0.127)           ---         ---       ---         ---      ---         ---
97-01       25-26        27-28         0.092 (0.168)           ---         ---       ---         ---      ---         ---
            Simple average             0.058                 0.091                 0.008               -0.005
           Weighted average            0.054                 0.098                 0.003               -0.007

Each DDD estimate is from a separate regression (β5 from equation (3) in the text). The sample is limited to cohorts born
in 1972-1975 in the 45 states that legalized abortion with Roe. The states in which changes in the abortion rate between
1971 and 1973 exceeded the median change are the “exposed” states and those at or below the median are the comparison
states (see Table 1A in the Appendix). Arrests include the years 1987-1998 and homicides 1985-2001. Homicides are from
the Supplemental Homicide Reports and have not been weighted to reflect state totals as reported in the Uniform Crime
Reports. The weighted average of the coefficients is weight by the inverse of their variances. Reports *p<.05; ** p<.01
    Table 5. Estimate from Regressions of Crime and Arrest Rates on Abortion Rates in the 45 States that
                         Legalized Abortion after Roe for Birth Cohorts 1972-1975*
                                                                                              Arrest Rates
                                       Homicide Rate                  Murder                Violent Crime              Property Crime
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)


Abortion rate                         0.015         0.033         0.019       0.023        -0.029        0.04          -0.022        -0.004
                                     (0.029)       (0.030)       (0.032)     (0.029)      (0.027)      (0.018)*       (0.025)       (0.017)

Effect of 1 SD Δ                     [0.016]       [0.035]       [0.020]     [0.025]      [-0.031]      [0.043]      [-0.024]      [-0.004]

Abortion rate adjusted*               0.039         0.064         0.038       0.017        -0.062        0.042        -0.037         0.000
                                     (0.051)       (0.052)       (0.052)     (0.052)      (0.048)       (0.039)       (0.045)       (0.028)

Effect of 1 SD Δ                     [0.034]       [0.056]       [0.033]     [0.015]      [-0.054]      [0.037]      [-0.032]       [0.000]

State-trends                           No            Yes           No          Yes          No            Yes           No            Yes
N                                     2009                        1355                     1618                        1621

Coefficients pertain to β from equation (1) in the text. The sample for homicides includes cohorts 1972-75, years 1985-01 and ages 13-27.
The sample for arrests includes cohorts 1972-1975, years 1987-98 and ages 15 to 24. The abortion rate is the number of resident abortions
per 1000 live births and then divided by 100. The weighted mean and standard deviation of the abortion rate unadjusted for mother’s place
of birth is 1.529 and 1.071, respectively. The abortion rates pertain to the years 1971-1974; thus, crime rates in year t are regressed on the
lagged abortion rate (AR) weighted as follows: 0.125*AR(t-a)+0.75*AR(t-a-1)+0.125*AR(t-a-2) where “a” is age in year t (See Donohue
and Levitt 2006). Thus, the homicide rate of 17-year olds in 1990 is regressed on .125*AR1973+.75*AR1972+.125*AR1971

*The adjusted abortion rate attempts to approximate the abortion rate by mother’s state of birth. I create a 51x51 weight matrix in which
each element (aij)is the proportion of homicide victims that reside in state i but who were born in state j. I use all homicide victims ages 15
to 29 from the national mortality files for the year 1985-1998 to create the weights. I then pre-multiply the resident abortion rate in each
state and year by the weight matrix. The weighted mean and standard deviation of the adjusted abortion rate is 1.496 and 0.875,
respectively.
 Appendix Table 1. Abortion Ratios by State of Residence in 1971 and 1973 Ranked
           by the Change in Abortion Ratios between the Two Years.*

State                               Abortion ratio   Abortion ratio   Difference
(ranked by difference in abortion       1971             1973         1973-1971
ratio 73-71: lowest to highest)

New Mexico                              224              146             -78
West Virginia                            29               24              -5
Louisiana                                16               20               4
North Dakota                             25               40              15
Mississippi                               7               27              20
Oregon                                  212              237              25
Montana                                  35               61              26
Indiana                                  52               81              29
Utah                                      2               36              34
Arkansas                                 29               68              39
Tennessee                                39               78              39
Kentucky                                 37               81              44
Idaho                                     2               48              46
Oklahoma                                 33               81              48
Iowa                                     63              116              53
Kansas                                  112              165              53
Wisconsin                                74              130              56
South Carolina                           39               95              56
Alabama                                  22               81              59
Wyoming                                  32              100              68
Nebraska                                 42              113              71
Georgia                                  53              129              76
New Hampshire                            96              173              77

Average for below median                 55               93             37
Weighted Average for below median        51               92             41

Maine                                    75              159             84
South Dakota                             14              103             89
North Carolina                           64              160             96
Ohio                                     71              169             98
Minnesota                                54              155            101
Missouri                                 59              160            101
Colorado                                               115                   221                   106
Texas                                                   11                   127                   116
Delaware                                               167                   286                   119
Arizona                                                 11                   135                   124
Pennsylvania                                           113                   243                   130
Virginia                                                84                   222                   138
Illinois                                                81                   225                   144
Florida                                                 79                   227                   148
Vermont                                                 96                   250                   154
Rhode Island                                           113                   269                   156
Connecticut                                            174                   342                   168
Michigan                                                88                   266                   178
Massachusetts                                          152                   360                   208
New Jersey                                             188                   431                   243
Maryland                                               154                   418                   264
Nevada                                                   4                   352                   348

Average for above median                                89                   240                   151
Weighted Average for above median                       86                   229                   142

Average for 45 states                                   72                   165                    93
Weighted Average for 45 states                          74                   180                   106

*Abortion rates are the ratio of abortions by state of residence per 1000 births. Data on resident abortions in
1971 are from Table 5 of the Centers for Disease Control (1972) and resident abortion rates in 1973 are from
Stanley Henshaw of the Alan Guttmacher Institute.
 Appendix Table 2. Negative binomial estimates of the Association between
  Homicides and Murder Arrests and the Abortion Rates in the 45 States
     that Legalized Abortion after Roe for Birth Cohorts 1972-1975*
                                             Homicide                     Murder Arrest
                                                  (1)                              (2)


Abortion rate                           0.013            0.045           0.013            0.005
                                       (0.025)          (0.024)         [0.027]          [0.026]

Abortion rate weighted*                 0.031             0.06           0.022            -0.007
                                       (0.039)          (0.037)         [0.042]          [0.042]

State-trends                             No              Yes               No             Yes
N                                       2559             2559             1621            1621

Coefficients are from a negative binomial regression estimated by conditional (on state fixed
effects) maximum likelihood with Stata 9.0. Age-specific population was used as offsets.
Exponentiation of the coefficients is interpretable as the incident rate ratio. See notes to Table 8
in the text.
