                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION

                                            Thomas Sargent
                                            Noah Williams
                                               Tao Zha

                                         Working Paper 12606
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12606


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2006




This paper has benefited from help and encouragement of many people. We thank Eduardo Ganapolsky,
Karsten Jeske, Albert Marcet, David Romer, and especially Christopher Sims, Dan Waggoner, and
Michael Woodford for helpful discussions. Sagiri Kitao, Tomasz Piskorski, and Demian Pouzo provided
their outstanding research assistance; Namgeun Jeong and Eric Wang provided indispensable assistance
on clustering and parallel computing in the Linux operating system. We acknowledge the technical
support of the Computing College of Georgia Institute of Technology on grid computation techniques.
Finally, we thank Mike Chriszt, Jose Ricardo, Diego Vilan, and Elena Whisler for their help with both
collecting the data and understanding institutional details. Sargent thanks the National Science Foundation
for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Thomas Sargent, Noah Williams, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Conquest of South American Inflation
Thomas Sargent, Noah Williams, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 12606
October 2006
JEL No. D83,E31,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

We infer determinants of Latin American hyperinflations and stabilizations by using the method of
maximum likelihood to estimate a hidden Markov model that potentially assigns roles both to fundamentals
in the form of government deficits that are financed by money creation and to destabilizing expectations
dynamics that can occasionally divorce inflation from fundamentals. Our maximum likelihood estimates
allow us to interpret observed inflation rates in terms of variations in the deficits, sequences of shocks
that trigger temporary episodes of expectations driven hyperinflations, and occasional superficial reforms
that cut inflation without reforming deficits. Our estimates also allow us to infer the deficit adjustments
that seem to have permanently stabilized inflation processes.

Thomas Sargent                                       Tao Zha
Department of Economics                              Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
New York University                                  1000 Peachtree Street N.E.
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor                         Atlanta, Georgia 30309-4470
New York, NY 10003                                   tzha@earthlink.net
and NBER
thomas.sargent@nyu.edu

Noah Williams
Department of Economics
001 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1921
and NBER
noahw@princeton.edu
                       THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                           2

          Perhaps the simple rational expectations assumption is at fault here,
          for it is difficult to believe that economic agents in the hyperinflations
          understood the dynamic processes in which they were participating
          without undergoing some learning process that would be the equivalent
          of adaptive expectations.
                                                                Stanley Fischer, 1987
          The Larida proposal starts from the premise that indexation, not mone-
          tized deficits, is the cause of inflation, and I share that view completely.
          Money creation, and more importantly, rising velocity because of mone-
          tary deregulation, are at best the air in the tires; indexation is decidedly
          the engine of inflation.
                                                             Rudiger Dornbusch, 1985

                                       I. Introduction
I.1. A hidden Markov model. This paper estimates a hidden Markov model for in-
flation in five South American countries, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, and Peru.1
Ours is a “back-to-basics” model. It features a demand function for money inspired
by Cagan (1956), a budget constraint that determines the rate at which a govern-
ment prints money, a stochastic money-financed deficit whose mean and volatility
are governed by a finite state Markov chain, and an adaptive scheme for the pub-
lic’s expected rate of inflation that allows occasional hard-to-detect deviations from
rational expectations that help to explain features of the data that a strict rational
expectations version of the model cannot. We trust our monthly series on inflation
but lack trustworthy monthly data on deficits and money supplies. Therefore, to es-
timate the model’s free parameters, we form the density of a history of inflation, view
it as a likelihood, and maximize it with respect to the parameters. For each country,
we then form a joint density for the inflation and deficit histories at the maximum
likelihood parameter estimates and use it to calculate a density for the deficit history
conditional on the inflation history. As one of several validation exercises, we compare
this deficit density with the annual monetary deficit data that we do have. Unlike
purely statistical models, we can use our model to infer the causes of hyperinflations
and stabilizations at different times and places. Our model offers explanations of
particular inflations and stabilizations that differ substantially across episodes.
   Our purpose in positing an adaptive expectations scheme is not to turn the clock
back to the days before the hallmark cross-equation restrictions of the rational ex-
pectations revolution caused expectations to disappear as free variables in dynamic
  1
      Elliott, Aggoun, and Moore (1995) is a good reference about hidden Markov models.
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                   3

                        πt − βt




                                                                  G(βt )




                                        b                    b

                                       π1∗                  π2∗       βt



                                                                  H(βt )




               Figure 1. Mean adaptive dynamics and REE dynamics.

models.2 On the contrary, we shall exploit rational expectations restrictions and self-
confirming equilibria when we analyze salient features of our model’s dynamics that
allow it to fit the inflation data. But like Marcet and Nicolini (2003), our model
retreats from rational expectations by adding an adaptation parameter that gives
people’s expectations dynamics that help our model explain the data, partly by elim-
inating some perverse out-of-steady state rational expectations dynamics and partly
by allowing occasional expectations-driven big inflations. Though we use different
procedures to highlight this, we shall argue along with Marcet and Nicolini (2003)
that the departures of our model from rational expectations are not large.

I.2. Basic idea. We start with the insight of Marcet and Sargent (1989b) and Marcet
and Nicolini (2003) that an adaptive expectations version of a hyperinflation model
shares steady states with its rational expectations version, but has more plausible
out-of-steady-state dynamics. Figures 1 and 2 summarize the dynamics of the model
of Sargent and Wallace (1987) and Marcet and Sargent (1989b) and show the basic
ingredients of our model. Here βt denotes the public’s expected gross rate of infla-
tion at date t; H(β) and G(β) describe the actual inflation πt determined by rational
expectations (or perfect foresight) dynamics and some least squares learning (or adap-
tive expectations) dynamics, respectively. The dashed curves correspond to a higher

  2
   Sargent (1981) and most of the articles in Lucas and Sargent (1981) argue for making parameters
measuring expectations disappear from econometric models. Lucas (1986) and Marcet and Sargent
(1989a,b) used adaptive expectations schemes to justify rational expectations as an equilibrium
concept supported by a law of large numbers and to select among multiple rational expectations
equilibria.
                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                4

                       πt − βt




                                 G(βt )




                                           b               b

                                          π1∗            π2∗       βt




                Figure 2. Adaptive dynamics and the “escape event”.

deficit level than do the solid curves. Figure 1 indicates that while the rational expec-
tations dynamics and the learning dynamics share fixed points (the zeros of H and
G), they identify different fixed points as stable ones: the high expected inflation fixed
point π2∗ is stable under the rational expectations dynamics, while the lower expected
inflation fixed point π1∗ is stable under the learning dynamics.3 The two fixed points
are on different sides of the peak of the Laffer curve, so increases in the deficit raise
π1∗ , but lower π2∗ .4 Around the lower fixed point, increases in the government deficit
increase inflation, while they lower inflation at the higher fixed point. An attractive
feature of the learning dynamics is that they dispose of the implausible higher fixed
point, with its perverse comparative statics, as a focal point for analysis.
    Now think of stochastic versions of a model under the learning dynamics in which
the G curve shifts in a stochastically stationary way as shocks impinge on the deficit
or in which shocks impinge directly on the inflation rate without shifting the G curve.
In such a stochastic version of the model with learning, the learning dynamics will
tend to push expected inflation toward a stochastic counterpart of the lower fixed
point so long as expectations remain within its domain of attraction, i.e., so long as
they remain beneath π2∗ . But occasionally shocks might push βt above π2∗ , the shaded
region in figure 2 in which the G dynamics cause actual and expected inflation to
increase without limit. When β exceeds π2∗ , we say that an escape (from the domain
of attraction of π1∗ ) has occurred. Marcet and Nicolini (2003) exploit the insight that
occasional escapes from the domain of attraction of π1∗ could capture the recurrent

  3Lucas  (1986),Marcet and Sargent (1989a), and Evans and Honkapohja (2001) recommend select-
ing rational expectations equilibria that are stable under least squares learning.
   4See Marcet and Sargent (1989b) for details.
                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                5

bursts of inflation in Latin America that seemed not to coincide with any marked
increases in government deficits. However, note that when deficits are higher on
average, as in the dashed lines in figure 1, not only is inflation higher on average due
to the higher π1∗ , but the higher fixed point π2∗ is lower and thus it will be easier for
beliefs to escape. To make this explanation fit together, Marcet and Nicolini (2003)
supplemented the basic model of Marcet and Sargent (1989b) with a story about
mechanical reforms that end an escape episode by exogenously interrupting the G
dynamics and resetting actual inflation (and therefore πt ) well within the domain of
attraction of π1∗ under the G dynamics.
  We adopt the idea of Marcet and Nicolini (2003) that there are recurrent escapes,
but differ from them in our stochastic specification of the deficit and the reform
event. Instead of calibrating the model as they do, we form a likelihood function,
maximize it, then use the equilibrium probability distribution that we estimate to
extract interpretations of the observed hyperinflation in terms of “normal” dynamics
driven by deficits and “extraordinary” dynamics driven by escape dynamics. One of
our objectives is to use the likelihood function for inflation to spot when escape events
and reform events occurred. In addition to Marcet and Nicolini’s mechanical reforms
that eventually arrest escaping inflation, the richer dynamics that we attribute to the
deficit allow another type of reform not allowed by Marcet and Nicolini (2003): an
exogenous shift in the deficit regime. This type of reform allows us to fit our model
over longer periods than would be appropriate for the Marcet and Nicolini (2003)
specification, in particular, the periods that include both recurrent hyperinflations as
well as enduring stabilizations.
I.3. Related literature. Sargent and Wallace (1987) formed the likelihood function
for a rational expectations version of a model closely related to the one that we shall
study here. Their model has a continuum of rational expectations equilibria but
is nevertheless overidentified. A single parameter in the likelihood function indexes
the continuum of equilibria. Imrohoroglu (1993) estimated the Sargent and Wallace
(1987) model using data from German hyperinflation of the early 1920s and made
inferences about the prevailing rational expectations equilibrium. Because it assumed
a constant mean deficit, the econometric setup in Sargent and Wallace (1987) and
Imrohoroglu (1993) was not designed to explain data series spanning periods of hy-
perinflation and their subsequent stabilizations.5 To explain such data, we modify
the model of Marcet and Nicolini (2003) while adhering to the maximum likelihood
philosophy of Sargent and Wallace (1987). Another strand of the literature uses game
  5A  recent paper by Adam, Evans, and Honkapohja (in press) is another theoretical model that
deals with a single episode of hyperinflation.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                             6

theoretic ideas to develop models in which hyperinflations may be an important part
of an equilibrium path. In Zarazaga (1993) and Mondino, Sturzenegger, and Tommasi
(1996), conflict between different groups in determining policy results in an equilib-
rium path where inflation may switch between phases of high and low rates. While
our model shares the features of switches in the rates of inflation, the mechanism
underlying it is quite different.
   Models of escapes have been used to model inflation rates and exchange rates at
moderate levels of inflation by Sargent (1999), Cho, Williams, and Sargent (2002),
Sargent and Williams (2003), Cho and Kasa (2003), Kasa (2004), Tetlow and von zur
Muehlen (2004), and Ellison, Graham, and Vilmunen (2006).

I.4. Organization. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents our model and a brief description of the likelihood function for histories of
inflation. We consign important details about the likelihood to appendix A. Section
III gives a brief account of the concepts of self-confirming equilibria and conditional
self-confirming equilibria that will guide our empirical interpretations. We relegate
computational details to appendix B. In section IV, we describe how to compute the
probabilities of two important events, namely, when beliefs escape and when monetary
reforms take place. Section V describes our estimation procedures and results. Section
VI then assembles these results into a set of interpretable economic findings. Section
VII then explores the fit of our model relative to some alternatives. To help us measure
how far we have drifted from rational expectations, section VIII computes stationary
points of conditional self-confirming equilibria and compares them with stationary
rational expectations inflation rates, defined and computed in appendix C, evaluated
at our maximum likelihood parameter estimates. Section IX concludes. Appendix D
describes the deficit data and discusses how we compute statistics from our model to
compare to this data. Finally, appendix E collects some additional results.

                                   II. The Model
   Given a vector of parameters, the model induces a probability distribution over
sequences of inflation rates, money creation rates, deficits, and a hidden Markov state.
We use this joint distribution to deduce a marginal distribution for a sequence of
inflation rates as a function of the model’s parameters: this is our likelihood function.
We maximize it to get parameter estimates. In this section, we describe the economic
forces at play on the way to constructing the likelihood function to be presented in
appendix A.
   The model consists of a demand function for money, a government budget con-
straint, an exogenous process for fiscal deficits, and a formulation that by slightly
                      THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                       7

retreating from rational expectations occasionally gives expectations a life of their
own in shaping the evolution of inflation.6 The money demand equation, the govern-
ment budget constraint, and the law of motion for deficits are:7
                                                   e
                                  Mt       1 λ Pt+1
                                         = −          ,                           (1)
                                  Pt       γ γ Pt
                            Mt = θMt−1 + dt (mt , vt )Pt ,                        (2)
                                            ¯ t ) + ηd t (vt ),
                            dt (mt , vt ) = d(m                                   (3)
                        Pr(mt+1 = i|mt = j) = qm, ij , i, j = 1, ..., mh ,                         (4)
                       Pr(vt+1 = i|vt = j) = qv, ij , i, j = 1, ..., vh ,                (5)
                                                                £         ¤
where 0 < λ < 1, 0 < θ < 1, γ > 0, d(s    ¯ t ) > 0. Here st = mt vt is a Markov state,
as in Hamilton (1989) and Sclove (1983), that neither the agents inside the model nor
we the econometricians observe; Pt is the price level at time t; Mt is nominal balances
                                          e
as a percent of output at time t; Pt+1       is the public’s expectation of the price level
at time t + 1; and ηd t (vt ) is an i.i.d. random shock. Each column of each transition
probability matrix Q` = [q`, ij ] for ` = m, v sums to 1. The coefficient d(m ¯ t ) measures
the average deficit, which via the government budget constraint equals the average
amount of seigniorage financed by money creation in state mt . Thus, in what follows
we speak interchangeably of the fiscal or monetary deficit. £The two        ¤ Markov chains
(Qm , Qv ) induce a chain Q on the composite state st = mt vt with transition
matrix Q = Qm ⊗ Qv .8 The total number of states is h = mh × vh .
  Rather than imposing rational expectations, we follow Marcet and Sargent (1989b)
and Marcet and Nicolini (2003) and assume that:
                                       e       e
                                      πt+1 ≡ Pt+1 /Pt = βt .
The public updates the belief βt by using a constant-gain algorithm:
                                   βt = βt−1 + ε(πt−1 − βt−1 ),                                    (6)
where 0 < ε << 1 and πt is the gross inflation rate at time t, defined as
                                           πt = Pt /Pt−1 .
  6Using   adaptive rather than rational expectations also strengthens the role of the deficit as a
fundamental that determines inflation. See Marimon and Sunder (1993) and the remarks in section
II.2.
   7For an interpretation of this equation as a saving decision in a general equilibrium model, see Ma-

rimon and Sunder (1993), Marcet and Nicolini 2003) and Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004). Equation
(2) was used by Friedman (1948) and Fischer (1982), among many others.
   8We have also considered cases where m and v are not independent, but the fit of these versions
                                             t      t
of the model is much worse. See Section V.2 for a detailed discussion.
                      THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                8

  The model (1)-(5) makes inflation dynamics depend on γdt (k) where k ∈ {1, . . . , h}
and not on the individual parameters γ and dt (k) separately. Therefore, we have

Proposition 1 (Normalization). The dynamics of πt are unchanged if both dt (k) and
1/γ are normalized by the same scale.

Proof. Let dt (k) and 1/γ be multiplied by any real scalar κ. If we redefine Pt to be
Pt /κ, the system (1)-(5) remains unaffected. The redefinition of the price level simply
means that the price index is re-based, which does not affect the dynamics of either
Mt or πt .                                                                            ¤

  The normalization is effectively a choice of units for the price level, about which
our model is silent because we deduce a joint density over inflation sequences only.
Proposition 1 explains why we have chosen to deviate from the procedure of Marcet
                                          ¯
and Nicolini (2003), who treated γ and d(m)    as separate parameters, and who in-
terpreted the calibrated value of dt to measure fiscal deficits as a share of GDP. We
think that procedure is misleading because these parameters cannot be identified sep-
arately, so that re-normalizing them in the manner of Proposition 1 gives the same
equilibrium outcome.9 For identification purposes, therefore, when searching for the
maximum likelihood estimates, we normalize γ = 1. We shall eventually re-normalize
it to match the pertinent price level when we compute estimates of dt to compare
with some monetary deficit data. It is important to note that such normalization
                                               ¯ t ), but not the standard deviation
affects only the mean of log dt or the median d(m
of log dt .


II.1. Deterministic steady states. A deterministic version of model (1) - (5) can
be obtained by fixing the state mt = m ∈ {1, . . . , mh } and setting ηd t (vt ) to zero for
all t. We now report equilibria from a perfect foresight version of the model where
agents observe and condition on the mean deficit state m. Such equilibria are useful
reference points in the analysis of our stochastic adaptive model. As is well-known
by now, there are two deterministic steady states associated with each m.

Proposition 2. If
                                                     √
                                    ¯
                                    d(m) < 1 + θλ − 2 θλ,                                   (7)

  9For    a general discussion of normalization in econometrics, see Hamilton, Waggoner, and Zha
(2004).
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                     9

then there exist two steady state equilibria for πt :
                         ¡              ¢ q¡                    ¢2
                           1 + θλ − ¯
                                    d(m)   −     1 +  θλ − ¯
                                                           d(m)    − 4θλ
               π1∗ (m) =                                                 ,                      (8)
                                             q 2λ
                         ¡               ¢     ¡               ¢2
                           1 + θλ − ¯
                                    d(m)   +     1 +  θλ − ¯
                                                           d(m)    − 4θλ
               π2∗ (m) =                                                 .                      (9)
                                               2λ
Proof. Sargent and Wallace (1987) show that
                            ¡                  ¢                 θ
                                       ¯
                       πt = λ−1 + θ − d(m)λ −1
                                                 −                    .
                                                               λ πt−1
In stationary equilibrium, πt = πt−1 . Substituting this equality into the above equa-
tion leads to (8) and (9).                                                          ¤
  We shall impose (7) in our empirical work. Note that the maximum value √that
¯
d(m) can take and still have a steady state (SS) inflation rate exist is 1 + θλ − 2 θλ.
      ¯
When d(m)   attains this maximum value, the two SS inflation rates both equal
                                             r
                                      max      θ
                                    πSS   ≡      .                                  (10)
                                               λ
II.2. Limit points of near deterministic dynamics. Marcet and Sargent (1989b)
and Marcet and Nicolini (2003) show that when the gain ε is sufficiently small, πt
converges to π1∗ when the initial belief satisfies β0 < π2∗ (k).10 Marcet and Sargent
(1989b) describe how this outcome “reverses the dynamics” under rational expecta-
tions studied by Sargent and Wallace (1987), according to which πt converges to the
high steady state inflation rate π2∗ (k). The π2∗ (k) stationary point exhibits the per-
verse comparative statics property that stationary inflation rises when seigniorage
falls. We impute the constant gain (or adaptive expectations) learning scheme to
agents for two reasons. First, we want to arrest the perverse comparative dynamics
associated with rational expectations because we believe that normally higher deficits
actually cause higher inflation and that imposing this feature on the model will help to
explain the data. Second, as noted earlier by Marcet and Sargent (1989b) and Marcet
and Nicolini (2003), in the presence of sufficiently large shocks, the adaptive expecta-
tions scheme creates the possibility that some big inflations are driven by dynamics
of inflation expectations that are divorced from the fundamental force that normally
causes inflation, namely, the deficit. We shall soon discuss such dynamics under the
  10They  actually establish their convergence results for a learning scheme where the constant ε is
replaced by 1/t. Our convergence results in appendix B use the constant gain specification, which
changes the nature of the convergence.
                       THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                          10

moniker “escape dynamics”. But first we state some restrictions on parameters and
outcomes that are necessary for our equilibrium to be well defined.
II.3. Restrictions on parameters and outcomes. We return to the stochastic
version of the model. By using (1)-(2) and (6), we obtain the following formula for
equilibrium inflation:
                                        θ(1 − λβt−1 )
                                πt =                     ,                        (11)
                                      1 − λβt − dt (st )
provided that both the numerator and denominator are positive. As shown in the
next section, the denominator must be bounded away from zero to ensure that the
moments of inflation exist and that the inflation dynamics converge. Therefore, to
guarantee existence of an equilibrium with positive prices and positive real balances,
we impose the following restrictions:
                                            1 − λβt−1 > 0,                                            (12)
                                 1 − λβt − dt (st ) > δθ(1 − λβt−1 ).                                 (13)
Condition (13) uses a small value δ > 0 to bound the denominator of (11) away
from zero. It follows that inflation is bounded by 1/δ. Because the steady state
rational expectations equilibrium (REE) inflation rate is bounded by 1/λ according
to Proposition 2, it follows that λ ≥ δ.
II.4. Cosmetic reforms. It is possible for a sequence of seigniorage shocks ηd t to
push βt beyond a point when the inflation dynamics will tend to push βt upward with-
out limit, in turn leading to an explosion of inflation driven by adverse expectations
dynamics. Unless we do something to arrest these dynamics, the model breaks down
in the sense that conditions (12) and (13) will ultimately be violated. We do this by
mechanically imposing a “reform” event: whenever these conditions are violated, we
simply reset inflation to the low steady state π1∗ (mt ) plus some noise:
                                 πt = πt∗ (mt ) ≡ π1∗ (mt ) + ηπ t (mt ),                             (14)
where ηπ t (mt ) is an i.i.d. random shock such that
                                          0 < πt∗ (mt ) < 1/δ.
When in addition 1 − λβt ≤ δθ(1 − λβt−1 ), then the model breaks down even with
dt = 0. In this case we also reset expectations so that βt = πt .11
  11Marcet    and Nicolini (2003) did not have this second clause in their reforms. We use it because
it helps to fit the data. It has the interpretation that when agents see that the first clause of
the cosmetic reform takes place with certainty, they are likely to adjust their belief quickly. If the
cosmetic reform is less certain (i.e., its probability is less than one), the public will continue to update
its belief according to the constant-gain algorithm. In principle, one could make reform of inflation
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                   11

                        Table 1. Parameters and their meanings

                           Parameter(s)      Feature
                           λ                 demand for money
                           ε                 expectations
                           ¯
                           d(m)              log deficit mean
                           ξ(v)              log deficit inverse std
                           ξπ                reform inverse std
                           Qm                m- transition matrix
                           Qv                v-transition matrix

  We use this inelegant device of cutting inflation and expected inflation to represent
the cosmetic reforms that Latin American governments occasionally used in the 1980s
to arrest inflation without really altering the stochastic process for money-financed
deficits.12

II.5. Likelihood functions. As discussed in section V.1 below, we fix the parame-
ters
£    (θ, δ) in estimation. Denote the remaining ¤    free parameters of the model as φ =
      ¯
 λ d(m) ξd (v) ξπ ε vec(Qm ) vec(Qv ) , where m = 1, . . . , mh and v = 1, . . . , vh .
The new parameters ξd (v) and ξπ are the inverses of the variances for structural shocks
to deficits and inflation and will be discussed in detail in appendix A. For convenience,
table 1 contains a reminder of the interpretations of these parameters. Let π t be a his-
tory of inflation from 1 to t, and similarly for the other variables. Given a parameter
vector, the model induces a joint density p(π T , mT , v T , dT , M T , β T |φ), where we set
β0 = π0 and the probability for the initial unobservable composite state s0 = [m0 v0 ]
is set as described in appendix A. We follow the convention that the initial observ-
able π0 is always taken as given. The initial value M0 is a function of β0 and d0
has no effect on the likelihood as long as π0 is given. We take the marginal density
p(π T |φ), viewed as a function of φ, as our likelihood function and compute the estima-
tor φ̂ = argmaxφ p(π T |φ). We make inferences about the deficit from the conditional
density p(dT |π T , φ̂). Appendix A contains a detailed description of how we construct
the likelihood function.

expectations depend on states by assuming that the agents can observe states or infer states from a
history of data. As discussed in section V.2, this specification would make estimating the model an
insurmountable task.
   12There were many cosmetic reforms in Latin America in the 1980s that sought to stabilize

inflation “on the cheap” without tackling fiscal deficits. See Dornbusch (1985) for a contemporary
discussion and Marcet and Nicolini (2003) for a discussion of superficial monetary reforms.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                           12

                        III. Self-Confirming Equilibria
   Although we are mostly interest in the dynamics of the model that arise under
learning, it is useful to have a benchmark equilibrium notion that characterizes these
dynamics. Following Sargent (1999) and Cho, Williams, and Sargent (2002), we adopt
the notion of a self-confirming equilibrium (SCE) as a natural limiting concept and
reference point for learning models. In an SCE, agents’ beliefs are consistent with
their observations, though their beliefs may be incorrect about off-equilibrium events.
In appendix B, we define self-confirming equilibria and conditional self-confirming
equilibria in terms of orthogonality conditions that will govern β in large samples
when ε → 0. We also describe functions corresponding to the G(β) function in
figure 1 that govern the dynamic behavior of βt as ε → 0. Appendix C then defines
rational expectations equilibria and links them to conditional and unconditional self-
confirming equilibria. Here we briefly describe the main concepts.
   An unconditional SCE is a β that satisfies Eπt − β = 0. For each mean deficit state
m, a conditional SCE is a β(m) that satisfies

                             E[πt |mt = m ∀t] − β(m) = 0

for m ∈ {1, . . . , mh }. A conditional SCE is thus just an unconditional SCE computed
on the (false) assumption that the mean deficit state mt will always be m. Like the
deterministic steady state REEs, in general there are two conditional SCEs for each
state m. We denote them as β1∗ (m) and β2∗ (m), where β1∗ (m) ≤ β2∗ (m). As in our
discussion above, β1∗ (m) is a stable attractor of the beliefs, while β2∗ (m) marks the
edge of the domain of attraction of this stable SCE.
   As we describe in appendix B, the conditional SCEs serve as good approximations
to REEs for very persistent average deficit states. They interest us because our
estimate of p(mt = m|π T , φ̂) implies that the mean deficit states are very persistent.
As we shall see, this makes a conditional SCE β(m) a good approximation to the
expected inflation rate in state m in a rational expectations equilibrium. It also
promises to make the conditional mean dynamics a good guide to the motion of β
in our adaptive model in mean deficit state m. More formal details justifying and
qualifying these assertions are given in appendix B.
   For each country, we construct mean dynamics for the conditional SCEs in each
deficit state m. We report them for each of our five countries in our key figures 3-7
below. In section VII, they will help us to interpret the inflation histories in our
five countries in terms of convergence to a lower fixed point, and escapes above the
higher fixed point associated with the mean deficit in state m. Later in section VIII,
                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                 13

they will help us evaluate how much our model deviates from a rational expectations
benchmark.

             IV. Probabilities of Escape and Cosmetic Reform
  When a sequence of seigniorage shocks ηd t pushes βt above the unstable SCE β2∗ (m),
we say that the inflation dynamics have escaped from the domain of attraction of the
low SCE inflation rate. When an escape has proceeded so far that a breakdown
threatens in the sense that (12)-(13) are violated, we impose the reform discussed in
Section II.4.
  Escapes and reforms contribute important features to the likelihood function. To
give a formal definition of probabilities of escape and reform, we introduce the fol-
lowing notation:
                                             θ(1 − λβt−1 ) ¯
                      ω t (mt ) = 1 − λβt −                − d(mt ),                       (15)
                                                β2∗ (mt )
                                                             ¯ t ).
                      ω t (mt ) = 1 − λβt − δθ(1 − λβt−1 ) − d(m                           (16)
If β2∗ (mt ) does not exist, we replace this term in (15) by πSS
                                                              max
                                                                  defined in (10). In the
escape region, because actual inflation πt is higher than βt , both perceived inflation
and inflation itself tend to escalate and thus hyperinflation is likely to occur. The
probability of this escape event at time t given the t − 1 information set is
                    h
                    X £                         ¡                                     ¢¤
    ι{βt−1 < 1/λ}         Pr (st = k | Πt−1 , φ) Fηd (k) (ω t (k)) − Fηd (k) (ω t (k)) ,   (17)
                    k=1

where ι(A) is an indicator function that returns 1 if the event A occurs and 0 otherwise
and Fηd (k) (x) is the cumulative density function (cdf) of ηdt (k) evaluated at the value
x. The probability of reform at time t given the t − 1 information set is:
                                     h
                                     X £                         ¡                     ¢¤
 ι{βt−1 ≥ 1/λ} + ι{βt−1 < 1/λ}             Pr (st = k | Πt−1 , φ) 1 − Fηd (k) (ω t (k)) . (18)
                                     k=1

                                      V. Estimation
V.1. Estimation procedure. In estimation we use the monthly CPI inflation for
each country published in the International Financial Statistics. These data sets
are relatively reliable and have samples long enough to cover the episodes of both
hyperinflation and low inflation. The long sample makes it reasonable to use the
Schwarz criterion to measure the fit of our parsimonious model. The sample period
is 1957:02–2005:04 for Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, and Peru and 1980:01–2005:04 for
Brazil.
                      THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                    14

   There are no reliable or even available data on GDP, money, and the government
deficit in many hyperinflation countries even on a quarterly basis because of “poorly
developed statistical systems” (Bruno and Fischer, 1990). However, as discussed
above, we are able to estimate the structural parameters through the inflation likeli-
hood derived in appendix A. On the other hand, we may ask too much of the model
to pin down all the parameters from inflation data alone. Therefore we fix the values
of the following three parameters as β0 = π0 , θ = 0.99, and δ = 0.01. The value of
θ is consistent with economic growth and some cash taxes.13 The value of δ implies
that monthly inflation rates are bounded by 10, 000%.14 Although we do not use it
in estimation, we do have annual data on seignorage which is described in appendix
D. As discussed below, we uses this data to validate our model by comparing the
distribution of deficits predicted by the model with the actual data on seignorage.
   Because of the long sample, the likelihood of inflation is well shaped around its
peak. There are local peaks but often the likelihood values at these locations are
essentially zero relative to the maximum likelihood (ML) value. Nonetheless, if one
chooses a poor starting point to search for the ML estimate, the numerical algorithm
is likely to lead to an estimate at a local peak.15 Thus, obtaining the maximum likeli-
hood estimates (MLEs) proves to be an unusually challenging task. The optimization
method we use combines the block-wise BFGS algorithm developed by Sims, Wag-
goner, and Zha (2006) and various constrained optimization routines contained in
the commercial IMSL package. The block-wise BFGS algorithm, following the idea of
Gibbs sampling and EM algorithm, breaks the set of model parameters into a few sub-
sets and uses Sims’s csminwel program to maximize the likelihood of one set of the
model’s parameters conditional on the other sets.16 This maximization is iterated at
each subset until it converges. Then the optimization iterates between the block-wise
BFGS algorithm and the IMSL routines until it converges. The convergence criterion
is the square root of machine epsilon. Thus far we have described the optimization
process for only one starting point. We begin with a grid of 300 starting points; after

  13One could impose a prior distribution of θ with values ranging from 0.96 to 1.0. This is one of few
parameters we have a strong prior on. It is difficult or impossible, however, to have a common prior
distribution on the other structural parameters because the likelihood shape differs considerably
across countries. If we center a tight prior around the location as odds with the likelihood peak,
the model would be unduly penalized. It would be more informative to study the likelihood itself
and let the data determine what the model estimates are for each country. One could interpret our
likelihood approach as having a diffuse prior on the other structural parameters.
   14Marcet and Nicolini (2003) set the bound at 5, 000%.
   15
      Such a problem is prevalent in Bayesian estimation.
   16
      The csminwel program can be found on http://sims.princeton.edu/yftp/optimize/.
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                   15

convergence, we perturb each maximum point in both small and large steps to gen-
erate additional 200 new starting points and restart the optimization process again;
the MLEs are obtained at the highest likelihood value.17 The other converged points
typically have much lower likelihood values by at least a magnitude of hundreds of
log values.
V.2. Robustness analysis. In addition to the specifications described in section II,
we have studied a number of alternative specifications described in section VII below.
None of these alternatives has improved the fit of our model. Further, one could in
principle let ε or βt depend on regimes st . While this alternative creates no difficulty
in analyzing the theoretical model, it is infeasible to compute the likelihood function
because the unobservable variable βt depends on the entire history of regimes st (even
though st itself follows a Markov chain). For the model with bounded rationality,
moreover, it may make sense to assume that the agents do not know the regimes
while it is natural to assume that they know the regimes in the rational-expectations
model.

                                         VI. Findings
  In this section, we present and interpret our main empirical results. Before going
through the analysis country by country, we look at how some key parameters vary
across countries.
VI.1. Parameter patterns. Tables 6-10 in appendix E report the maximum likeli-
hood estimates of our model for Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, and Peru, respec-
tively, along with the estimated standard errors.18 As one can see, all the parameters
are tightly estimated except ξπ in the case of Brazil. The standard error for the ele-
ment in the second row and second column of Qm for Chile implies a high likelihood
that the low deficit regime would last forever. As for Peru, one can see that the high
deficit regime is more persistent than the low and medium deficit regimes.
   For our five countries, table 2 reports our maximum likelihood estimates of the im-
portant discounting or elasticity parameter λ in equation (1) and the gain parameter
ε that controls the rate at which past observations are discounted in the expectations
  17
     For each country, the whole optimization process is completed in 5-10 days on a cluster of 14
dual-processors, using the parallel and grid computing package called STAMPEDE provided to us
by the Computing College of Georgia Institute of Technology.
   18Following Sims (2001) and Hamilton, Waggoner, and Zha (2004), the standard errors are derived

from the covariance matrix that is computed as the inverse of the Hessian of log p(ΠT |θ) evaluated
at the MLEs. The estimated values of d¯ are re-normalized to be consistent with the data, as we
describe in appendix D.
                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                              16

                Table 2. Money demand and adaptation parameters

                                Country      λ       ε
                                Argentina    0.73    0.023
                                Bolivia      0.307   0.232
                                Brazil       0.613   0.189
                                Chile        0.875   0.025
                                Peru         0.74    0.069

scheme (6). There are interesting cross country differences in these parameters. Bo-
livia has the lowest λ and the highest ε, indicating that it discounted future money
creation rates the most through a low elasticity of the demand for money with respect
to expected inflation, while it also discounted past rates of inflation the most through
a high gain in the expectations scheme. Comparing Bolivia’s (λ, ε) with Chile’s shows
expected inflation to be more important in the demand for money and expectations
to discount past observations much less in Chile.
   In general, the smaller λ is, the less likely it is that an escape will take place because
the domain of attraction of the low SCE inflation rate is larger. Once in the escape
region, a large value of ε tends to accelerate increases in both inflation and beliefs β.
An informative example is Brazil where both λ and ε are large. For Argentina, Chile,
and Peru, the value of λ is even larger and consequently the probabilities of escape
are quite high during the hyperinflation period. For Bolivia, the value of λ is quite
low. Thus, even though its estimated gain is higher than those in the other countries,
the domain of attraction of the low SCE is large enough to prevent the escape event
from occurring during the hyperinflation period. We return to these observations in
our country-by-country analysis below.

VI.2. The key figures. We use figures 3-7 below to breathe life into our maximum
likelihood estimates for each country. Each of these figures consists of five panels
aligned to reveal features of our estimated model. The top left panel contains two or
three curves that depict the conditional mean dynamics for β and whose zeros depict
conditional self-confirming equilibria evaluated at the maximum likelihood parameters
φ̂ for the country under study. The SCEs are conditional on the different estimated
                                ¯
average deficits measured by d(m).     There are three curves when the Markov state
for the mean deficit can take three values and two curves when we allow it to take
only two values. These curves are empirical renditions of the G(β) functions in figure
1 at the different levels of the mean deficits we have estimated. We have projected
the zeros from these figures as horizontal dotted lines into the top right panel, which
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                17

plots our estimates of the public’s inflation beliefs βt over time. These dotted lines
tell us the stable (the lower values) and unstable (the higher values) of beliefs for
each deficit level and help us to identify the range of β’s that qualify as escapes and
reforms.
   The panel that is the second from the top compares bars that are seigniorage rates
constructed from annual data along with the 0.16, 0.5, 0.84 probability quantiles for
dt predicted by our model (which recall uses only inflation data for estimation). See
Appendix D for the details of how these numbers are computed in the data and the
model. The dashed lines in the graph contains two-thirds of the probability distri-
bution of simulated annual deficits from our model; the solid line labelled “Model”
represents the median of simulated annual deficits.19 For all countries, it is striking
that the deficits constructed from actual data seem to follow relatively closely the
patterns that the model predicts and about which the quantiles constructed from
p(dT |π T , φ̂) are informative.
   The third panel from the top records probabilities of two events that we have
computed from the joint density p(π T , dT |φ̂). The thick solid line, denoted “L Deficit”
when there are two mean states (or “L & M Deficit” when there are three mean states),
is the probability that the mean deficit regime is in the low deficit state (or either
the low or the medium state in the three-mean deficit case) as a function of time.
The dashed line is the probability that an escape will occur next period, computed
as described in section IV above. Figures 10-14 in appendix E plot the full suite of
probabilities of the mean deficit and deficit shock variance regimes for each country.
   The bottom panel shows the actual inflation history π T and the history of one-
step ahead estimates produced by our model evaluated at φ̂, conditioning on earlier
inflation rates. Later, we shall compare the fit of this model with a good-fitting
autoregression constructed without imposing our economic model. Here we note
simply that the model tends to track the data relatively well, particularly in the
hyperinflation episodes.
   We now use these figures to tell what our estimates say about the histories of
inflation in these five countries.

VI.3. Argentina. The top left panel of figure 3 shows curves for two conditional
self-confirming equilibrium dynamics. The one associated with the high m state
has its higher fixed point at a value for log β of about 0.2, while the low m state
has a low stable point near zero. Comparing βt in the top right panel with the
  19We   report quantiles because our model makes the distribution of dt a fat-tailed mixture of
log normal distributions. When the deficit shock variance is large with a high average amount of
seigniorage, the deficit distribution is quite skewed with a very fat tail.
                                 THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                         18


                  Conditional SCEs                                    Log Belief




         0.2                                 0.2
log βt




         0.1                                 0.1


          0                                   0
               −0.2   0          0.2   0.4         1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
                           β˙t
                                                                       Deficits
                                             0.3


                           Data              0.2
                           Model

                                             0.1


                                              0
                                                   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                      Probability
                                              1

                                             0.8
                           L deficit
                                             0.6
                           Escape
                                             0.4

                                             0.2

                                              0
                                                   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                        log πt

                                              1
                                             0.8
                          Actual             0.6
                          Prediction
                                             0.4
                                             0.2
                                              0
                                                   1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005


                                             Figure 3. Argentina.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                          19

probabilities in the third panel down on the right shows that throughout the 1960s
up until 1975 the economy was repeatedly in the low deficit regime, the probability
of escape was very low, and expected inflation hovered around the low conditional
SCE. The low probability for the low deficit state in the third panel on the right
shows that after 1975 up until 1991, Argentina lived with a chronically high mean
deficit. The second panel from the top shows that our model predicts higher and more
volatile deficits throughout this period, and this is largely confirmed in the annual
deficit data. Throughout this period, expected inflation drifted higher and higher (as
shown in the first panel on the right, first tending toward the stable conditional SCE
around 0.1 associated with the high m state, then going even higher. The bottom
panel shows that actual inflation drifted upward during this period, with spikes of
very high inflation in 1976 and 1984, driven largely by the shocks to the deficits.
Again, looking at the third panel, the probability of escape becomes large when β
approaches and finally exceeds that higher fixed point near 0.2 in 1989 and 1990. As
expected inflation increased rapidly in 1990 actual inflation (as shown in the bottom
panel) increased even more rapidly, leading to a dramatic hyperinflationary episode.
   The high deficit conditional dynamics indicate that if Argentina had been lucky
enough to avoid sequences of adverse deficit shocks that drove β above the stable
rest point near 0.1, it could have avoided the kind of big inflation associated with
an escape. Our estimates say that it was thus lucky until the late 1980s, when the
escape probability escalated and an escape occurred. From 1991-1992, the inflation
fell rapidly as shown in the bottom panel. Our model attributes this stabilization to
switches in the Markov states governing the mean and volatility of the deficit, which
remained in a lower and less volatile regime for most of the rest of the sample. Again,
this is confirmed by the second panel, which shows smaller deficits throughout the
later 1990s, apart from a period of volatility associated with the crisis in 2002. This
change in the mean deficit state shifted the conditional dynamics curve (in the top
left panel)in a way that pushed expected inflation rapidly downward, with beliefs (in
the top right panel) eventually converging down toward the lower conditional SCE
once again. Although the change in the deficit state and the decline in the actual
inflation rate occurred relatively quickly, expected inflation fell throughout the last
years of the sample because the estimated gain ε is small.


VI.4. Bolivia. Our results for Bolivia tell a substantially different story. Our esti-
mates suggest that the escape dynamics emphasized by Marcet and Nicolini (2003)
played no role in Bolivia. The most striking thing about the conditional dynamics
in the top left panel of figure 4 is how spread out the conditional SCEs are in each
                             THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                        20


               Conditional SCEs                                  Log Belief


          1                              1
         0.8                            0.8
log βt




         0.6                            0.6
         0.4                            0.4
         0.2                            0.2
          0                              0
          −2      −1               0          1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
                       β˙t
                                                                  Deficits

                                        0.2

                                       0.15
                       Data
                       Model            0.1

                                       0.05

                                         0
                                              1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                 Probability
                                         1

                                        0.8
                       L deficit
                                        0.6
                       Escape
                                        0.4

                                        0.2

                                         0
                                              1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                   log πt
                                         1
                                        0.8

                    Actual              0.6
                    Prediction
                                        0.4
                                        0.2
                                         0
                                              1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005


                                         Figure 4. Bolivia.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                           21

regime. As noted above, this is governed in our model by the money demand elas-
ticity parameter λ, whose estimated value in Bolivia is quite low. Thus, the stable
conditional SCEs are near zero and 0.2 in the low and high m states, respectively, but
the high SCEs that mark the edge of the domain of attraction are both over 1.0. As
the top right panel shows, the beliefs βt never get into the region where the unstable
dynamics take over. This is confirmed by the third panel of the figure, which shows
that the escape probabilities are very small throughout the entire sample, so small
that it is hard to detect by eye from the third panel on the right.
   Since the learning dynamics play very little part in Bolivia, our model suggests that
the dynamics of inflation in this country are almost entirely driven by the dynamics of
seignorage revenue. As shown in the third panel, our estimates indicate that a switch
to the high mean deficit state took place around 1982, a view that is confirmed by
the deficit data shown in the second panel. Throughout most of the sample our
model predicts a low and relatively stable level of monetized deficits, with a large and
volatile period in the mid-1980s, and this is essentially what the data show. With this
switch to a higher m state, expected inflation increases (top panel) and the country
experiences a hyperinflation (bottom panel) driven both by the higher mean inflation
and large shocks (notice the relatively large discrepancy between the predicted and
actual inflation in this period). However, around 1987 the economy switches back
to the low and more stable deficit regimes (third panel), actual deficits are lower
and more stable (second panel), expected inflation falls back down toward the lower
stable conditional SCE (top panel), and actual inflation is stabilized at a low level
(bottom panel). This country thus illustrates the importance of allowing the data to
determine the causes of hyperinflation, whether due to learning dynamics or largely
driven by fundamentals. Bolivia is a prime example of the importance of the fiscal
determination of hyperinflation.



VI.5. Brazil. Brazil, as shown in figure 5, presents an interesting case study with
two main episodes of hyperinflation that appear to have been ended by different
means. First note that in the top panel on the left the low average deficit state has
a conditional SCE near zero, the medium deficit’s SCE is near 0.06, but the high
mean deficit conditional dynamics curve has no fixed points. We interpret this as
asserting that when the economy is in this deficit regime, expected inflation is likely
to increase steadily and an escape will occur unless the country is lucky enough to
have a sequence of negative shocks that push it far enough below that high conditional
mean.
                              THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                      22


                Conditional SCEs                              Log Belief
         0.5                            0.5

         0.4                            0.4

         0.3                            0.3
log βt




         0.2                            0.2

         0.1                            0.1

          0                              0
         −0.5       0           0.5      1980     1985    1990              1995   2000   2005
                        β˙t
                                                                 Deficits
                                        0.1

                                       0.08
                        Data           0.06
                        Model
                                       0.04

                                       0.02

                                         0
                                         1980     1985    1990              1995   2000   2005

                                                              Probability
                                         1

                                        0.8
                     L & M deficit
                                        0.6
                     Escape
                                        0.4

                                        0.2

                                         0
                                         1980     1985    1990              1995   2000   2005

                                                                  log πt


                                        0.6

                     Actual             0.4
                     Prediction

                                        0.2


                                         0
                                         1980     1985    1990              1995   2000   2005


                                          Figure 5. Brazil.
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                  23

   Our estimates suggest that from 1980-1985 the economy was in the medium deficit
state, as evidenced by the regime probabilities in the third panel down and the pre-
dictions and actual levels of deficits in the second panel. Throughout this period,
expected inflation was near the medium deficit SCE (top right panel) and actual in-
flation was moderately high but relatively stable (bottom panel). However, between
1985 and 1987 the economy shifted to the high average deficit state, remaining there
until 1994. Again, this is clear from the regime probabilities in the third panel and
the deficit predictions and data in the second panel.20 Once the economy entered this
regime, the unstable learning dynamics kicked in. The escape probabilities in the
third panel rose repeatedly after 1985, remaining mostly near one after 1987 up until
1994, and there were volatile but high deficits during this period. Expected inflation
increased rapidly from 1987 through 1991 (top panel) and actual inflation skyrocketed
(bottom panel). In the graph, the predicted value for this first hyperinflation is about
3 in log points. We truncate the figure at 0.7 log points in order to make the actual
and predicted inflation paths more discernible.
   Actual inflation fell from its peak in 1991 (bottom panel), while the economy con-
tinued to run large deficits that necessitated money creation (second panel). Thus,
our model interprets the recurrent inflations and stabilizations before 1994 in the
manner of Marcet and Nicolini (2003), namely, as recurrent escapes followed by su-
perficial mechanical reforms that cut inflation but leave the mean deficit unaltered.
These reforms succeeded in lowering expected inflation temporarily (top panel), but it
rose rapidly again until 1994, with actual inflation rising again to another peak (bot-
tom panel). However, unlike the earlier cosmetic reforms, our model says that the
1994 stabilization is different, and was accompanied by a persistent reduction in the
mean and volatility of the monetized deficit. This is evident in the lower predicted
deficits in the second panel, which largely accords with the lower and more stable
actual deficits (apart from 2002). After 1994, beliefs fell rapidly down to the low
deficit SCE (top panel), and actual inflation remained stable at a low level (bottom
panel). Moreover, as shown in table 8 in appendix E, our estimates of the transition
probabilities Qm suggest that the high and medium deficit regimes are transitory,
and thus our model predicts the sustained stable inflation that accompanies the low
deficit regime. Thus, Brazil provides an interesting example of the ultimate futility
of the cosmetic reforms, followed by a successful sustained fiscal reform.
VI.6. Chile. In figure 6 we consider the case of Chile, whose experience again is
rather distinct from the other countries. First note that the scale in the top panels
  20Note  that regime probabilities are computed on a monthly basis while the annual deficit is an
average of monthly deficits as discussed in appendix D.
                          THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                              24


                 Conditional SCEs                                   Log Belief

          0.1                              0.1
log βt




         0.05                             0.05



           0                                0

          −0.1           0          0.1          1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
                        β˙t
                                                                     Deficits

                                          0.25

                                           0.2
                        Data
                        Model             0.15

                                           0.1

                                          0.05

                                            0
                                                 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                    Probability
                                            1

                                           0.8
                        L deficit
                                           0.6
                        Escape
                                           0.4

                                           0.2

                                            0
                                                 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                      log πt

                                           0.6


                                           0.4
                      Actual
                      Prediction
                                           0.2


                                            0

                                                 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005


                                             Figure 6. Chile.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                             25

is significantly smaller than the other countries, with the low deficit state having
conditional SCEs near 0.03 and 0.12, and the high deficit state having essentially
one rest point near 0.07. Thus, even the escapes in Chile are consistent with much
lower inflation rates than in Brazil. Moreover, the deficit levels themselves do not
vary sizeably across regimes, as the median model prediction in the second panel is
essentially flat over the entire sample. The probabilities of the low deficit in the third
panel are relatively volatile before 1994 (as reflected by relatively volatile inflation
rates), but these do not translate into volatile predictions. Thus, our estimates suggest
that the buildup and spike in inflation in the mid 1970s (bottom panel) was caused
by a sustained run of high deficits, largely driven by economy entering the high
shock variance state. This is evident in the second panel, where although the median
prediction remains flat in the 1970s, there is a large tail evident in the distribution
of deficits, so that the predictive distribution covers the increase that we observe
in the data. These shocks caused beliefs to drift upward (top panel), increasing
the probability of escape (third panel), and leading to the hyperinflation observed
(bottom panel).
   Because the buildup in inflation was largely driven by shocks, the stabilization in
the late 1970s is interpreted as a reduction of variance of shocks to deficits. Beliefs
drift continually downward after 1978 (top panel), and inflation remains relatively
low throughout the rest of the sample (bottom panel), apart from a short-lived spike
around 1985. Cosmetic reforms play little role for Chile, as their probabilities remain
very low even during the runaway inflation period. Thus, Chile is again an example
of the importance of fiscal policy for inflation. But although fiscal reforms play some
role in bringing down hyperinflation in the 1970s, deficit shocks are the driving force
in the conquest of Chilean inflation. After the tumult of the 1970s the economy
engaged in a more stable fiscal policy, resulting in relatively stable inflation.

VI.7. Peru. Figure 7 considers the case of Peru. The third panel down makes clear
that throughout the 1960s and most of the 1970s, the economy was in the low and
middle average deficit states. The average deficits do not vary substantially across
these regimes, as the second panel shows that the median prediction is relatively
flat, which roughly matches the annual deficit data. Expected inflation was relatively
low throughout this period (top panel), remaining near the conditional SCEs that
are at 0.016 and 0.029 for the low and medium states, and the actual inflation rate
was relatively low and stable as well (bottom panel). However, around 1978 our
model suggests that the economy entered into a high deficit regime (third panel) that
persisted all the way until 1993. This is confirmed by the persistently high seignorage
revenues shown in the second panel. But inflation did not accelerate immediately.
                               THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                          26


                      Conditional SCEs                               Log Belief




         0.2                                0.2
log βt




         0.1                                0.1


          0                                  0
               −0.2    0   0.2 0.4 0.6            1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
                             β˙t
                                                                      Deficits


                                            0.1

                             Data
                             Model
                                           0.05



                                             0
                                                  1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                     Probability
                                             1

                                            0.8
                           L & M deficit
                                            0.6
                           Escape
                                            0.4

                                            0.2

                                             0
                                                  1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005

                                                                       log πt

                                            1.5


                           Actual            1
                           Prediction

                                            0.5


                                             0
                                                  1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005


                                              Figure 7. Peru.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                             27

Rather, beliefs drifted upward throughout the 1980s to the stable conditional SCE in
the high state (top panel) and inflation climbed slowly with it (bottom panel).
   But as we have seen in the other countries, the high deficit state is precarious and a
sequence of deficit shocks was enough to upset the balance. In 1989 expected inflation
increased rapidly, traversing into the region that prompted a large and rapid escape,
as is evident in the belief dynamics in the top panel and the sharp increase in the
escape probability in the third panel. Inflation itself increased even more dramatically
(bottom panel), triggering a definite cosmetic reform. In other countries, cosmetic
reforms occur with probability less than one and thus only inflation itself is reset. Peru
is the only country that experiences a cosmetic reform with certainty, which evokes
expectations to be reset as well. We interpret this double-barreled intervention as a
reform that, although it does not alter the deficit dynamics, is credible in the sense
that the public believed it to be effective in cutting inflation. Consequently, expected
and actual inflation jump down dramatically in 1992. Moreover, unlike the failure
of the initial cosmetic reforms in Brazil where there is no SCE in the high-deficit
regime, these reforms seemed to have been successful in Peru, where there is a large
gap between the low and high SCEs in the high-deficit state. Consistent with the high-
deficit SCE around 0.08, inflation remained relatively low and stable throughout the
rest of the sample (bottom panel), even though the economy remained in the high
average deficit state for a considerable time. Evidence of a fiscal reform is absent
until 1995, when the probability assigned to the low or medium monetized deficit
state increased nearly to one (third panel). Thus, Peru seems to be the case where
the unorthodox cosmetic reforms discussed by Marcet and Nicolini (2003) were the
most successful in vanquishing hyperinflation.

VI.8. Comparison with Marcet and Nicolini. We now illustrate how our model
differs from the model of Marcet and Nicolini (2003), which is geared toward explain-
ing the experience of Argentina. We have formed the distribution conditioned on
the history of inflation that is implied by their quarterly model at their calibrated
parameter values. Figure 8 reports the one-step forecasts and 90% probability dis-
tributional bands around them, together with actual inflation outcomes. This figure
should be compared with the bottom panel of figure 3. For Marcet and Nicolini’s cal-
ibrated parameter values, we have found that there is no SCE, so that the ordinate of
their G(β) curve (see figure 1) always exceeds zero. This means that inflation expec-
tations are perpetually along an escape path that must terminate with a mechanical
monetary reform that will reset inflation itself. This seems to be the reason that in
figure 8 the Marcet-Nicolini constant-parameter economic model over-predicts actual
inflation in the relatively low inflation periods preceding 1975 and following 1991. By
                                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                     28

                                                     Constant−parameter quarterly model

                                                                                                  Actual
                        1.8
                                                                                                  Prediction
                                                                                                  Low band
                                                                                                  High band
                        1.6


                        1.4


                        1.2
          Log Pt/Pt−1




                         1


                        0.8


                        0.6


                        0.4


                        0.2


                         0
                              1960     1965   1970     1975      1980     1985      1990   1995   2000     2005


        Figure 8. Marcet and Nicolini (2003) model’s one-step prediction with
        90% probability bands for Argentina.

considering a more general deficit process, our model is thus able to capture both the
hyperinflations and the stabilizations.

                                                VII. The Model’s Fit
   Since our theoretical model is highly restricted, one would not expect its fit to
come even close to be as good as a standard autoregressive (AR) model, let alone
a time-varying AR model. In previous work with models like ours, such as Marcet
and Nicolini (2003), only certain moments or correlations of the model were typically
reported and compared to the data. By contrast, in this paper we take the fit of our
model seriously and report it against the flexible, unrestricted statistical models. We
compare not only various versions within our model but also our model with different
types of AR models.
   For each country we have tried more than two dozen versions of our theoretical
model and of the unrestricted atheoretical models. Some of the different variations
include the models with constant parameters, with 2-5 states for d(s            ¯ t ) and ηd t (st )
             ¯                                         ¯
jointly, for d(st ) only, for ηd t (st ) only, and for d(s1t ) and ηd t (s2t ) where s1t and s2t
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                 29

              Table 3. Log likelihood adjusted by the Schwarz criterion

                       Constant       Best-fit    Best-fit AR(2)     log posterior odds
      Argentina 980.9 (df=8)           1275.4     1346.1 (df=0)             -70.7
      Bolivia   1248.1 (df=8)          1540.0     1547.2 (df=0)              -7.1
      Brazil    510.7 (df=9)           814.6      853.6 (df=-1)             -39.0
      Chile     1422.3 (df=8)          1745.9     1721.7 (df=0)             24.14
      Peru      1378.1 (df=8)          1711.7     1658.7 (df=0)              52.8

are independent state variables. If the number of states is 3 for mt and 2 for v2t ,
we call it a 3 × 2 model. By the Schwarz criterion (SC) or Bayesian information
criterion,21 the 2 × 3 version of the model fits best for Argentina, Bolivia, and Chile
and the 3 × 2 version is the best for Brazil and Peru; all other versions including the
constant-parameter case fit worse. With the 3-state case, we follow Sims, Waggoner,
and Zha (2006) and restrict the probability transition matrix to be of the following
form:                                                    
                                χ1     (1 − χ2 )/2    0
                             1 − χ1       χ2      1 − χ3  ,
                                 0     (1 − χ2 )/2   χ3
where χj ’s are free parameters to be estimated.
   In addition, we have tried a number of different specifications of the model. For
example, we have let πt∗ and dt be serially correlated with their parameters freely
estimated, and allowed ξπ to be time varying. We have also allowed d(m  ¯ t ) to be neg-
ative, used a number of different distributions for ηπ and ηd , including the truncated
normal distribution used by Marcet and Nicolini (2003), and introduced more lagged
inflation variables in the learning rule (6). Again, within each model, the fit in most
versions is substantially worse than our best-fitting model and thus we do not report
their results.
   Table 3 reports the log likelihood (adjusted by the Schwarz criterion) of the best-
fitting theoretical model for each country, the constant-parameter theoretical model
as in Marcet and Nicolini (2003), and the best-fitting unrestricted regime-switching
AR model.22 The constant-parameter model for every country fits poorly; this result
is consistent with the analysis in section VI.8. For all the five countries, the best-
fitting atheoretical model is the 2×2 AR(2), which allows the two states in coefficients
to be independent of the two states in shock variances. Our best-fitting theoretical
  21See Sims (2001) for detailed discussions of how to use the SC for model comparison.
  22Regime-switching  AR models considered here are simply a special case of regime-switching VAR
models developed by Sims and Zha (2006) and by Sims, Waggoner, and Zha (2006).
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                            30

model is used as a baseline for comparison. The notation “df” stands for degrees of
freedom in relation to the baseline model. The last column reports the posterior odds
of the best-fitting economic model relative to the best-fitting statistical model. The
table shows that our model fits worse than the best fitting atheoretical model for
Argentina, Bolivia, and Brazil, while it fits better for in the cases of Chile and Peru.
   However, even in countries such as Argentina and Brazil, where our model fits worse
overall, the discrepancy is largely driven by the superior performance of the statistical
models in the non-hyperinflation episodes. For the hyperinflations, our model does
as well or better than the atheoretical models. These points are illustrated by figures
15-19 in appendix E, where we compare the log conditional likelihood p(πt |π t−1 , φ̂)
of our theoretical model with that of the best-fitting statistical model. Clearly, the
fit is much better for our theoretical model than the statistical model during the
period of hyperinflation. Take Argentina as an example. The log likelihood for
the non-hyperinflation periods 1957:04-1974:12 and 1993:01-2004:04 is 1014.4 for the
statistical model and 948.1 for the theoretical model. This difference is 66.2, which
captures most of the difference between the fits of the two models. Similarly, the
log likelihood for the hyperinflation period 1979:01-1987:12 in Bolivia is 133.0 for our
theoretical model and 117.6 for the statistical model, so the fit is much better for
our model during this period. Thus, while our model is not an unqualified empirical
success, it does a reasonably good job of capturing much of the inflation dynamics
in these countries. Moreover the validation of our model provided by the monetary
deficit data, as well as the insight that it provides into the causes and consequences
of inflation make us regard it as a clear economic success.


                        VIII. Comparing SCEs and REEs
   We now examine what our estimates imply for the self-confirming and rational
expectations equilibria discussed above and defined formally in appendices B and
C. As we have emphasized, key parts of our story for the dynamics of hyperinfla-
tions require retreating from rational expectations. We argue here that the retreat is
relatively minor.
   In particular, Table 4 lists the conditional SCEs for each country, along with the
beliefs from a rational expectations equilibrium (REE) consistent with low inflation.
(As we discuss in appendix C, there are many other REEs as well.) The table makes
quite clear that the conditional SCEs that govern the dynamics of our adaptive agents’
beliefs are very close to the REE beliefs. In most cases, the differences are well within
half of a percentage point, with the largest differences being slightly more than one
percentage point. The values in the low m (average deficit) state in particular are
                      THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                     31

    Table 4. Conditional SCEs and REEs. Log value of beliefs in each regime.

                  Country   SCE/REE Low m Medium m High m
                  Argentina   SCE   0.0123    -    0.1018
                  Argentina   REE   0.0188    -    0.0902
                  Bolivia     SCE   0.0153    -    0.1804
                  Bolivia     REE   0.0165    -    0.1711
                  Brazil      SCE   0.0064 0.0632  0.2256
                  Brazil      REE   0.0063 0.0726  0.2299
                  Chile       SCE   0.0346    -    0.0743
                  Chile       REE   0.0378    -    0.0612
                  Peru        SCE   0.0163 0.0288  0.0853
                  Peru        REE   0.0186 0.0332  0.0833


very close for all countries.23 Moreover the REEs are computed under the assumption
that agents observe and condition on the mean deficit state mt . Since our adaptive
agents’ beliefs converge in distribution to these conditional SCEs, this suggests that
on average agents in our model do not make systematic forecast errors. Even though
they do not observe and do not condition on the Markov state governing the average
deficit, they are able to adapt their beliefs over time in such a way that this omission
is not very costly to them. Thus, our departure from full rationality is rather small.
But by making this departure, we change in important ways the dynamics of the
model and allow the data to inform us as to the underlying causes and consequences
of the South American inflations.


                                 IX. Concluding remarks
   Building on Sargent and Wallace (1987) and Marcet and Nicolini (2003), we have
formulated a nonlinear stochastic model of inflation, expectations, and money-supply
financed deficits and then fit the implied density over histories of inflation to data for
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, and Peru. Figures 3-7 summarize the stories that
our maximum likelihood estimates tell about the inflation histories of these countries.


  23Brazil  was a special case in that there is no conditional SCE in the high average deficit regime.
Similarly, we were not able to find a low inflation REE. The table reports the “near equilibria” that
have the lowest forecast errors, and correspond to the minimal value of the mean dynamics in the
high seignorage state.
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                 32

       Table 5. Causes for the rise and fall of hyperinflation across countries

                                         Escape                 No Escape
            Cosmetic Reform              Brazil (87-91)
                                         Peru (87-92)
            Fiscal Deficit Reform        Argentina (87-91) Bolivia (82-86)
                                         Brazil (92-95)
            No Reform (Driven by         Chile (71-78)     Argentina (76-86)
            Deficit Shocks)




IX.1. Types of inflations and stabilizations. Table 5 briefly summarizes some of
the key empirical patterns revealed by Figures 3-7. The first column lists three possi-
ble ways that our model tells us hyperinflation can be stopped: a superficial monetary
reform that mechanically resets inflation without altering the deficit regime, a fiscal
deficit reform activated by a change in the mean monetary deficit, and no reform
in the mean monetary deficit but a change in the conditional deficit shock variance.
The top row lists the two possible causes of hyperinflation: a high probability of
self-perpetuating escalation of inflation governed by escape dynamics, and a large
deficit shock variance coupled with a small probability of escape. We chose to put
countries into appropriate boxes in the table according to whether our model assigns
high probabilities (i.e., over 60%) of escape or of a cosmetic reform.
   In March of 1990, for example, Brazilian inflation reached its peak with a monthly
gross rate of 1.82. In the next two months, the inflation rate dropped to 1.15 then 1.07.
The probability of cosmetic monetary reform is 67.5% for March, 75.6% for April, and
47.8% for May. By contrast, the high and volatile inflation episode in Brazil finally
ended in 1994 with a sustained fiscal reform. Peru is another informative example. In
August of 1990, the Peruvian monthly inflation rate reached 4.97, was brought down
to 1.14 in September, and stayed at a relatively low level around 1.1 for a number of
months thereafter. The probability of cosmetic reform is only 10.8% in August but
jumps to 100% in September. Expected inflation is so high that the reform resets
inflation expectations as well as inflation, which brings down the belief instantly.24
Thus, the cosmetic reform is crucial for interpreting the fall of hyperinflation in Peru.

  24Without   this resetting, the cosmetic reform of Marcet and Nicolini (2003) would have stayed
with probability one for the next eleven months because of the unusually high values of expected
hyperinflation.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                             33

  For Argentina (from 1987 to 1991), Bolivia, and Brazil, fiscal reforms play a dom-
inant role in conquering hyperinflation. A reduction of the variance of shocks to
deficits can be also important, as seen in Chile and Argentina (from 1976 to 1986).

IX.2. Ergodic distributions for deficits. Figure 9 plots the ergodic probabilities
of the estimated average deficit level and the estimated standard deviation of deficit
shocks. As we have seen, in the high average deficit states, inflation tends to be high on
average and there is typically a sizeable probability of escaping to hyperinflation. This
chance is even greater when the variance of the deficit shocks is larger. These ergodic
probabilities are therefore helpful in predicting the long run inflation experiences
of the different countries in our sample. Countries whose ergodic distribution has
significant mass in the high average deficit and high shock variance states will thus
tend to experience repeated episodes of high inflation and hyperinflation. In contrast,
countries where most of the mass is in low mean deficits and small shocks will tend
to have low and stable inflation. Clearly, Brazil and Chile have deficit processes that
are conducive to persistent low inflation, while Argentina and Peru do not. Bolivia
is an intermediate case, suggestive of mostly low inflation perhaps interrupted by
occasional periods of high inflations.

IX.3. The epigraphs. We conclude by returning to the thoughtful epigraphs of
Dornbusch (1985) and Fischer (1987) with which we began. The articles in which
those quotes appear testify to how the available inflation, deficit, and other macro-
economic data had left informed observers like Dornbusch and Fischer undecided
about the ultimate sources of inflation dynamics. While not including the indexation
arrangements that Dornbusch suspected contributed so much to inflation dynamics,
our model makes important concessions in his direction by treating the mean deficit
as a hidden Markov state whose effects on inflation are confounded by noise and ob-
scured by shocks to deficits and perturbations to expectations and therefore have to
be gently coaxed from the data. And we have taken Fischer’s doubts about the pure
rational expectations model of Sargent and Wallace (1987) seriously by backing away
from rational expectations just enough to make room for the escapes and reforms
that help our model to explain the data and interpret the histories.

                     Appendix A. Deriving the Likelihood
  We first derive a likelihood conditional on the hidden composite states st = [mt vt ]
and then integrate over states to find the appropriate unconditional likelihood. We
assume that the probability distribution of ηπ t (k) is truncated log-normal and that
the distribution of ηd t (k) is log-normal for k = 1, . . . , h where h = mh × vh . This
                                      THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                                                34


                                     Argentina                                                                    Bolivia



              0.6                                                                      0.6
Probability




                                                                         Probability
              0.4                                                                      0.4


              0.2                                                                      0.2


               0                                                                        0
                    15                                            0.15                       15                                             0.15
                         10                                 0.1                                   10                                  0.1
                                 5                0.05                                                    5                 0.05
                    Volatility       0    0         Level                                    Volatility       0     0         Level



                                         Brazil                                                                   Chile



              0.6                                                                      0.6
Probability




                                                                         Probability



              0.4                                                                      0.4

              0.2                                                                      0.2


               0                                                                        0
                    15                                            0.15                       15                                             0.15
                         10                                 0.1                                   10                                  0.1
                                 5                0.05                                                    5                 0.05
                    Volatility       0    0         Level                                    Volatility       0     0         Level



                                         Peru



              0.6
Probability




              0.4


              0.2


               0
                    15                                            0.15
                         10                                 0.1
                                 5                0.05
                    Volatility       0    0         Level

                     Figure 9. Ergodic probability given the estimated average deficit level
                     (x-axis) and the estimated standard deviation of deficit shocks (y-axis).
                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                                  35

general setup includes both the case where mt and vt are independent and the case
where mt = vt . Specifically, the probability density functions are
                                             ∗ (k)+η
                                       [log (π1                    ∗
                                                     π t (k))−log π1 (k)]
                                                                         2
                        
                               exp −                     2
                                                     2σπ
                         √2πσπ (π∗ (k)+ηπ t (k))Φ((−log(δ)−log(π∗ (k))/σπ )
                                     1                                      1
      pπ (ηπ t (k)) =                                                                                   ,   (A1)
                        
                                                      if −π1∗ (k) < ηπ t (k) < 1/δ − π1∗ (k)
                        
                        
                            0                                                           otherwise

                                                                       2
                                
                                 exp    −
                                                 ¯
                                           [log (d(k)+η
                                                     dt
                                                                   ¯
                                                          (k))−log d(k)]
                                                     2σ 2 (k)
                                         √             d                                       ¯
                                                                                if ηd t (k) > −d(k)
            pd (ηd t (k)) =                         ¯
                                           2πσd (k)(d(k)+η    d t (k))                              ,       (A2)
                                
                                0                                                             ¯
                                                                                if ηd t (k) ≤ −d(k)

where Φ(x) is the standard normal cdf of x. We use the convention that log(0) = −∞
and Φ(−∞) = 0. Equation (A2) implies that the geometric mean of dt (st ) is d(s¯ t ).
Denote

                                              st = {s1 , . . . , st },
                                              ξd (st ) = 1/σd (st ),
                                                   ξπ = 1/σπ ,

and let φ be a collection of all structural parameters. We use the tilde above ηd t (st )
to indicate that η̃d t (st ) is a random variable, whereas ηd t (st ) is the realized value
associated with πt . The following proposition provides the key component of the
overall likelihood function.

Proposition 3. Given the pdfs (A1) and (A2), the conditional likelihood is

  p(πt |π t−1 , sT , φ) = p(πt |π t−1 , st , φ)
                               h 2¡                       ¢2 i
                                  ξπ                 ∗
                    |ξπ | exp − 2 logπt − logπ1 (st )
        = C1 t √
                     2π Φ (|ξπ |(−log(δ) − log(π1∗ (st ))) πt
                    Ã
                                  θ|ξd (st )|(1 − λβt−1 )                                   (A3)
           + C2 t √
                           2π [(1 − λβt )πt − θ(1 − λβt−1 )] πt
                · 2                                                                      !
                     ξd (st ) h                                                     i2 ¸
          exp −                log[(1 − λβt )πt − θ(1 − λβt−1 )] − logπt − logd(st )      ,
                        2
                            THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                         36

where
    C1 t = ι {βt−1 ≥ 1/λ} + ι {βt−1 < 1/λ}
          ³       £                                                                 ¤´
            1 − Φ |ξd (st )| (log (max[(1 − λβt ) − δθ(1 − λβt−1 ), 0]) − logd(st )) ,
                                ½                                            ¾
                                          θ (1 − λ βt−1 )                  1
    C2 t = ι {βt−1 < 1/λ} ι                                        < πt <      .
                                  max (1 − λ βt , δθ(1 − λ βt−1 ))         δ
Proof. We need to prove that
                          Z                          1/δ
                                                           p(πt |π t−1 , st , φ)dπt = 1.
                                                 0

With some algebraic work, one can show from (A1) and (A2) that Equation (A3) is
equivalent to the following expression
         ι {βt−1 ≥ 1/λ} pπ (πt − π1∗ (st )) + ι {βt−1 < 1/λ}
            " ½                                                   ¾
                         θ (1 − λβt−1 )                        1                     d ηd t (st )
             ι                                       < πt <          pd (ηd t (st ))
                 max (1 − λβt , δθ(1 − λβt−1 ))                δ                        d πt
                                                                   #
                        £                      ¤
                   + Pr η̃d t (st ) ≥ ω t (st ) pπ (πt − π1∗ (st )) ,

where Pr[ ] is the probability that the event in the brackets occurs.
  Consider the case where βt−1 < 1/λ (the other case is trivial). Denote
                                                             θ(1 − λβt−1 )
                                     Lt =                                           .
                                                     max (1 − λβt , δθ(1 − λβt−1 ))
It follows that
              Z       1/δ
                            p(πt |π t−1 , st , φ)dπt
                  0
                                Z    1/δ
                                                       dηd t (st )
                            =              pd (ηd t (st ))         dπt
                                    Lt                    dπt
                                                                   Z
                                         £                        ¤ 1/δ
                                     + Pr η̃d t (st ) > ω t (st )       pπ (πt − π1∗ (st )) dπt
                                                                             0
                                Z    ω t (st )                                   £                       ¤
                            =                    pd (ηd t (st ))d ηd t (st ) + Pr η̃d t (st ) ≥ ω t (st )
                                     ¯ t)
                                    −d(s
                                £                       ¤    £                       ¤
                            = Pr η̃d t (st ) < ω t (st ) + Pr η̃d t (st ) ≥ ω t (st )
                            = 1.
                                                                                                             ¤
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                            37

  After integrating out sT , the overall likelihood is
                                T
                                Y
                  p(π T |φ) =         p(πt |π t−1 , φ)
                                t=1
                                T
                                      (   h
                                                                                                   )   (A4)
                                Y         X £                                                    ¤
                                                            t−1                        t−1
                            =                     p(πt |π         , st , φ) Pr(st |π         , φ) ,
                                t=1       st =1

where
                                           h
                                           X £                                         ¤
                  Pr(st |π t−1 , φ) =               Pr(st |st−1 , q)Pr(st−1 |π t−1 , φ) .              (A5)
                                          st−1 =1

The probability Pr(st−1 |π t−1 , φ) can be updated recursively. We follow Sims, Wag-
goner, and Zha (2006) and set
                                           Pr(s0 |π 0 , φ) = 1/h.
For t = 1, . . . , T , the updating procedure involves the following computation:
                                              p(πt |π t−1 , st , φ) Pr(st |π t−1 , φ)
                  Pr(st |π t , φ) = Ph          £                                       ¤.             (A6)
                                                           t−1 , s , φ) Pr(s |π t−1 , φ)
                                           st =1 p(πt |π          t           t

   As shown in Sims, Waggoner, and Zha (2006), one can also use the above recursive
structure to compute the smoothed probability of st , Pr(st |π T , φ).

                     Appendix B. Self-Confirming Equilibria
   This appendix describes self-confirming equilibrium versions of our model, while
appendix C below describes rational expectations equilibria. We do not estimate
either of these types of equilibria. However, by estimating the adaptive model of
section II, we recover all the parameters that are required to compute such equilibria.
In section VIII, we compute such equilibria for our estimated parameter values.
B.1. Small gain convergence. If the agents in our model were to implement a least
squares estimator by replacing ε in the updating rule (6) by t−1 , we would expect βt to
converge to a constant level of expected inflation that equals the actual unconditional
mean rate of inflation. Such a constant average level of gross inflation is a special
case of a self-confirming equilibrium (SCE) as described by Sargent (1999).25 We
find such an unconditional SCE by computing a small gain limit for the beliefs of
the adaptive agents under our model. We also consider a small variation limit in
  25We    have assumed that agents do not know the current regime st = (mt , vt ) when forecasting
inflation. Better informed agents would incorporate knowledge of st in forecasting inflation (see
section C).
                      THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                         38

which the transition probabilities of the average deficit state mt become degenerate,
leading us to a notion of a conditional self-confirming equilibrium. As we’ve seen,
these equilibria are important reference points for characterizing the belief dynamics.

B.1.1. Self-confirming equilibria. A self-confirming equilibrium (SCE) is a fixed point
of beliefs, β, that is consistent with what the agents observe and solves the following
population orthogonality condition:

                                           E [πt − β] = 0,                                           (A7)

where πt is itself a function of β.
  Let:
                            ω(βt , βt−1 ) = 1 − λβt − δθ(1 − λβt−1 ).
As we implement a “reform” by setting πt randomly in the way described in equation
(14), we have:
                                          θ(1 − λβt−1 )
     πt = ι(dt (st ) < ω(βt , βt−1 ))                      + ι(dt (st ) ≥ ω(βt , βt−1 ))πt∗ (st ).
                                        1 − λβt − dt (st )
Hence, we can write (6) as:

                                  βt+1 = βt + εg(βt , βt−1 , dt , πt∗ )                              (A8)

where
                                                   θ(1 − λβt−1 )
g(βt , βt−1 , dt , πt∗ ) = ι(dt < ω(βt , βt−1 ))                 + ι(dt ≥ ω(βt , βt−1 ))πt∗ (st ) − βt .
                                                   1 − λβt − dt
  Let Fd(k) (x) be the cdf of d(k) at the value x. We define the following terms:

                                   g̃(β, dt , πt∗ ) = g(β, β, dt , πt∗ ),
                                        ξ(β) = (1 − βλ),
                                           Z b
                                                  1
                               Ψk (β, b) =             dFd(k) (x).
                                            0 ξ(β) − x

It follows that ω̄(β) ≡ ω(β, β) = (1 − δθ)ξ(β) and that Ψk (β, b) is finite as b → ξ(β)
because δ in equation (13) is bounded away from zero.
   Recall that when a reform event takes place, πt∗ (mt ) has a truncated log-normal
distribution, and denote its mean as π̄ ∗ (mt ). Also denote q̄k as the unconditional
probability of the event {st = k}, which is an element of the ergodic distribution of Q.
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                39

                             ¯
Then since log d(k) ∼ N (log d(k), σd2 (k)) we can write the unconditional expectation:
G(β) = E[g̃(β, dt , πt∗ )]
        h
           "Z                                                                      #
       X        (1−δθ)ξ(β)
                            θ(1 − λβ)              £                        ¤ ∗
     =                                dFd(k) (x) + 1 − Fd(k) ((1 − δθ)ξ(β)) π̄ (k) q̄k − β
       k=1    0            1 − λβ − x
       Xh ½                         ·      µ                  ¯ ¶¸         ¾
                                              log ω̄(β) − log d(k)     ∗
     =       θξ(β)Ψk (β, ω̄(β)) + 1 − Φ                              π̄ (k) q̄k − β
       k=1
                                                      σd (k)

Proposition 4. As ε → 0 the beliefs {βt } from (A8) converge weakly to the solution
of the ordinary differential equation (ODE):
                                          β̇ = G(β)                                       (A9)
for δ > 0 and a broad class of probability distributions of ηd t (st ) and ηπ t (st ) (including
those specified in (A1) and (A2).

Proof. Under our assumptions about distributions and the truncation rule, this follows
from Kushner and Yin (1997).                                                        ¤
  The ODE (A9) governs the mean dynamics G, in that for small gains the belief
trajectories tend to track those of the ODE. Thus, for beliefs to converge in a weak
sense to an SCE, that SCE must be a stable equilibrium point of the ODE (A9). We
don’t have an explicit expression for G, so we shall find the SCE numerically. Thus,
we look for a stationary point β ∗ such that G(β ∗ ) = 0. Since the system is scalar the
stability condition is simply G0 (β ∗ ) < 0. This gives formal content to the diagram in
Figure 1 and the related discussion.

B.2. Conditional SCEs. For comparison, we are also interested in the self-confirming
equilibria that would result if the economy were forever to remain in one average deficit
regime. Thus, instead of (A7) the orthogonality condition is now:
                                 E [πt − β|mt = m ∀t] = 0,                               (A10)
where again πt is itself a function of β. We refer to these as conditional self-confirming
equilibria. Since our estimated average deficit regimes are very persistent, we expect
beliefs to adapt to these slowly varying regimes. We justify the consideration of
conditional SCEs by refining our small-gain limit above. We now consider a two time-
scale limit, in which the gain in the belief updating goes to zero but the probabilities
of switching mean deficit regimes go to zero at a faster rate.
   For simplicity, consider the case where the mean deficit regime state takes on two
values: mt ∈ {0, 1}. Then note that we can write the evolution of the mean deficit
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                        40

state mt as:
                                       mt+1 = mt + ηt+1 (mt )
where ηt+1 (0) = 0 with probability Qm (1, 1), ηt+1 (0) = 1 with probability Qm (2, 1),
ηt+1 (1) = 0 with probability Qm (2, 2), and ηt+1 (1) = −1 with probability Qm (1, 2).
Thus, we have:
                       Et mt+1 = mt + Qm (−m, m)(1 − 2mt )
where Qm (−m, m) is the off-diagonal element of column m of Qm . Therefore we can
re-write the evolution as:
                           mt+1 = mt + Qm (−m, m)(1 − 2mt ) + vt+1
where Et vt+1 = 0. Now we consider a slow variation limit where Qm → I, and
thus we scale Qm (m, −m) by a small parameter α, which also implies the martingale
difference term vt+1 inherits the scaling. Thus, we extend the system that we analyze
from (A8) to:
                         βt+1 = βt + εg(βt , βt−1 , dt (mt , vt ), πt∗ )                          (A11)
                     mt+1 = mt + α [Qm (−m, m)(1 − 2mt ) + vt+1 ]
   Now, following Tadić and Meyn (2003) we consider the limit where ε → 0 and
α → 0 but where α ¿ ². In this limit, mt varies more slowly than the beliefs βt , and
thus for the belief evolution we can effectively treat the mean deficit state as fixed.
Thus, we extend our previous mean dynamics G(β) above to the conditional mean
dynamics Ĝ(β, m) that we now define. To do so, let Fηd (v) (x) be the cdf of ηdt (v)
at x, denote q̄v,k as the unconditional probability of the event {vt = k}, which is an
element of the ergodic distribution of Qv , and define:
                                  Z b−d(m)
                                      ¯
                                                  1
                   Ψv (β, b, m) =                 ¯        dFηd (v) (x).
                                   0       ξ(β) − d(m) − x
Then we have:
Ĝ(β, m) = E[g̃(β, dt (mt , vt , πt∗ )|mt = m ∀t]
            vh
               "Z         ¯
                                                                  #
           X        ω̄(β)−d(m)
                                       θ(1 − λβ)
         =                                  ¯         dFηd (k) (x) q̄v,k
           k=1    0              1  −  λβ − d(m)  − x
                   vh
                   X  ££              ¡            ¢¤ ∗    ¤
               +                               ¯
                           1 − Fηd (k) ω̄(β) − d(m)  π̄ (m) q̄v,k − β
                   k=1
               vh ½
               X                                    ·        µ                          ¶¸         ¾
                                                                                 ¯
                                                                 log ω̄(β) − log d(m)         ∗
           =             θξ(β)Ψk (β, ω̄(β), m) + 1 − Φ                                       π̄ (m) q̄v,k − β
               k=1
                                                                         σd (k)
                     THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                41

Then we have the following result.

Claim 1. Let ε → 0 and α → 0 such that α/ε → 0 and ε3/2 /α → 0. Then for
m0 = m the beliefs {βt } from (A11) converge weakly to the solution of the ordinary
differential equation (ODE):
                                        β̇ = Ĝ(β, m)                                    (A12)
for δ > 0 and a broad class of probability distributions of ηd t (st ) and ηπ t (st ) (including
those specified in (A1) and (A2).

Proof. (Sketch.) This follows from Corollary 2 to Theorem 2 in Tadić and Meyn
(2003). Since they focus on convergence of the “slow” process mt as well they require
stronger stability conditions on the ODE then are necessary for our result.        ¤

   The conditional self-confirming equilibria are the collections of fixed points of the
conditional dynamics, and thus are the β ∗ that satisfy Ĝ(β ∗ , m) = 0. Again, for a
conditional SCE to be a limit point of the learning it must be stable and thus satisfy
Ĝβ (β ∗ , m) < 0. In section (VIII), we study how well the conditional SCE beliefs
approximate rational expectations beliefs under our estimated parameters.

B.3. Qualifications. It is important to note that we have convergence in a weak
sense of convergence in distribution. For any constant positive gain, when regimes
change and as the deficit is hit by shocks, beliefs will continue to fluctuate. These
fluctuations become proportionately smaller when the gain ε is smaller, but for any
positive gain the beliefs will have a non-degenerate distribution. As the gain shrinks,
this distribution collapses to a point mass on the solution of the ODE. Proposition 4
describes only the average behavior of beliefs for small gains. There may be extended
periods in which beliefs are away from the SCE, particularly when some regimes may
be experienced for extended periods. This is why the conditional SCEs in Claim 1
are useful reference points for the analysis. Over the relatively long spells in which
the average deficit state is constant the beliefs would tend to be centered on the
conditional SCE. However, the escape dynamics play an important role as well, and
they persist with positive gains.

                Appendix C. Rational Expectations Equilibria
  We now suspend the adaptive learning rule (6) and consider a subset of the rational
expectations equilibria of the model. Further, while previously we’ve assumed that
agents within the model do not observe the Markov state governing seignorage, we
now assume that rational agents do condition on the average deficit state mt .
                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                    42

C.1. Computing equilibria. We seek stationary Markov equilibria in which infla-
tion and expected inflation are given by:

                 πt = π(st , mt−1 , dt )
                                      ¯ t+1 ) + ηd,t+1 (vt+1 ))|mt ]
       E[πt+1 |mt ] = E[π(st+1 , mt , d(m
                      hm X
                      X   hv Z
                    =                           ¯ + x)dFη (k) (x)q̄v,k Qm (mt , j)
                                 π([j, k], mt , d(j)         d
                            j=1 k=1

                        ≡   π e (mt ),

where we use the notation st = [j, k] ≡ [mt = j, vt = k]. Note that we assume that
the state vt governing seignorage shocks is unobserved and that agents’ subjective
distribution over this state is given by the ergodic distribution q̄v . Then going through
calculations similar to those above we have:
                                                   θ(1 − λπ e (mt−1 ))
                            π(st , mt−1 , dt ) =                           .
                                                 1 − λπ e (mt ) − dt (st )

Again this only holds when the denominator is positive (which is the more stringent
condition), so we truncate as above, giving:

                                                                      θ(1 − λπ e (mt−1 ))
        π(st , mt−1 , dt ) =ι(dt (st ) < ω(π e (mt ), π e (mt−1 )))
                                                                    1 − λπ e (mt ) − dt (st )
                              + ι(dt (st ) ≥ ω(π e (mt ), π e (mt−1 )))πt∗ (mt )

Letting ωij = ω(π e (j), π e (i)) and taking expectations of both sides conditional on
information at t − 1 and setting mt−1 = i yields:
        hm X
        X    hv ½                         ·      µ                 ¯ ¶¸       ¾
 e                        e                        log(ωij ) − log d(j)   ∗
π (i) =          θξi Ψk (π (j), ωij , j) + 1 − Φ                        π̄ (j) q̄v,k Qm (i, j),
        j=1 k=1
                                                          σd (k)
                                                                                   (A13)
                    e
where ξi = 1 − π (i)λ and Ψk is as above. Thus, we have hm coupled equations
determining π e (mt ). Substituting this solution into the expression for π(·) then gives
the evolution of inflation under rational expectations. The equations are sufficiently
complicated that an analytic solution is not available, and hence we must look for
equilibria numerically. A simple iterative solution method for the equations consists
of initializing the π e (j) on the right side of (A13) and computing π e (i) on the left
side and iterating until convergence. Alternatively, any other numerical nonlinear
equation solver can be used.
                    THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                              43

C.2. Multiplicity and nonexistence. Though there are multiple rational expec-
tations equilibria of the model, there is typically a unique SCE that is stable under
learning. As we’ve seen, in the deterministic counterpart of the model there are two
REEs. With small enough shocks, we also find that there are two conditional SCEs
in each regime. As discussed above, the SCEs average across these conditional SCEs.
Thus, for example with two possible regimes and two conditional SCEs in each regime,
there would typically be two SCEs, with one of them stable. REEs also average across
the conditional SCEs, taking into account the probability of regime switches. So, for
example, with two conditional SCEs in each regime, there are typically four REEs
that switch between values close to the conditional SCEs in each regime. However,
when shocks to seignorage become large enough there may be only one conditional
SCE in a regime, or it could even occur that a conditional SCE fails to exist alto-
gether. Depending on the weight that these high-shock regimes have in the invariant
distribution, the SCE may also fail to exist. Similarly, there may be fewer rational
expectations equilibria or none at all.
   As we’ve seen, these observations are empirically relevant, as in some countries our
estimates imply very large seignorage shocks in some regimes. Nevertheless, in all
cases we find that a stable SCE exists, even though there may not be a conditional
SCE in the high shock regimes. This suggests that beliefs may tend to diverge in
the regimes with high shocks, with agents expecting ever-growing inflation (up to
the truncation point). But the regimes usually will not last long enough for this to
actually happen, and the lower shock regimes tend to bring beliefs back down.

Appendix D. Seigniorage Rates: Actual Data and Model Implications
  Because we have no reliable data on real output and money on a monthly basis,
we construct a time series of annual deficits financed by money creation. Following
Fischer (1982), we calculate annual seigniorage rates from actual data as
                                              Agg     Agg
                                             MA, t − MA, t−1
                                 dData
                                  A, t   =         Agg
                                                                                     (A14)
                                                  YA, t

where the subscript “A” stands for annual and the superscript “Agg” stands for ag-
            Agg
gregate. MA,  t is aggregate reserve money for the year containing the month indexed
            Agg
by t and YA, t is aggregate nominal GDP in that year. For this calculation, there is
no parameter θ involved because we work directly on the aggregate data on money.
   To make the simulated data from our model as close to (A14) as possible, we
compute the distribution of dA, t as follows. We first draw st from Pr(st |φ̂, π T ) and for
a given st we then draw dt (st ) and compute dA, t as an average of dt (st ) over the twelve
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                           44

         Table 6. Argentina: MLEs for the 2 × 3 regime-switching model

                                       λ : 0.730 (0.0104)
                       ¯      ¯
                     [d(1); d(2)] : [0.0937 (0.0009); 0.0228 (0.0002)]
          [ξd (1); ξd (2); ξd (3)] : [0.104 (0.050); 1.482 (0.074); 3.784 (0.226)]
                                       ξπ : 16.78 (5.178)
                                        ² : 0.023 (0.001)
           Transition probability matrix Qm for d(s     ¯ t ):
          0.9789 (0.014)                                             0.0162
                0.0211                                           0.9838 (0.007)
          Transition probability matrix Qv for ηd t (st ):
          0.4395 (0.139)                    0.0370                   0.0000
                0.5605                 0.9260 (0.021)                0.0287
                0.0000                      0.0370               0.9713 (0.018)

        Note: the numbers in the parentheses are estimated standard errors.



months for the year containing all these months indexed by t. The simulated data dA, t
is only an approximation to the actual data dData A, t because of these differences. The
price index data Pt used for our model is CPI, not the GDP deflator. For the actual
data, dData
        A, t is calculated as a ratio of two sums or aggregates. For the simulated data,
  Data
dA, t is computed as a sum of monthly money creations in percent of real output.
   In our estimation, dt is arbitrarily normalized. When comparing to actual data, we
need to re-normalize it. We do so by matching the average of medians of simulated
annual deficits to the average of actual annual deficits over the sample for Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru. For Chile, we use the average over the sample excluding
the hyperinflation period 1971-1975 during which large simulated deficits are caused
by a large variance of deficit shocks. The effect of this relatively large variance is
shown by the skewed distribution marked by the dashed bands in the second-row
graph of Figure 6. Note that changes in shock variances has no effect on the median
of simulated deficits.

                Appendix E. Additional Tables and Figures
  Tables 6-10 present the full maximum likelihood estimates of our model for the five
countries in our sample.
           THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                           45

  Table 7. Bolivia: MLEs for the 2 × 3 regime-switching model

                                λ : 0.307 (0.038)
               ¯      ¯
              [d(1); d(2)] : [0.1088 (0.0078); 0.0151 (0.0006)]
[ξd (1); ξd (2); ξd (3)] : [0.053 (0.0396); 1.322 (0.0732); 3.252 (0.3157)]
                               ξπ : 26.52 (2.5114)
                                ² : 0.232 (0.0375)
 Transition probability matrix Qm for d(s      ¯ t ):
0.9629 (0.0237)                                             0.0041
      0.0371                                            0.9959 (0.0028)
Transition probability matrix Qv for ηd t (st ):
0.3344 (0.1067)                    0.0910                    0.0000
      0.6656                 0.8180 (0.0426)                 0.1487
      0.0000                       0.0910               0.8513 (0.0405)

Note: the numbers in the parentheses are estimated standard errors.


   Table 8. Brazil: MLEs for the 3 × 2 regime-switching model

                             λ : 0.613 (0.0073)
 ¯ d(2)
[d(1) ¯ d(3)]
           ¯      : [0.0771 (0.0020); 0.0375 (0.0006); 0.0096 (0.0001)]
           [ξd (1) ξd (2)] : [2.818 (0.1672); 10.929 (1.0010)]
                             ξπ : 9.18 (10.8305)
                              ² : 0.189 (0.0118)
 Transition probability matrix Qm for d(s    ¯ t ):
0.9845 (0.0127)                   0.0134                   0.0000
     0.0155                 0.9732 (0.0224)                0.0000
     0.0000                       0.0134                   1.0000
Transition probability matrix Qv for ηd t (st ):
0.9344 (0.0292)                                            0.0969
     0.0656                                           0.9031 (0.0338)

Note: the numbers in the parentheses are estimated standard errors.
           THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                          46

   Table 9. Chile: MLEs for the 2 × 3 regime-switching model

                               λ : 0.875 (0.0000)
               ¯     ¯
              [d(1) d(2)] : [0.0200 (0.0000); 0.0110 (0.0000)]
 [ξd (1) ξd (2) ξd (3)] : [0.203 (0.0619); 2.298 (0.1036); 6.985 (0.5367)]
                              ξπ : 10.62 (3.8807)
                               ² : 0.025 (0.0000)
  Transition probability matrix Qm for d(s    ¯ t ):
 0.9869 (0.0051)                                             0.0070
       0.0131                                           0.9930 (0.0076)
 Transition probability matrix Qv for ηd t (st ):
 0.7627 (0.0740)                   0.0345                    0.0000
       0.2373                 0.9310 (0.0193)                0.0869
       0.0000                      0.0345               0.9131 (0.0289)

Note: the numbers in the parentheses are estimated standard errors.


   Table 10. Peru: MLEs for the 3 × 2 regime-switching model

                             λ : 0.740 (0.0001)
 ¯ d(2)
[d(1) ¯ d(3)]
           ¯      : [0.0542 (0.0003); 0.0219 (0.0001); 0.0139 (0.0001)]
            [ξd (1) ξd (2)] : [0.394 (0.0714); 3.208 (0.1107)]
                             ξπ : 15.97 (2.4004)
                              ² : 0.069 (0.0025)
 Transition probability matrix Qm for d(s    ¯ t ):
0.9943 (0.0076)                   0.0187                    0.0000
     0.0057                 0.9626 (0.0142)                 0.0350
     0.0000                       0.0187               0.9650 (0.0166)
Transition probability matrix Qv for ηd t (st ):
0.3016 (0.1310)                                            0.0453
     0.6984                                            0.9547 (0.0127)

Note: the numbers in the parentheses are estimated standard errors.
                   THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                          47

   Figures 10-14 plot the smoothed (two-sided) probabilities of the regimes condi-
tional on our estimates and the full data sample. Each panel of the figures plots the
probability of a particular combination (m, v) of the mean deficit and deficit shock
variance states.
   Figures 15 - 19 summarize the relative fit of our model for each country. In each
figure, the top panel plots the inflation data along with the 90% probability bands
for the one-step ahead forecasts from out model. The second panel plots the time
series of the log of the conditional likelihood for our model, while the third panel
plot the corresponding time series for the best-fitting regime-switching autoregressive
statistical model. The bottom panel plot the difference between the two previous log
conditional likelihoods. Together these bottom three panels summarize the relative
fit of our model versus the statistical model in different time periods.
                       THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                 48


                             Regime with high average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980       1985     1990     1995    2000   2005
                            Regime with high average seigniorage and medium shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980      1985      1990      1995   2000   2005
                             Regime with high average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965    1970      1975      1980      1985       1990     1995    2000   2005
                             Regime with low average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975     1980       1985     1990     1995     2000   2005
                            Regime with low average seigniorage and medium shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970     1975      1980       1985     1990      1995    2000   2005
                             Regime with low average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980      1985     1990      1995    2000   2005

             Figure 10. Argentina: smoothed probability of the regimes condi-
             tional on the MLEs and the data.
                        THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                 49


                              Regime with high average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960    1965     1970      1975      1980       1985     1990     1995    2000   2005
                             Regime with high average seigniorage and medium shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960    1965     1970      1975      1980      1985      1990      1995   2000   2005
                              Regime with high average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960    1965    1970      1975      1980      1985       1990     1995    2000   2005
                              Regime with low average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960    1965     1970      1975     1980       1985     1990     1995     2000   2005
                             Regime with low average seigniorage and medium shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960    1965     1970     1975      1980       1985     1990      1995    2000   2005
                              Regime with low average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960    1965     1970      1975      1980      1985     1990      1995    2000   2005

             Figure 11. Bolivia: smoothed probabilities of the regimes conditional
             on the MLEs and the data.
                        THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                           50


                               Regime with high average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
                        1985                1990               1995               2000   2005
                               Regime with high average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
                        1985             1990              1995                2000      2005
                           Regime with medium average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
                        1985             1990              1995                2000      2005
                           Regime with medium average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
                        1985                1990               1995               2000   2005
                               Regime with low average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
                        1985                1990               1995               2000   2005
                               Regime with low average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
                        1985                1990               1995               2000   2005

             Figure 12. Brazil: smoothed probabilities of the regimes conditional
             on the MLEs and the data.
                       THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                 51


                             Regime with high average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980       1985     1990     1995    2000   2005
                            Regime with high average seigniorage and medium shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980      1985      1990      1995   2000   2005
                             Regime with high average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965    1970      1975      1980      1985       1990     1995    2000   2005
                             Regime with low average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975     1980       1985     1990     1995     2000   2005
                            Regime with low average seigniorage and medium shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970     1975      1980       1985     1990      1995    2000   2005
                             Regime with low average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980      1985     1990      1995    2000   2005

             Figure 13. Chile: smoothed probabilities of the regimes conditional
             on the MLEs and the data.
                       THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                 52


                             Regime with high average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980      1985      1990      1995   2000   2005
                             Regime with high average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975     1980      1985      1990      1995    2000   2005
                            Regime with medium average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975     1980      1985      1990      1995    2000   2005
                            Regime with medium average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980      1985       1990     1995   2000   2005
                              Regime with low average seigniorage and large shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965      1970     1975      1980       1985     1990      1995   2000   2005
                              Regime with low average seigniorage and small shock
        1
Prob




       0.5

        0
              1960   1965     1970      1975      1980      1985     1990      1995    2000   2005

             Figure 14. Peru: smoothed probabilities of the regimes conditional
             on the MLEs and the data.
                               THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                  53



                1                                                                          Actual
                                                                                           Low band
Log Pt/Pt−1



                                                                                           High band
              0.5



                0
                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005



                                                                                     Economic model
               10
 Log LH




                0


              −10
                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005



                                                                                     Statistical model
               10
 Log LH




                0


              −10
                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005


               20
                                                                                           Difference
     Log LH




               10


                0


                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005

                    Figure 15. Argentina: 90% probability bands of one-step predictions
                    from our theoretical model, the log value of the conditional likelihood
                    p(πt |Πt−1 , φ̂ for both the theoretical and statistical models, and the
                    difference in log conditional likelihood.
                               THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                  54


                1
                                                                                           Actual
                                                                                           Low band
Log Pt/Pt−1



                                                                                           High band
              0.5



                0
                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005




                0
 Log LH




              −5

              −10                                                                    Economic model

                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005




                0
 Log LH




              −5

              −10                                                                    Statistical model

                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005


                8
                                                                                           Difference
                6
                4
     Log LH




                2
                0
              −2
              −4
                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005

                    Figure 16. Bolivia: 90% probability bands of one-step predictions
                    from our theoretical model, the log value of the conditional likelihood
                    p(πt |Πt−1 , φ̂ for both the theoretical and statistical models, and the
                    difference in log conditional likelihood.
                             THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                  55



              3                                                                          Actual
                                                                                         Low band
Log Pt/Pt−1



              2                                                                          High band

              1

              0
                             1985            1990            1995           2000                  2005


              5
Log LH




              0



          −5                                                                       Economic model

                             1985            1990            1995           2000                  2005


              5
Log LH




              0



          −5                                                                       Statistical model

                             1985            1990            1995           2000                  2005



              6                                                                          Difference
              4
Log LH




              2

              0

          −2
                             1985            1990            1995           2000                  2005

                  Figure 17. Brazil: 90% probability bands of one-step predictions
                  from our theoretical model, the log value of the conditional likelihood
                  p(πt |Πt−1 , φ̂ for both the theoretical and statistical models, and the
                  difference in log conditional likelihood.
                               THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                  56


              0.8
                                                                                           Actual
              0.6                                                                          Low band
Log Pt/Pt−1



                                                                                           High band
              0.4

              0.2

               0
                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005



              10

               5
     Log LH




               0

              −5                                                                     Economic model

                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005



              10

               5
     Log LH




               0

              −5                                                                     Statistical model

                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005



              10                                                                           Difference
     Log LH




               5


               0


                      1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005

                    Figure 18. Chile: 90% probability bands of one-step predictions
                    from our theoretical model, the log value of the conditional likelihood
                    p(πt |Πt−1 , φ̂ for both the theoretical and statistical models, and the
                    difference in log conditional likelihood.
                                 THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                                  57



                                                                                             Actual
                  2                                                                          Low band
    Log Pt/Pt−1


                                                                                             High band

                  1



                  0
                        1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005




                  0
Log LH




              −5

                                                                                       Economic model
         −10
                        1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005




                  0
Log LH




              −5

                                                                                       Statistical model
         −10
                        1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005


                  8
                                                                                             Difference
                  6
                  4
   Log LH




                  2
                  0
              −2
              −4
                        1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995       2000       2005

                      Figure 19. Peru: 90% probability bands of one-step predictions
                      from our theoretical model, the log value of the conditional likelihood
                      p(πt |Πt−1 , φ̂ for both the theoretical and statistical models, and the
                      difference in log conditional likelihood.
                 THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                       58

                                  References
Adam, K., G. W. Evans, and S. Honkapohja (in press): “Are Hyperinflation
  Paths Learnable?,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.
Bruno, M., and S. Fischer (1990): “Seigniorage, Operating Rules, and the High
  Inflation Trap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 353–374.
Cagan, P. (1956): “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in Studies in the
  Quantity Theory of Money, ed. by M. Friedman. University of Chicago Press,
  Chicago, IL.
Cho, I.-K., and K. Kasa (2003): “Learning Dynamics and Endogenous Currency
  Crises,” Computing in Economics and Finance 2003, Society for Computational
  Economics.
Cho, I.-K., N. Williams, and T. J. Sargent (2002): “Escaping Nash Inflation,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 69, 1–40.
Dornbusch, R. (1985): “Comment,” in Inflation and indexation: Argentina, Brazil,
  and Israel, ed. by J. Williamson. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Elliott, R., L. Aggoun, and J. Moore (1995): Hidden Markov Models: Esti-
  mation and Control. Springer-Verlag, New York and Berlin.
Ellison, M., L. Graham, and J. Vilmunen (2006): “Strong contagion with weak
  spillovers,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9(2), 263–283.
Evans, G., and S. Honkapohja (2001): Learning and Expectations in Macroeco-
  nomics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Fischer, S. (1982): “Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 90(2), 295–313.
          (1987): “Comments on Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace, ’Inflation and the
  Government Budget Constraint’,” in Economic Policy in Theory and Practice, ed.
  by A. Razin, and E. Sadka, pp. 203–207. St. Martin’s Press, New York, New York.
Friedman, M. (1948): “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability,”
  The American Economic Review, 38, 245–264.
Hamilton, J. D. (1989): “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonsta-
  tionary Time Series and the Business Cycle,” Econometrica, 57(2), 357–384.
Hamilton, J. D., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2004): “Normalization in Econo-
  metrics,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2004-13.
Imrohoroglu, S. (1993): “Testing for Sunspot Equilibria in the German Hyperin-
  flation,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(3), 289–317.
Kasa, K. (2004): “Learning, Large Deviations, And Recurrent Currency Crises,”
  International Economic Review, 45, 141–173.
                 THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                       59

Kushner, H. J., and G. G. Yin (1997): Stochastic Approximation Algorithms and
  Applications. Springer-Verlag.
Ljungqvist, L., and T. J. Sargent (2004): Recursive Macroeconomic Theory.
  The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, second edn.
Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1986): “Adaptive Behavior and Economic Theory,” Journal of
  Business, 59, S401–S426.
Lucas, Jr., R. E., and T. J. Sargent (1981): Rational Expectations and Econo-
  metrics Practice. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Marcet, A., and J. P. Nicolini (2003): “Recurrent Hyperinflations and Learning,”
  The American Economic Review, 93(5), 1476–1498.
Marcet, A., and T. J. Sargent (1989a): “Convergence of Least Squares Learning
  Mechanisms in Self-Referential Linear Stochastic Models,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 48, 337–368.
          (1989b): “Least-Squares Learning and the Dynamics of Hyperinflation,” in
  International Symposia in Economic Theory and Econometrics, ed. by W. Barnett,
  J. Geweke, and K. Shell, pp. 119–137. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
  England.
Marimon, R., and S. Sunder (1993): “Indeterminacy of Equilibria in a Hyperin-
  flation World: Experimental Evidence,” Econometrica, 61(5), 1073–1107.
Mondino, G., F. Sturzenegger, and M. Tommasi (1996): “Recurrent High
  Inflation and Stabilization: A Dynamic Game,” International Economic Review,
  37, 981–996.
Sargent, T. J. (1981): “Interpreting Economic Time Series,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 89(2), 213–48.
          (1999): The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University Press,
  Princeton, New Jersey.
Sargent, T. J., and N. Wallace (1987): “Inflation and the Government Budget
  Constraint,” in Economic Policy in Theory and Practice, ed. by A. Razin, and
  E. Sadka, pp. 170–200. St. Martin’s Press, New York, New York.
Sargent, T. J., and N. Williams (2003): “Impacts of Priors on Convergence and
  Escapes from Nash Inflation,” Manuscript, New York University and Princeton
  University.
Sclove, S. L. (1983): “Time-Series Segementation: A Model and a Method,” Infor-
  mation Sciences, 29(1), 7–25.
Sims, C. A. (2001): “Stability and Instability in US Monetary Policy Behavior,”
  Manuscript, Princeton University.
                 THE CONQUEST OF SOUTH AMERICAN INFLATION                       60

Sims, C. A., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2006): “Generalized Methods for
  Restricted Markov-Switching Moels with Independent State Variables,” Unfinished
  Manuscript.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (2006): “Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary
  Policy?,” The American Economic Review, 96, 54–81.
Tadić, V. B., and S. P. Meyn (2003): “Asymptotic Properties of Two Time-Scale
  Stochastic Approximation Algorithms with Constant Step Sizes,” Proceedings of
  the 2003 American Control Conference.
Tetlow, R., and P. von zur Muehlen (2004): “Avoiding Nash Inflation:
  Bayesian and robust responses to model uncertainty,” Review of Economic Dy-
  namics, 7, 869–899.
Zarazaga, C. (1993): Hyperinflations, Institutions, and Moral Hazard in the Ap-
  propriation of Seignorage. University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA, ph.d. dis-
  sertation edn.
  New York University and Hoover Institution, Princeton University and NBER,
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
