NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STRATEGIC INCOMPATIBILITY IN ATM MARKETS
Christopher R. Knittel
Victor Stango
Working Paper 12604
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12604

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

Thanks to seminar participants at the 2005 IIOC conference, DOJ, and the 2006 Tuck Winter IO Conference
for helpful comments. Carrie Jankowski and Kaushik Murali provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Christopher R. Knittel and Victor Stango. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Strategic Incompatibility in ATM Markets
Christopher R. Knittel and Victor Stango
NBER Working Paper No. 12604
October 2006
JEL No. K21,L1,L12,L4,L41,L44,L84
ABSTRACT
We test whether firms use incompatibility strategically, using data from ATM markets. High ATM
fees degrade the value of competitors' deposit accounts, and can in principle serve as a mechanism
for siphoning depositors away from competitors or for creating deposit account differentiation. Our
empirical framework can empirically distinguish surcharging motivated by this strategic concern from
surcharging that simply maximizes ATM profit considered as a stand-alone operation. The results
are consistent with such behavior by large banks, but not by small banks. For large banks, the effect
of incompatibility seems to operate through higher deposit account fees rather than increased deposit
account base.
Christopher R. Knittel
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
crknittel@ucdavis.edu
Victor Stango
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover NH 03755
victor.stango@dartmouth.edu

2
‘ATM surcharges may put small banks–or, more accurately, banks that do not
own many ATMs–at a disadvantage...[Surcharges] may induce small-bank customers
to move their deposit accounts to the larger banks, resulting in increased concentration
in local banking markets.’
– from ‘Competition in ATM Markets,’ Congressional Budget Oﬃce (1998)

1

Introduction

In recent years the economics of incompatibility have moved to the forefront of policy debates. The
generic issue is something like this: Firm A produces two products, which may be more valuable
when consumed together. Firm A faces competition in one or both markets. In principle, consumers
can “mix and match” Firm A’s products with those of its competitors, but Firm A decides to
restrict consumers’ ability to do so, eﬀectively forcing them to buy both of its products together.
In computers, Microsoft is held to have used a variety of technical and contractual restriction to
link products in this way.1 In media and telecommunications markets, the prospect that owners
of “bottleneck” facilities might use that advantage to acquire market power in other markets is an
ongoing concern.2 Kodak allegedly used contractual restrictions to deny users of its copiers the
ability to use independent service and parts for repairs.3 Printer manufacturer Lexmark was sued
for restricting consumers’ ability to use third-party toner cartridges in its printers. Terminology in
these cases varies–some refer to incompatibility, others refer to access or interconnection pricing,
and others term this behavior tying–but the economic question is the same in each case: when
will a firm attempt to restrict access across related markets, and when will that strategic behavior
be successful?4
1

See Genakos et al. (2005) for an empirical examination of the OS/server issue, in which Microsoft allegedly

degraded the interoperability of its OS with rivals’ server software. The antitrust suit against Microsoft alleged that
Microsoft tied both Internet Explorer and its Java platform to Windows in order to maintain its Windows monopoly.
See, e.g., Gilbert and Katz (2001) for a discussion.
2

The government’s case against the AOL/Time Warner merger alleged that the merged entity could harm Internet

Service Provider competition by denying competitors access to Time Warner’s cable lines, and this issue dictated
the terms of merger approval (which mandated that Time Warner provide open access to competing ISPs). In the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, the concern that local exchange carriers could leverage their monopoly from switches
to related markets drove the imposition of regulated access pricing.
3

See Mackie-Mason and Metzler (2004) for a discussion.

4

See Whinston (1990) for a clear exposition of the intuitive link between tying, interconnection degradation, and

incompatibility.

3
In this paper we provide an empirical framework for examining this question, using data from
ATM markets. Banks oﬀer both ATM cards and ATM services as a bundle to their depositors.
They also oﬀer other banks’ customers access to their ATMs, but impose a per-use surcharge for
each such transaction. Surcharges are closest to the telecommunication example; they are an access
fee for oﬀ-network transactions. The allegation (highlighted by the quote above) is that large banks
use surcharges to create incompatibility between their ATMs and other banks’ cards, degrading the
value of their competitors’ deposit accounts and creating competitive advantage in that market.5
The particular diﬃculty in ATM markets is that bank might impose surcharges simply to
maximize profits in their ATM business, considered as a stand-alone entity. This makes it hard
to distinguish behavior intended to maximize profits within a market from behavior intended to
maximize profits across markets. Do high ATM surcharges reflect an intent to create competitive
advantage in the deposit account market? Or, do they merely reflect a profit-maximizing response
to ATM demand? This is of particular concern in our setting; while there has been some empirical
work establishing that surcharges are correlated with changes in deposit market outcomes, that
work has not attempted to disentangle strategic behavior from other explanations (such as omitted
variables aﬀecting both markets).6 More generally, while there is a substantial theoretical literature
identifying the conditions under which incompatibility reflects a strategic motive, there has been
little empirical work on the issue.7
To distinguish surcharging that maximizes ATM profits from strategic incompatibility, we first
estimate the firm-level surcharge that would maximize ATM profits without any regard to the
deposit market. Our identification strategy benefits from a natural experiment. Prior to 1996
banks were barred from imposing surcharges; after the restriction was lifted, surcharging became
widespread. This regime change in surcharging allows us to estimate the elasticity of residual
demand for foreign ATM transactions. With this in hand and information on marginal cost, we
can estimate the optimal stand-alone surcharge for each firm.
5

Controversy surrounded surcharging when it was first allowed in the late 1990s; its opponents advocate statutory

bans on the practice, precisely to prevent the use of surcharges as strategic incompatibility. See Prager (2001) for a
discussion, as well as the first empirical work examining the issue.
6

Massoud, Saunders and Scholnick (2006) discuss this endogeneity issue, but do not estimate by how much strategic

behavior distorts surcharges. Hannan et al. (2003) focus on the reduced form link between bank characteristics and
surcharges without attempting to test whether surcharging is a form of strategic incompatibility.
7

Early theoretical work developing the economics of such markets includes that of Matutes and Regibeau (1988,

1992), Economides (1989) and Chou and Shy (1990). Later work focusing on incompatibility includes Church and
Gandal (1992, 1996, 2000), Economides and Salop (1992). Economides, Lopomo and Woroch (1996) discuss the
strategic use of access fees, and Economides (1998) relates the access issue to telecommunications markets and the
Microsoft case.

4
We then measure diﬀerences at the bank level between actual surcharges and our estimated
optimal stand-alone surcharges: we call this diﬀerence the incompatibility premium. We find that
large banks have much higher incompatibility premia than small banks; in fact, for small banks
the average incompatibility premium is quite close to zero. This is consistent with the view that
small firms have little motive or ability to restrict access for competitive advantage, but that large
banks do have such a motive. We also estimate a model that can in principle reveal the parameters
of interest to a bank: the partial derivatives of deposit account prices and quantities with respect
to surcharging. In the models where we impose the most structure on the data, the parameters
suggest that in our sample the strategic incompatibility motive stems from higher deposit fees,
rather than increased quantity in the deposit account market.
Because the partial equilibrium incentives for incompatibility need not correlate with equilibrium outcomes in any systematic way, we also estimate the relationship between our estimate of the
incompatibility premium and changes in deposit account prices and quantities after banks began
surcharging.8 For large banks, the incompatibility premium is positively correlated with higher
deposit account fees even when we condition on surcharges. There is no relationship between the
incompatibility premium and gains in deposit share for banks of any size. This result sheds light on
some mixed empirical results from previous studies of ATM markets, which find that banks should
use high surcharges strategically, and that large banks charge higher fees, but has not been able
to conclusively establish that banks use surcharges strategically.9 Our results suggest that higher
8

Massoud, Saunders and Scholnick (2006) conduct a similar test that correlates surcharges with changes in deposit

market outcomes; we condition on surcharges and estimate the correlation between changes and our estimated
incompatibility premium.
9

Massoud, Saunders and Scholnick (2006) find a positive correlation between surcharges and gains in deposit share

for large banks. Hannan et al. (2003) establish that large banks charge higher surcharges, using data from 1998, and
also find that large banks are more likely to impose surcharges in markets with a high inflow of new customers–a
result that they argue is consistent with the leveraging motive. But, they find little support for the notion that large
banks are motivated by an attempt to steal existing customers from small banks. Prager (2001) finds no evidence
that surcharges are correlated with deposit share losses by small banks, although her definition of “small” is based
on national size and includes many banks with high local market share. Hannan (2005) does find evidence that
large banks gain share in states with surcharges relative to a state that banned them, but is unable to undertake
any cross-sectional analysis related to surcharging and the incompatibility motive because he does not observe actual
surcharges.
The more structural work in Ishii (2005) and Knittel and Stango (2004) both find, using diﬀerent data, that
the data fit a model where consumers value ATMs and ATM access, and consider both when making their deposit
account decisions. The estimated parameters in Ishii (2005) also suggest an economically significant role for strategic
incompatibility.

5
deposit fees are a motive for high surcharges.10
To our knowledge, ours is the first empirical study to estimate the degree to which firm behavior
is distorted by incentives for incompatibility. It is closely related to work by Genakos et al. (2004),
which estimates the incentive for incompatibility, but does not measure the equilibrium behavior
generated by such an incentive. More generally, our work adds to the empirical literature on
compatibility and competitive strategy.11

2

ATM Markets

Banks oﬀer a variety of financial products, but we focus on two: ATMs and ATM cards. Together,
the two allow electronic withdrawals from deposit accounts.12 Banks bundle cards and access to
their ATMs together in the standard set of service oﬀerings to depositors. Banks price those bundles
using monthly fees, service charges and the float on deposits to earn revenue. Previous empirical
work suggests that access to ATMs is an important deposit account characteristic, diﬀerentiating
banks both horizontally and vertically.13
Because banks operate on shared networks, customers can use their ATM cards at other banks’
ATMs: these are called foreign transactions. All foreign transactions generate two fees: a switch fee
paid by the cardholder’s bank to the network, and an interchange fee paid by the cardholder’s bank
to the ATM owner.14 A foreign transaction may also generate a foreign fee paid by the cardholder
to the cardholder’s bank. Foreign transactions are common in our sample, comprising roughly
thirty-five percent of all ATM transactions in 1996.15
10

This is consistent with the results in Knittel and Stango (2004), which shows an economically significant reduced

form relationship between surcharges, ATMs and deposit account fees. That paper does not examine the relationship
between deposit account share and surcharging.
11

Early work in this literature (e.g., Brynjolfson and Kemerer [1996], Gandal [1994, 1995] and Greenstein [1993]

seeks to identify a first-order eﬀect of compatibility on pricing and firm behavior. Later work has focused on a much
richer set of questions, such as the welfare eﬀects of competition between incompatible networks (Rysman [2003],
Shankar and Bayus [2003], Ohashi [2003]), and firm strategies such as preannouncements (Dranove and Gandal
[2003]).
12

Dove Consulting (1999, 2002) finds that in both 1999 and 2002, roughly eighty percent of ATM transactions were

cash withdrawals. Deposits and inquiries comprise roughly ten percent each.
13

SURVEY finds that ATM access is the second most important characteristic. Knittel and Stango (2004) find

that deposit account prices are correlated with banks’ ATM fleet size.
14

See McAndrews (2003) for a discussion of these fees. The Bank Network News periodically reports fees for the

largest ATM/debit networks.
15

We take this figure from data in the Bank Network News, various years. It closely matches the 38% average

6
Prior to 1996, the major ATM shared networks (PLUS and Cirrus) prohibited ATM owners
from imposing surcharges when non-customers used their machines. After 1996, however, the
networks rescinded the ban and surcharges became widespread. From 1997-1999, most banks
adopted surcharges, and they are currently nearly universal. It is this regime change that provides
the primary source of identification in the data; as we show below, surcharging had first-order eﬀects
on consumer and firm behavior. It also led to allegations that surcharges were anti-competitive,
based in part on the strategic incompatibility motive for large banks.16

2.1

The Network Economics of ATMs and Fees

The underlying economics in ATM markets are intuitively similar to a variety of other markets.
ATMs and cards are a set of mix and match products: components that consumers use to construct a composite good–an ATM transaction.17 Such composite goods are common; examples
include audio/visual systems, computer systems and hardware/software systems more generally,
and many others.18 In these markets, it is often true that competing firms not only choose prices
for their components, but also choose whether their components are compatible with those of their
competitors.19 Surcharging is a form of partial incompatibility; higher surcharges impose costs for
using a card with an ATM owned by a diﬀerent bank.
The motive for incompatibility in these markets is well-known. In ATM markets, the clearest
exposition of this motive is found in Massoud and Bernhardt (2002, 2003). Massoud and Bernhardt
(2002) present a model in which customers make a two-stage decision–first of a bank, then for
ATM use, given their bank choice and ATM fees. Higher surcharges depress willingness to pay
for competitors’ deposit accounts, by increasing ATM costs associated with those other accounts.
Banks consider this, and it gives them an incentive to impose surcharges in order to attract deposit
account customers from competitors. Attracting such consumers is valuable because a firm can
engage in price discrimination for ATM services on its deposit account customers, but not on its
foreign ATM users.
The conclusions reached by Massoud and Bernhardt are broadly consistent with those reached
figure in Massoud, Saunders and Scholnick (2006).
16

A report by the Congressional Budget Oﬃce (1998) details these allegations and discusses national and local

policy debates.
17

To our knowledge Matutes and Regibeau (1988) coined this term.

18

See Katz and Shapiro (1994) and Farrell and Klemperer (2005) for surveys.

19

How providers of complementary products set separate prices for their goods is not a relevant issue in our case,

because own ATM access and deposit account services are almost never sold separately.

7
by other theoretical models in which firms choose compatibility. First, the strategic motive is
highly dependent on market structure; incompatibility is typically unattractive when one or more
of the component markets is perfectly competitive. Massoud and Bernhardt assume imperfect
competition, but it is quite easy to see that in their model the incentive for leveraging disappears
if the deposit account market is competitive. Second, Massoud and Bernhardt also find that large
firms (i.e., those with greater market power) have greater incentives for incompatibility. This is
also a common feature of other studies.
This result (and the intuition behind our empirics) is general to other settings. Economides,
Lopomo and Woroch (1996) examine a very similar theoretical question, but in the context of
telecommunications access. In telecommunications, the owner of a bottleneck facility (such as local
switches) may charge an excessive price for access to that facility–excessive, in the sense that it
is motivated by a desire to steal customers in a related market from competitors, and exceeds the
stand-alone monopoly price for the bottleneck facility.

2.2

Theoretical Implications of Strategic Incompatibility

While there is substantial theoretical support for strategic incompatibility, there has been very
little empirical work on the subject. Here we provide a framework that is directly applicable in any
instance where firms might use interconnection degradation or access pricing as the mechanism for
incompatibility. The intuition is closely related to the empirical framework independently developed
by Genakos et al. (2004) for identifying strategic interoperability degradation.20
Consider a bank oﬀering both ATM services and ATM cards. Its profits in the two markets are
20

In both settings a firm with market power sells complementary products and faces competition. In their study, a

PC OS monopolist reduces interoperability of the PC OS with competitors’ server OSs. This reduces the attractiveness
of the competitors’ server OS product and increases profits. In our case, the ATM owner reduces the interoperability
of its ATMs with competitors’ cards, reducing the attractiveness of those cards and increasing profits. In both cases,
a key empirical prediction is that market share and the leveraging motive are positively correlated.
Despite the similarity of the two studies there are both conceptual diﬀerences and diﬀerences in implementation.
First, the motive for reduced interoperability in Genakos et al. is foreclosure to achieve price discrimination. In our
setting inducing exit is not a motive. Price discrimination is important, however; as Massoud and Bernhardt discuss,
banks can engage in second degree price discrimination against their deposit account customers but not foreign ATM
users. It is this that motivates stealing customers from other firms. A second conceptual diﬀerence is that Genakos et
al. estimate an incentive for reducing interoperability, in partial equilibrium. They find that such an incentive exists
and is large. Our approach examines the actual level of interoperability (because we observe a quantifiable metric of
it), and estimates by how much interoperability is distorted by the leveraging motive.

8

πi = πiA + πiC ,

(1)

where πiA represents profits from foreign ATM transactions and πiC are profits from ATM cards
(deposit accounts).21 The choice variable of interest is si , the surcharge paid by non-customers
using the bank’s ATMs. In all of this analysis, we abstract away from the existence of foreign fees,
to highlight the role of surcharges. We do account for them in the empirical work below.
While a surcharge does not directly aﬀect a bank’s own deposit account demand and profits,
it can make its competitors’ deposit accounts less valuable to their customers, by increasing the
expected fees that they pay. This may increase deposit account profits by making the surcharging
bank’s deposit accounts relatively more attractive. If the bank maximizes profits across the two
markets, it will solve:
∂πiA ∂πiC
+
= 0.
∂si
∂si

(2)

This will yield the profit-maximizing surcharge:

A
C
s∗∗
i = arg max(πi + πi ).

(3)

If we write profits in the two markets more completely as:
³

´

(4)

´

(5)

πiA = si + k − cA QA
i Ai ,
³

C
C
πiC = pC
i − ci Qi ,

where si is bank i’s surcharge, k is the interchange fee (common across banks), cA is the marginal
cost of an ATM transaction (also common across banks), QA
i is bank i’s per-ATM demand for
C
foreign transactions, Ai is its number of ATMs, pC
i is firm i’s deposit account price, ci is marginal

cost of deposit accounts and QC
i is the number of depositors (ATM cards). The optimal surcharge
is:22
∗
∗
s∗∗
i = si + Zi ,

(6)

21

Profits from deposit accounts also include the implicit profits associated with own customers’ use of own ATMs.

22

In this analysis we assume that equilibrium ATM deployment Ai is independent of surcharging, i.e. that

∂Ai
∂si

= 0.

Below, we empirically explore whether surcharging (and strategic incompatibility) are related to changes in ATM
deployment.

9
where
s∗i

A

= −k + c −

Ã

∂QA
i
∂si

!−1

QA
i ,

(7)

and
Ã

∂QA
i
Zi∗ = − Ai
∂si

!−1

Ã

∂pC
∂QA
i
i
QC
i − Ai
∂si
∂si

!−1

³

C
pC
i − ci

´ ∂QC
i

∂si

.

(8)

This decomposes the optimal surcharge into two parts. The first is s∗i , the surcharge that maximizes profits in the ATM market, considered as a stand-alone business. This stand-alone surcharge
is similar to (with some re-arranging) the familiar expression for the Lerner index describing the
price-cost markup, where the “price” from surcharging is si +k and marginal cost is cA . The second
component Zi∗ is what we term the incompatibility premium; it is the diﬀerence between the actual
surcharge and the stand-alone surcharge. If incompatibility increases deposit account demand the
∗
incompatibility premium will be positive, i.e. Zi∗ > 0 and s∗∗
i > si .

Writing the expression this way illustrates the factors driving both stand-alone surcharging and
strategic incompatibility. First, the stand-alone surcharge s∗i is increasing in marginal cost, foreign
transaction demand QA
i and the slope of residual demand for foreign ATM transactions,

∂QA
i
∂si .

The

expression for Zi∗ shows that there are two motives for strategic incompatibility: higher deposit
account prices (if

∂pC
i
∂si

> 0) or more depositors (if

∂QC
i
∂si

> 0). The first of these eﬀects is larger when

A
the bank has more depositors QC
i ; having a large base of cards Ai or heavy ATM usage Qi is more

important if incompatibility leads to higher deposit account prices. Both the first and second eﬀects
are decreasing in Ai and increasing in the slope of residual demand

∂QA
i
∂si ;

strategic incompatibility

involves deviating from stand-alone ATM profit maximization, and doing so is more costly when a
bank has many ATMs or foreign transaction demand is very sensitive to surcharges.

2.3

Empirical Tests for Strategic Incompatibility

Here we outline a series of empirical tests that can in principle estimate the incompatibility premium, reveal the partial equilibrium (private) incentives for incompatibility, and can also shed
light on the equilibrium eﬀects of such behavior when there are many firms in the market. We first
∗
estimate the optimal stand-alone surcharge at the firm level, ŝ∗it ; by the identity Zi∗ ≡ s∗∗
i − si , this

also estimates the incompatibility premium Zi∗ . Our simplest test of whether surcharging reflects
a strategic motive is to compare actual surcharges to estimated optimal stand-alone surcharges; if
they are equal, this implies that Zi∗ = 0. We also ask whether large banks–who may find strategic
incompatibility more worthwhile–have higher estimates of Zi∗ than smaller banks.

10
Our second test imposes more structure on the data, by fitting the first-order condition described
in equations 6-8. If surcharges merely reflect stand-alone profit maximization then equation (7)
should be well-specified. Another way of putting this is that a bank with no strategic motive for
∗
surcharges will set s∗∗
i = si , meaning that in the cross-section the coeﬃcient in a regression of

actual on estimated stand-alone surcharges should be one. If on the other hand actual surcharges
reflect a strategic motive, then a model reflecting the additional term in equation (8) should fit
the data better. We can also use this model to uncover some parameters of interest–the partial
derivatives of profit with respect to surcharges.
Finally, we use data from the three years following surcharging’s inception to examine the
equilibrium eﬀects of both surcharging and strategic incompatibility in deposit markets. These
tests are motivated by the fact that while firms may have private incentives for incompatibility,
the multi-firm equilibrium eﬀects of such behavior are ambiguous.23 We examine two deposit
account outcomes: ATM cards (deposit accounts) and average deposit account fees. To estimate the
equilibrium eﬀects, we examine how changes in the variables over the period following surcharging
are correlated with the levels of both surcharges and the incompatibility premium.

3

Empirical Analysis

3.1

Data and Descriptive Statistics

We take our data from the Card Industry Directory, an annual publication listing data for the
largest ATM card issuers in the United States. The Card Industry Directory contains information
on total ATM cards, total ATMs owned and ATM fees (surcharge and foreign). It also contains the
total number of transactions on the bank’s ATMs. We cross-reference these data with the FDIC
Reports of Condition and Income (or “Call Reports”), and the FDIC Summary of Deposits data.
These other sources provide us with bank-level information about local markets. Most important,
we observe both a bank’s deposit share (across all of its local markets if it operates in more than
one) and the population density of the markets that the bank serves. Market share is important
because in much of our analysis we compare the behavior of banks with high market share to that
of banks with low market share–the idea being that large banks should have a stronger incentive
23

In many models where firms choose compatibility but are symmetric, a prisoners dilemma-type eﬀect occurs

where all firms choose incompatibility, but it has no equilibrium eﬀects on market shares (though welfare and prices
may change). This occurs in Massoud and Bernhardt (2002) when banks are symmetric.

11
for incompatibility.24 Population density is also important because ATM use involves travel and
travel costs may be higher in dense markets; in related work, we have found that population density
is strongly correlated with cross-market diﬀerences in ATM and deposit account pricing.25
A further advantage of the cross-indexed data is that it allows us to estimate the foreign fees
and surcharges charged by a bank’s competitors in its local markets. We do this by exploiting the
fact that bank size is strongly correlated with both surcharging and foreign fees (as we illustrate
in Table 1 below). Thus, the size distribution of a bank’s local competitors is a good proxy for
the fees charged by those competitors.26 As it turns out, this is not critical for our analysis, as
we are primarily interested in how a bank’s own surcharges aﬀect its own transaction demand.
Further, there is not much scope for mis-measuring within-bank variation in competitors’ fees over
time, because foreign fees do not change much at all in our sample, and variation in competitors’
surcharging is almost exclusively a 0/1 transition before and after 1996. Nonetheless this measure
does provide us with some useful complementary information.27
Table 1 presents summary data for our relevant bank-level variables during the sample period
1994-1999. The data are an unbalanced panel, with roughly 150 observations per year for 210 banks.
In order to clarify some of the cross-sectional diﬀerences across card issuers, we classify banks as
being “large” if they have a deposit share in their local markets that is above the sample median,
and “small” otherwise.28 Large banks impose higher surcharges and foreign fees than smaller banks.
The former is consistent with strategic incompatibility, but could also reflect a systematic diﬀerence
in the elasticity of residual demand for foreign transactions; it will be important to control for this
possibility in the empirical work. The latter may reflect diﬀerential price discrimination, although
24

Ideally, we could exploit cross-sectional variation in relative deposit and ATM shares, but ATM and deposit

shares are too highly correlated for this to be a useful exercise.
25

See Knittel and Stango (2003) for evidence on this point.

26

We estimate competitors’ fees by running a within-sample regression of fees on bank size dummies, local market

population density, year eﬀects and interactions between the variables. We then use these coeﬃcients to predict out
of sample for the remaining banks, and average these fitted values by deposit share for each local market. We discuss
the procedure in more detail in Knittel and Stango (2004).
27

As we discuss in Knittel and Stango (2004), our results are robust to a number of alternative imputation methods.

Moreover, our estimates of the key parameter here (the slope of residual demand for a bank’s own ATM transactions,
with respect to its own surcharge) are identical whether we include estimated competitors’ fees or just condition only
on fees that we observe with certainty (i.e., a bank’s own surcharge and foreign fee).
28

In our data, “large” banks are those with a local market share greater than thirteen percent. We have also

estimated bank’s local ATM shares and classified them based on that variable; the two are nearly perfectly correlated,
so the results do not depend much on which measure we use.

12
this is diﬃcult to establish with certainty.29 While surcharges change dramatically over the sample
period, foreign fees rise only slightly (at roughly the inflation rate). Large banks begin the sample
with a higher average level of transactions per ATM, but this relationship reverses by the end of the
sample. Large banks appear to be more aggressive in deploying ATMs when measured relative to
cards; the ratio of cards per ATM is lower for large banks and falls for large banks, while remaining
stable for small banks.
We present the data stratified in this way to illustrate two points. First, there are significant
cross-sectional diﬀerences in the degree to which banks impose surcharges. These are largely consistent with theory; large banks impose higher surcharges. However, this should not be viewed as
conclusive evidence of the strategic behavior that interests us, as cross-sectional diﬀerences in pricing could stem from cross-sectional variation in the elasticity of residual demand. A second point
regarding these data is that they illustrate the first-order eﬀects of surcharges on consumer and
firm behavior; per-ATM transactions fell by 30% after the advent of surcharges.30 This provides a
useful identifying source of variation in the data.

3.2

Estimating Residual Demand and Stand-Alone Surcharges

Beginning with Equation (7) above, if the residual demand for foreign transactions is linear, we
can rewrite the expression for the optimal stand-alone surcharge as:
s∗it = −k + cA −
The partial derivative γi =

∂QA
i
∂si

1 A
Q
γi it

(9)

is the slope of residual demand for foreign ATM transactions with

respect to surcharges. With data on ATM fees and transactions, it is possible to estimate the
slope of residual demand γi in the vein of Baker and Bresnahan (1988). Their approach specifies
a relationship between quantity demanded, own prices, competitors’ prices, and controls.31 In our
case, we estimate the demand for foreign ATM transactions with respect to surcharges using the
following specification:
AT M T ransit = α + γ1 F orCostit + γ2 F orCostit · Largei + γn F orCostit · Density qtileit(10)
29

We do not observe the bank-level menu of checking fees–some of these exhibit nonlinear pricing of foreign trans-

actions. It is not uncommon for banks to give five free foreign transactions per month on certain checking accounts.
In any event, as we noted above, our residual demand analysis uses within-firm changes in fees for identification;
foreign fees do not change much at the firm level in our data.
30

Some of this change is the result of greater ATM deployment; we control for this in the empirical work below.

31

Baker and Bresnahan use a double-log specification, which yields elasticities directly. We can not employ this

specification because sit = 0 for the years prior to surcharging.

13
+δ1 F orCost−i,t + δ2 CardsperAT Mit + δ3 ln AT M sit + μi + ηt + εit ,
where AT M T ransit is the (monthly) number of transactions per ATM and F orCostit is the foreign
ATM cost for bank i’s ATMs (the own price).32 Because we focus on what drives cross-sectional
variation in surcharges–in particular, whether high fees for large banks reflect strategic behavior–
we allow the slope of the residual demand to vary by firm size.33 This allows us to identify whether
the cross-sectional variation in surcharges is driven by diﬀerences in residual demand or diﬀerences
in the level of strategic incompatibility. We also allow the slope of residual demand to vary based
on the population density quintile of a bank’s local market(s). The estimated slope of residual
demand γbi for a given bank will then depend not only on the first term γ1 but on the parameter

vector [γ1 , γ2 , γn ]. In unreported results, we have experimented with a variety of other functional
forms for the slope of residual demand; the general pattern of results remains the same.34

Although the dependent variable AT M T ransit is bank i’s total ATM transactions rather than
its foreign transactions, the parameter γi should estimate

∂QA
i
∂si

because usage of bank i’s ATMs by

its own customers should be invariant to its surcharge (which is never paid by its own customers).35
The other variables are intended to control for other factors influencing transactions. F orCost−i,t
is the foreign ATM cost on other ATMs in bank i’s local markets (the cross-price). CardsperAT Mit
is the bank’s total number of ATM cards divided by its total transactions; all else equal, a bank
with more cards per ATM will have more transactions per ATM (we do allow for the endogeneity
of this variable). We also include the bank’s total number of ATMs to control for any within-firm
changes in total ATM deployment and the eﬀects of such deployment on transaction volume. The
specification includes both fixed firm eﬀects, μi , and fixed year eﬀects, ηt .
The primary econometric issue in these models is that F orCostit and CardsperAT Mit should
be treated as endogenous. It is likely that there is a component of ATM demand that is observed
by the firm, but unobserved to the econometrician. Because the firm observes this, it may alter its
32

F orCost is the bank’s own surcharge plus our estimate of its competitors’ foreign fees. We have also use

specifications with only the surcharge; the results are nearly identical.
33

We are agnostic about the direction of such a diﬀerence. We might expect that the least price-sensitive customers

would sort into large banks, to avoid paying surcharges. This would increase the elasticity of foreign transaction
demand for large banks, because a large bank’s foreign transactions would be made by the price-sensitive customers
of small banks and vice versa. On the other hand, we remain open to the possibility that large banks face less elastic
demand–perhaps because they deploy their ATMs in superior locations.
34

We have also allowed the slope to vary by population density tertile or quartile rather than quintile. We have

also used finer size categories.
35

A
More precisely, we can write total demand as the sum of demand by own and foreign customers: QTit = QO
it + Qit .

Thus,

∂QT
∂si

=

∂QO
∂si

+

∂QA
∂si

and if

∂QO
∂si

= 0, then

∂QT
∂si

=

∂QA
∂si .

14
surcharges and ATM deployment in response. The fixed bank and year eﬀects included in the residual demand equation will absorb unobserved demand components that are constant within firm,
as well as general changes in the demand for ATM transactions across years. A good instrument
therefore will be correlated with cross-sectional diﬀerences in how surcharges and ATM deployment
changed within firms over time, but uncorrelated with the unobserved component of demand.
With this in mind, we interact a number of variables reflecting cross-sectional diﬀerences in
organizational structure and market conditions with a set of year eﬀects. In particular, we include
a dummy variable equal to one if the bank is a holding company that owns multiple subsidiaries
(this is essentially a size instrument), the share of the bank’s branches in Metropolitan Statistical
Areas (MSAs) and population density in the bank’s local markets.36 Because the surcharge ban
constrained the degree of cross-sectional variation in F orCostit the interaction of these variables
with year eﬀects will capture changes in the cross-sectional diﬀerences in how a given firm’s surcharge behavior changed over time. For these to be valid instruments, we need that the relationship
between the demand for ATM transactions and these other variables is stable over our sample.
We have experimented with diﬀerent sets of instruments with no eﬀect on the results; this
is not surprising, as the primary source of identification is the transition from no surcharges to
surcharges; this is explained almost completely at the bank level by year dummies and year/bank
holding company interactions.37

3.3

Residual Demand Slope and Elasticity

Table 2 shows results from our residual demand regressions. The first column shows results of
a simple OLS specification that includes only the own price variable F orCostit and the price
interactions. The second shows IV estimates of the same specification–as expected, the price
coeﬃcient becomes more negative. Model 3 includes competitors’ foreign cost, cards per ATM and
ln (AT M s). Model 4 restricts the sample to include only those banks that impose surcharges at
some point during the sample period.38 Because some of our analysis uses the sample of banks in
36

These variables are all statistically significant in cross-sectional regressions with either surcharges or cards per

ATM as the dependent variable.
37

We have also treated ln(ATMs) as endogenous. This increases all of the estimated standard errors in the model

but does not change the point estimate on the slope of residual demand.
38

It is somewhat puzzling that some banks do not surcharge, particularly when our model predicts that surcharging

at some level is optimal for nearly all banks. There may be other reasons for such behavior. Many banks, for example,
seem to use low ATM fees as a marketing device to signal generally low fees.

15
the data set in both 1996 and 1999, we also present in Model 5 a specification using only those
observations.
In every specification, the estimated coeﬃcient on F orCostit is negative and statistically significant. The large bank interaction is negative, suggesting that banks with higher market share
may face more elastic demand for ATMs. While the population density interaction terms are only
statistically significant for the densest quintile, the pattern of coeﬃcients suggests that demand is
less elastic in dense areas; this accords with the general pattern of results we have found in previous work.39 Cards per ATM are positively correlated with transactions per ATM. The cross-price
coeﬃcient is positive, and significant in the last column, as theory would predict. ATMs are not
significant in any specification.
Reading from the third column, we estimate an economically significant eﬀect of fees on transaction demand. We estimate that a one dollar increase in fees reduces foreign transactions per
machine by roughly 1000 per month. The 1000 transaction point estimate is quite large relative
to the typical number of foreign transactions per machine, which averages 2000 in our sample.40
Using this coeﬃcient estimate and those on the interaction terms, we construct our estimate of the
firm-level slope of residual demand γbi . In this calculation, we use surcharge and quantity data from

1999, the last year in the sample; this allows for the possibility that there was a gradual adjustment

to the surcharging equilibrium over the period 1997-1999. We then use γbi to estimate the optimal

stand-alone surcharges at the firm level using the formula in Equation (9). Doing so requires information on interchange fees and marginal cost, and also requires an estimate of the share of total

ATM transactions that are foreign. For k and cA , we use values of $0.40 and $0.10. The $0.40 figure
is the median value of the interchange fee across networks.41 While we do not observe marginal
cost directly, it is quite low, involving only the incremental cost of switching the transaction over
the network; an estimate of $0.10 is probably on the high side. In any event, both interchange
and marginal cost are virtually identical across issuers, meaning that they do not aﬀect any of our
cross-sectional comparisons below. We assign each bank a share of foreign transactions equal to
the national sample average of twenty-five percent in 1999. If anything, this assumption causes us
Below, we discuss all of our results both for the entire sample, and for the subsample of banks that impose
surcharges.
39

Knittel and Stango (2004) find a systematic relationship between deposit prices, ATMs and surcharges in high-

density markets but no such relationship in low-density markets.
40

While we do not know the bank-level breakdown of transactions per machine (own vs. foreign), we can infer

aggregate averages from data on how many transactions are switched by networks each month.
41

This figure comes from reported interchange fees in Bank Network News. There is no evidence that large banks

pay interchange fees that are systematically higher or lower than those paid by small banks.

16
to over-estimate ŝ∗it for large banks and under-estimate ŝ∗it for small banks (pushing against the
strategic incompatibility story), as evidence from later in the sample period suggests that large
banks have fewer foreign transactions as a share of their transactions per ATM.42
Table 3 shows summary statistics for our estimates of the residual demand slope γbi , stand-

alone surcharges ŝ∗it and incompatibility premia Ẑi∗ = si − ŝ∗i , again using quantity and surcharge

information from 1999.43 We show results for the entire sample as well as the subsample of banks
who surcharge. We also stratify the results by our large/small bank category. Large banks face more
elastic demand and have fewer transactions per ATM; both of these push ŝ∗i down relative to small

banks.44 Large banks also impose higher surcharges. In concert, this leads to estimates of Zi∗ that
are substantially higher, on average, for large banks. The results suggest that large banks impose
surcharges $0.28 higher than they would absent a strategic motive, while small banks undercharge
by $0.52 relative to the optimum. Much of the latter negative eﬀect comes from the fact that we
include banks with no surcharge in the average; when we drop them, large banks have an average
premium of $0.66, while small banks have an average close to zero ($-0.02). We are somewhat
circumspect about interpreting the level of these estimates, which depend on our assumptions
about k and cA ; however, the cross-sectional pattern that large banks have higher estimates of Ẑi∗
is independent of these assumptions, and quite robust to changes in the specifications we use to
obtain γbi . Thus, the patterns we find are consistent with the simplest prediction of the model; we

find evidence that actual surcharges exceed stand-alone surcharges, and this diﬀerence is positively
correlated with market share.
42

The Card Industry Directory does not begin reporting bank-level information on foreign vs. own ATM transac-

tions until 2001. In that year, the average share of foreign transactions for large banks is 20%; for small banks it is
30%. (Both figures are presumably lower than they were in 1999).
43

One issue we do not treat in this analysis is the fact that most surcharges are increments of $0.25, with modes at

$1.00 and $1.50. An alternative approach to the one we take here would account for such discreteness, but we do not
have a good model that explains why surcharges are priced this way. However, as long as bank size is not correlated
with some unobserved heterogeneity in how banks choose discrete prices our cross-sectional results will still hold.
44

Although they are not of primary interest, we have calculated the corresponding demand elasticities in our sample.

Note that there are actually two such elasticities, because prices paid by consumers (F orCostit ) do not correspond
to prices received by banks (si + k). We call the former the “consumer demand elasticity” and the latter the “firm
demand elasticity.” For large (small) banks in 1999, the consumer demand elasticity averages 2.9 (2.0) and the firm
demand elasticity averages 1.9 (1.2).

17

3.4

Fitting the First-Order Condition

An approach that imposes slightly more structure on the data is to fit the first-order conditions in
equations 6-8 and ask whether pricing is more consistent with stand-alone profit maximization or
the richer condition that incorporates a strategic motive. Beginning with equations 6-8 and adding
a random component, we can rewrite the equation for the optimal surcharge as:45

∗
bi )−1 QC
bi )−1 + εit
s∗∗
it = β1 ŝit − β2 (Ai γ
i − β3 (Ai γ

where

β2 =

∂pC
i
∂si

β3 =

³

C
pC
i − ci

(11)

(12)
´ ∂QC
i

∂si

The empirical question is whether this richer model fits the data better than the simple model
∗
46 We estimate these
in which s∗∗
it = ŝit , which is equivalent to testing whether β2 = β3 = 0.

models using least squares and test the restrictions. We also estimate the model separately for the
subsamples of large and small banks, and in some specifications only for the subsample of banks
that surcharge.
Table 4 shows results from this model. As the second through fifth columns show, for large
banks the estimate of β2 is positive and statistically significant. For small banks (columns 6-9) β2
is not significantly diﬀerent from zero. Comparing the significance of β2 and β3 can in principle
identify the motive for strategic incompatibility, which may come from either higher deposit account
prices

∂pC
i
∂si

or gains in card base

∂QC
i
∂si .

Our results suggest that it is the former eﬀect that motivates

pricing here. We are somewhat cautious about making a definitive interpretation of the result,
because β2 and β3 are identified from a restriction on functional form. But this result squares with
what we find when we look at market outcomes.

3.5

Equilibrium Changes in Market Outcomes

All of the analysis to this point focuses on partial equilibrium incentives for incompatibility, and
how they distort pricing relative to stand-alone ATM operations. But because banks compete with
45

While theory suggests a coeﬃcient restriction (β1 = 1), we relax the restriction here.

46

We have also estimated models that attempt to include deposit account fees as a proxy for price-cost margins.

The coeﬃcient on the price variable is not significant.

18
each other, the equilibrium eﬀects of incompatibility in the deposit account market are unclear.
Because we lack the data to estimate a fully specified model of equilibrium changes in deposit
account prices and quantities, we estimate two simpler reduced form models:

C
ln(QC
i,99 − Qi,96 ) = α0 + α1 Surchi + α2 Ẑi + α3 ln Cards96,i + α4 F ee96,i +

α5 ln AT M s96,i +

5
X

(13)

αn Density tilen,96,i + εi

n=2

C
pC
i,99 − pi,96 = α0 + α1 Surchi + α2 Ẑi + α3 ln Cards96,i + α4 F ee96,i +

α5 ln AT M s96,i + αn

5
X

(14)

Density tilen,96,i + εi

n=2

The two dependent variables measure changes from 1996-1999 in ATM cards and deposit account
fees, and correlate these changes with our variables of interest. We measure changes in cards as
a log-diﬀerence, and changes in deposit fees as the level change in dollars of revenue per $1000 of
deposit balances per year.47 We also include the bank’s levels of cards, fees and ATMs in 1996,
along with its population density quintile.
These models estimate the correlation between our estimate of the incompatibility premium
Ẑi and changes in deposit account quantity (cards) or price. The central econometric concern is
spurious correlation between Ẑi and these changes. If Ẑi were completely mis-measured we would
see a zero coeﬃcient on the variable. Suppose, however, that some banks have high unobserved
quality (on ATMs and other dimensions). This would be reflected in both a high surcharge and
increases in deposit account price and quantity. To control for this possibility, we also include
the actual surcharge. The exercise therefore compares changes in deposit market variables, holding
actual surcharges constant–that is, of two banks with surcharges of $1.50, one of which we identify
as engaging in strategic incompatibility and one of which we do not, which experiences the greater
increases in deposit price and quantity?
Table 5 shows summary statistics for these variables, stratifying the data by: large and small
banks that surcharge, banks with an estimated Ẑi above and below the median (conditional on
47

This measure includes direct revenue from checking account fees as well as foreign ATM fees. It does not include

checking account interest or the implicit return from the opportunity cost of funds. Using a broader metric of price
including one or both of these measures yields nearly identical results.

19
surcharging) and banks that do not surcharge.48 As noted about, large banks tend to have higher
surcharges and incompatibility premia. Large banks also have higher fees and more cards. Table 5
also shows that large banks exhibited larger growth in both cards and fees from 1996 to 1999.
In an attempt to understand whether the growth in large banks’ cards and fees is coming
from other factors associated with size, rather than incompatibility premia, we separate banks by
the size of their premia. This mixes both large and small banks; thirty-nine percent of the high
premium banks are small banks, while 39 percent of the low premium banks are large. As expected,
banks with high incompatibility premia (above the sample median for those banks with surcharges)
also have high surcharges. They also tend to be bigger in their local markets and bigger overall,
although this diﬀerence is not as pronounced as in the large/small stratification. Their deposit
account fees, however, are no diﬀerent than those of banks with low Ẑi , although all banks who
surcharge tend to have higher fees than those who do not. The raw changes in prices and quantity
(cards) after 1996 are consistent with strategic incompatibility. Banks who surcharge but with low
Ẑi experience changes in cards and fees that are roughly equal to those experienced by banks that
do not surcharge at all, but banks with high Ẑi experience relatively greater increases in both cards
and ATMs.
Table 6 summarizes the regression results. The first row shows a specification that pools large
and small bank and includes only the actual surcharge as an explanatory variable. The second
includes Ẑi , and the remaining columns split the sample by large/small bank. The results show
no significant relationship between changes in deposit accounts and Ẑi (or surcharging overall).49
This result holds even when we split the sample. In contrast, the results suggest a statistically
48

One might wonder why we observe any banks without surcharges, given our estimates of the slope of residual

demand. While our results suggest that banks without surcharges have lower-than-average optimal surcharges, very
few have estimated optimal surcharges that are zero.
One explanation for this is that banks do receive revenue from foreign transactions through the interchange fee,
even when surcharges are zero. We may be underestimating the slope of residual demand at very low prices (it is
estimated at higher prices).
Another possible explanation is that at least some banks apparently use a “no-surcharge” pricing policy as a signal
that they generally have low fees (since surcharges are a more visible component of fees). One notable example of
this is Washington Mutual, which features the fact that it does not surcharge prominently in its checking account
marketing (despite the fact that its prospective checking account customers should find other banks’ deposit accounts
more attractive).
49

This result contrasts with that in Massoud, Saunders and Scholnick (2005), who find a positive correlation. On

the other hand, Prager (2001) finds that small banks experienced no loss in market share in those states that allowed
surcharging prior to 1996. Hannan (2005) finds that concentration is positively correlated with surcharging across
states.

20
and economically significant correlation between Ẑi and changes in deposit account fees–for large
banks only.

3.6

Incompatibility and ATM Deployment

One might also ask how ATM deployment after 1996 is correlated with our estimates of the incompatibility premium.50 The raw data suggest that this is the case; banks with high estimated
leveraging premia increased their ATM fleets by 70 percent on average between 1996 and 1999,
while those with low Ẑi increased theirs by 37 percent and those who did not surcharge by 32
percent. We have also estimated a variant of the model above with the change in ATM deployment
as the dependent variable:

ln AT M s Dif f

= α0 + α1 Surchi + α2 Ẑi + α3 ln Cards 96i + α4 F ee 96i +

(15)

α5 ln AT M s 96i + αn Dens tile 96i + εi
The results of this model show no systematic relationship between actual surcharges and changes
in ATM deployment, but a coeﬃcient on Ẑi of 0.38 for large banks, significant at the 5 percent
level. The coeﬃcient for small banks is 0.27 but not statistically significant.

4

Conclusion

Identifying situations in which firms use incompatibility strategically is critical for developing sound
antitrust and public policy toward compatibility. Here, we present a simple economic framework for analyzing whether a particular form of incompatibility–an access charge for oﬀ-network
transactions–is intended to shift competitive advantage in a related market. Our results are consistent with such behavior in ATM markets, but only for large banks.
We see a few directions for future work in the area. First, our analysis largely abstracts from
the dynamic issues inherent in compatibility choice. In almost any market with network eﬀects
there are strong intertemporal demand links, both because of network eﬀects and often because of
switching costs. Incorporating these features into an empirical model would improve it. A second
limitation is that here we pursue a reduced form approach to many of the questions we raise (such
50

We take a simple approach to this question given our small sample size. Other work (e.g., Ishii (2005)) endogenizes

the deployment decision in a structural model.

21
as estimating equilibrium eﬀects of incompatibility). Our small sample dictates this approach, but
with more data one could certainly place more structure on the model. Genakos et al. (2004) is an
example of one way to do this. Finally, the central question in all of this is whether incompatibility
reduces social welfare. More work pursuing this question would greatly advance our understanding
of how policy should view firms’ compatibility choices.

22

References
[1] Baker, Jonathan and Timothy Bresnahan (1988), “Estimating the Residual Demand Curve
Facing a Single Firm,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, vol. 6, pp. 283-300.
[2] Brynjolfson, Erik and Chris Kemerer (1996), “Network Externalities in Microcomputer Software: An Econometric Analysis of the Spreadsheet Market,” Management Science, Vol. 42,
iss.12, pp. 1627-47.
[3] Carlton, Dennis and M. Waldman (2002), “The Strategic Use of Tying to Preserve and Create
Market Power in Evolving Industries,” RAND Journal of Economics 33: 194-220.
[4] Chou, Chien-fu and Oz Shy (1990), “Network Eﬀects Without Network Externalities,” International Journal of Industrial Organization 8(2), pages 259-270.
[5] Church, Jeﬀrey, and Neil Gandal, (1992), “Integration, Complementary Products, and Variety,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 653-675.
[6] Church, Jeﬀrey and Neil Gandal (1996), “Strategic Entry Deterrence: Complementary Products as Installed Base,” European Journal of Political Economy 12: 331-54.
[7] Church, Jeﬀrey and Neil Gandal (2000), “System Competition, Vertical Merger and Foreclosure,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 9: 25-51.
[8] Congressional Budget Oﬃce (1998), “Competition in ATM Markets: Are ATMs Money Machines?” Washington DC.
[9] Dove Consulting Inc. (1999), 1999 ATM Deployer Study.
[10] Dove Consulting Inc. (2002), 2002 ATM Deployer Study.
[11] Dranove, David and Neil Gandal (2003), “The DVD vs. DIVX Standard War: Empirical
Evidence of Network Eﬀects and Preannouncement Eﬀects,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 12: 363-386
[12] Economides, Nicholas (1989), “Desirability of Compatibility in the Absence of Network Externalities,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, pp. 1165-1181.
[13] Economides, Nicholas and Steven Salop (1992), “Competition and Integration Among Complements, and Network Market Structure,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. XL, iss. 1,
pp. 105-123.

23
[14] Economides, Nicholas, Giuseppe Lopomo and Glenn Woroch (1996), “Regulatory Pricing Policies to Neutralize Network Dominance,” Industrial and Corporate Change, vol. 5, no. 4,pp.
1013-1028.
[15] Economides, Nicholas (1998), “Raising Rivals’ Costs in Complementary Goods Markets: LECs
Entering into Long Distance and Microsoft Bundling Internet Explorer” NYU Working Paper.
[16] Farrell, Joseph and Paul Klemperer (2006), “Coordination and Lock-In:

Competi-

tion with Switching Costs and Network Eﬀects,” forthcoming in Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 3, edited by Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter. Draft at
http://emlab.berkeley.edu/users/farrell.
[17] Gandal, Neil (1994), “Hedonic Price Indexes for Spreadsheets and an Empirical Test for Network Externalities,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, iss. 1, pp. 160-170.
[18] Gandal, Neil (1995), “Competing Compatibility Standards and Network Externalities in the
PC Software Market,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 599-608.
[19] Genakos, Christos D., Kai-Uwe Kühn, and John Van Reenen (2004), “The Incentives of a
Monopolist to Degrade Interoperability: Theory and Evidence from the Personal Computer
and Server Market,” mimeo.
[20] Gilbert, Richard and Michael Katz (2001), “An Economist’s Guide to U.S. v. Microsoft,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 25-44.
[21] Greenstein, Shane (1993), “Did Installed Base Give an Incumbent any (Measurable) Advantages in Federal Computer Procurement?,” Rand Journal of Economics, 24(1), pp. 19-39.
[22] Hannan, Timothy H. (2005), “ATM Surcharge Bans and Bank Market Structure: The Case
of Iowa and its Neighbors,” mimeo.
[23] Hannan, Timothy H.; McDowell, John M (1990), “The Impact of Technology Adoption on
Market Structure,” Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1990, Vol. 72, iss. 1, pp.
164-68.??
[24] Hannan, Timothy H., Elizabeth K. Kiser, James McAndrews and Robin A. Prager (2003),
“To Surcharge or Not to Surcharge: An Empirical Investigation of ATM Pricing,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 85(4): 990-1002.
[25] Ishii, Joy (2006), “Interconnection Pricing, Compatibility, and Investment in Network Industries: ATM Networks in the Banking Industry,” mimeo Stanford University.

24
[26] Katz, Michael L. and Carl Shapiro (1994), “Systems Competition and Network Eﬀects,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(2), 1994 (Spring), pages 93-115.
[27] Knittel, Christopher and Victor Stango (2003), “Compatibility and Pricing with Indirect Network Eﬀects: Evidence from ATMs,” NBER Working paper 10774.
[28] Knittel, Christopher and Victor Stango (2004), “Incompatibility, Product Attributes and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from ATMs,” NBER Working paper.
[29] Mackie-Mason, Jeﬀrey and John Metzler (2004), “Links Between Markets and Aftermarkets:
Kodak (1997),” in Kwoka and White eds., The Antitrust Revolution, Oxford: New York.
[30] Massoud, Nadia and Dan Bernhardt (2002), “Rip-Oﬀ ATM Surcharges,” RAND Journal of
Economics 33(1): 96-115.
[31] Massoud, Nadia and Dan Bernhardt (2003), “Endogenous ATM Location and Pricing,” mimeo.
[32] Massoud, Nadia, Anthony Saunders and Barry Scholnick (2006), “The Impact of ATM Surcharges on Large vs. Small Banks: Is There a Switching Eﬀect,” Journal of Business, forthcoming.
[33] Matutes, Carmen and Pierre Regibeau (1988), “Mix and Match: Product Compatibility without Network Externalities,” RAND Journal of Economics, Summer, Vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 221-234.
[34] Matutes, Carmen and Pierre Regibeau (1992), “Compatibility and Bundling of Complementary
Goods in a Duopoly,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 40, iss. 1, pp. 37-54.
[35] McAndrews, James J. (2001), “A Model of ATM Pricing: Foreign Fees and Surcharges,”
mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.??
[36] McAndrews, James J. (2003) “ATM Network Pricing: A Review of the Literature,” Review of
Network Economics, Volume 2, Issue 2, pp. 146-158.
[37] Ohashi, Hiroshi (2003), “The Role of Network Eﬀects in the U.S. VCR Market, 1978-86,”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 12(4): 447-494.
[38] Prager, Robin (2001), “The Eﬀects of ATM Surcharges on Small Banking Organizations,”
Review of Industrial Organization, Vol. 18, iss. 2, pp. 161-73.
[39] Rysman, Marc (2004), “Competition Between Networks: A Study of the Market for Yellow
Pages,” Review of Economic Studies 71, 483-512.

25
[40] Shankar, Venkatesh and Barry L. Bayus (2003), “Network Eﬀects and Competition: An Empirical Analysis of the Video Game Industry,” Strategic Management Journal 24(4), 375-394.
[41] Michael Whinston (1990), “Tying, Foreclosure, and Exclusion,” American Economic Review
80, 837-59.

26

A

Tables
Table 1: ATM Fees and Transactions for Large and Small Banks, 1994-1999
Variable:

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Surcharge

–

–

–

0.79

1.06

1.25

Foreign fee

1.22

1.24

1.33

1.35

1.34

1.29

Transactions per ATM

5104

5092

4736

4000

3931

3510

Cards per ATM

1597

1511

1431

1306

1458

1303

65

90

81

79

50

62

Surcharge

–

–

–

0.38

0.87

0.81

Foreign fee

0.94

0.96

0.99

1.00

1.09

1.03

Transactions per ATM

4680

4590

4609

4555

4203

4424

Cards per ATM

1653

1781

1732

1629

1526

1653

93

70

65

71

88

63

Large banks:

N
Small banks:

N

Source: Faulkner and Gray’s Card Industry Directory, various years. Surcharge is
bank’s fee for non-customers using its machines (the average of such the highest and
lowest if the bank lists a range). Foreign fee is the fee imposed by a bank when one
of its customers uses another bank’s ATM. Transactions per ATM includes both own
and foreign transactions. Cards per ATM divides total ATM cards by the bank’s base
of active ATMs. “Large banks” are those with a deposit share in their local markets
above the sample median.

27
Table 2: Residual Demand Estimates
Variable
F orCostit

F orCostit · (Largei )
F orCostit · Dens2i
F orCostit · Dens3i
F orCostit · Dens4i
F orCostit · Dens5i

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-237.64**

-1165.72***

-1061.84***

-1271.87*

-1029.08*

(117.24)

(360.39)

(362.65)

(689.19)

(580.25)

-86.04

-161.03*

-140.92*

-123.02

-165.03*

(65.70)

(83.48)

(83.41)

(89.08)

(88.59)

87.38

-62.00

-60.42

-98.60

-173.05

(96.45)

(128.29)

(121.80)

(138.95)

(135.27)

73.73

145.45

172.46

68.99

12.71

(94.25)

(116.18)

(110.40)

(115.98)

(113.95)

27.22

52.48

39.04

-49.40

-77.28

(99.25)

(124.17)

(117.35)

(121.38)

(118.8)

133.03

311.53**

253.11*

135.69

81.97

(105.35)

(135.78)

(131.03)

(133.94)

(130.65)

1.07*

1.28***

0.86**

(0.62)

(0.45)

(0.44)

49.21

332.96

161.91

(143.23)

(203.50)

(216.58)

380.15

210.80

(288.50)

(247.64)

877

564

CardsperAT Mit

F orCost−i,t
ln AT M sit

N

877

877

489

Notes: Dependent variable in all specifications is transactions per ATM. All models include fixed bank and year eﬀects. Model 1 is OLS. Models 2-4 instrument for
F orCostit and the F orCostit interactions using population density in local markets,
share of deposits held in MSAs, whether the bank is part of a holding company and
interactions of these with year dummies. Models 3 and 4 also instrument for cards per
ATM. Model 4 drops observations for banks that never surcharge in our sample. Model
5 uses only observations for banks in the sample during both 1996 and 1999.

28

Table 3: Estimates of the Incompatibility Premium
Large banks

Small banks

Slope of demand

-1146

-950

Transactions per ATM

4073

4400

Estimated stand-alone surcharge

0.97

1.35

Actual surcharge

1.25

0.83

Incompatibility premium

0.28

-0.52

62

63

Slope of demand

-1154

-955

Transactions per ATM

3945

4309

Estimated stand-alone surcharge

0.92

1.29

Actual surcharge

1.58

1.27

Incompatibility premium

0.66

-0.02

49

41

All banks:

N
Banks with surcharges:

N

Notes: All data are from 1999. “Slope of demand” is the average across all banks
of the estimated slope of residual demand γ̂i , using the coeﬃcients in model (4) of
Table 2. “Estimated stand-alone surcharge” is calculated as ŝ∗i = −k + cA − bγ1 QA
i
i
A
using k = $0.40, c = $0.10 and assuming that foreign transactions per ATM represent

twenty-five percent of total transactions per ATM. “Incompatibility premium” is actual
surcharge minus estimated stand-alone surcharge.

29

Table 4: Fitting the First-Order Condition
Parameter
β1

β2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.52***

0.41*

0.40

0.36

0.36

0.63***

0.61***

0.51***

0.51**

(0.16)

(0.25)

(0.25)

(0.26)

(0.26)

(0.18)

(0.18)

(0.19)

(0.19)

0.32**

0.63***

0.71***

0.82***

0.83***

0.09

0.12

0.25

0.20

(0.13)

(0.21)

(0.21)

(0.22)

(0.23)

(0.14)

(0.15)

(0.15)

(0.16)

β3

-13181

-570

-1867

4203

(9457)

(11257)

(3437)

(3847)

r2

0.59

0.60

0.62

0.69

0.70

0.71

0.71

0.79

0.79

N

125

62

62

49

49

63

63

41

41

Bank sample

All

Large

Large

Large

Large

Small

Small

Small

Small

Omit si = 0

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Notes: Nonlinear least squares estimates of parameters in the first-order condition
where
si = β1 ŝ∗i − β2

Ã

∂QA
i
Ai
∂si

!−1

QC
i + β3

Ã

∂QA
i
Ai
∂si

!−1

+ εi .

Model is estimated using 1999 data. If the model is specified correctly the parameters
are
β2 =
³

∂pC
i
∂si

C
β3 = pC
i − ci

´ ∂QC
i

Models (1)-(3) impose the restriction β3 = 0.

∂si

30

Table 5: Surcharges, leveraging premia and changes in market outcomes
Large

Small

High

Low

N/A

Surcharge

1.37

1.28

1.53

1.12

–

Incompatibility premium

0.48

-0.03

0.87

-0.37

-0.83

ATM cards, 1996

309,268

81,859

181,107

111,000

42,000

Deposit fee, 1996

3.27

2.59

2.95

2.97

2.27

Share large banks

1.00

0.00

0.71

0.39

0.35

Percent change in ATM cards, 1996-1999

0.40

0.32

0.42

0.30

0.29

Change in deposit fee, 1996-1999

0.26

0.11

0.27

0.11

-0.03

34

28

31

31

20

N

Notes: “High” column is set of banks with Ẑi above the sample median (conditional
on surcharging). “Low” column is set of banks with Ẑi below the sample median.
“N/A” column is set of banks with no surcharge.

31

Table 6: Changes in Deposit Variables and the Estimated Incompatibility Premium
C
Dependent Variable: change in card base: ln(QC
99,i ) − ln(Q96,i )

si

0.10

0.03

0.03

0.24

-0.09

-0.17

(0.09)

(0.15)

(0.21)

(0.27)

(0.23)

(0.76)

0.08

0.14

0.18

0.13

0.08

(0.13)

(0.20)

(0.23)

(0.20)

(0.33)

0.11

0.33

0.45

0.29

0.33

Ẑi
r2

0.10

C
Dependent Variable: change in deposit fees: pC
99,i − p96,i

si

0.12

-0.00

-0.16

-0.09

0.02

-0.36

(0.08)

(0.12)

(0.18)

(0.23)

(0.16)

(0.44)

0.14

0.44**

0.40*

0.03

0.04

(0.11)

(0.17)

(0.20)

(0.14)

(0.19)

Ẑi
r2

0.20

0.22

0.52

0.52

0.36

0.30

Bank sample

All

All

Large

Large

Small

Small

Omit si = 0

No

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

N

82

82

39

31

43

28

Notes: Sample includes only those banks in our sample in both 1996 and 1999. All
regressions are OLS and include the other covariates in equations 13 and 14.

