NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEAD PIPES AND CHILD MORTALITY
Karen Clay
Werner Troesken
Michael Haines
Working Paper 12603
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12603

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

Troesken gratefully acknowledges grant support from the NIH, P01 AG10120-09A1 The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2006 by Karen Clay, Werner Troesken, and Michael Haines. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Lead Pipes and Child Mortality
Karen Clay, Werner Troesken, and Michael Haines
NBER Working Paper No. 12603
October 2006
JEL No. I1,N30
ABSTRACT
Beginning around 1880, public health issues and engineering advances spurred the installation of city
water and sewer systems. As part of this growth, many cities chose to use lead service pipes to connect
residences to city water systems. This choice had negative consequences for child mortality, although
the consequences were often hard to observe amid the overall falling death rates. This paper uses
national data from the public use sample of the 1900 Census of Population and data on city use of
lead pipes in 1897 to estimate the effect of lead pipes on child mortality. In 1900, 29 percent of the
married women in the United States who had given birth to at least one child and were age forty-five
or younger lived in locations where lead service pipes were used to deliver water. Because the effect
of lead pipes depended on the acidity and hardness of the water, much of the negative effect was concentrated
on the densely populated eastern seaboard. In the full sample, women who lived on the eastern seaboard
in cities with lead pipes experienced increased child mortality of 9.3 percent relative to the sample
average. These estimates suggest that the number of child deaths attributable to the use of lead pipes
numbered in the tens of thousands. Many surviving children may have experienced substantial IQ
impairment as a result of lead exposure. The tragedy is that lead problems were avoidable, particularly
once data became available on the toxicity of lead. These findings have implications for current policy
and events.
Karen Clay
Heinz School of Public Policy
and Management
5000 Forbes Ave.
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu
Werner Troesken
Department of History
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
troesken@pitt.edu

Michael Haines
Department of Economics
217 Persson Hall
Colgate University
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
MHAINES@MAIL.COLGATE.EDU

1. Introduction
The period 1880 to 1920 was a period of falling mortality in the United States for infants,
children and adults. Much of this reduction has been attributed to installation of water and sewer
systems in cities (Haines 2001; Ferrie and Troesken 2005). It is widely accepted that much of
the improvement in child mortality in particular was the result of better nutrition and improved
public health services that protected infants and young children from infectious diseases,
particularly deaths from infantile diarrhea. Of studies that look at child mortality and mortality
transitions in the United States, Preston and Haines (1991) is probably the best known and most
important. In their analysis of census data from the turn of the century, Preston and Haines
emphasize the importance of infectious diseases.
Against that backdrop is a lesser known story. Many of the new water systems employed
lead service pipes which ran from iron street mains to the customer’s home. Lead was
considered a superior engineering material for this purpose because of its malleability and
durability. Unfortunately, such expedience would cause substantial increases in child mortality
rates from the use of lead pipes. The cause of death is traceable to high levels lead exposure in
utero and to a lesser extent after birth.
This paper builds on Troesken’s (2003) case study of the lead problem in Massachusetts. We
show that the lead problem was national. In 1900, 29 percent of the married women in the
United States who had given birth to at least one child and were ages forty-five or younger lived
in locations where lead service pipes were used to deliver water. Because the effect of lead pipes
depended on the acidity and hardness of the water, much of the negative effect was concentrated
on the densely populated eastern seaboard.
To estimate the effect of lead pipes on child mortality, we use data from the public use
sample of the 1900 Census of Population. In the 1900 census, in addition to the standard
demographic information, women were asked to report the number of children ever born and the
number of children surviving, excluding stillbirths. We combine these data with data on city use
of lead pipes in 1897 and mortality rates from tuberculosis in 1900 to estimate the effect of lead
pipes on child mortality. In the baseline regression, we estimate the effects of lead water
delivery systems on child mortality controlling for the mother’s characteristics, the father’s
occupation, average state temperature, precipitation and drought, city size, and region. The
2

negative effects of lead delivery systems were not widely known at this time, so the use of lead
was predominantly a function of city size. To address possible issues of endogeneity, we also
present instrumental variables estimates.
In the full sample, we find that in 1900 women who lived on the eastern seaboard in cities
with lead pipes experienced increased child mortality of 9.3 percent relative to the sample
average. This is an increase in child mortality of roughly 13 deaths per 1,000 children. In
comparison, in 2000 the white infant mortality from all causes was 5.7 deaths per 1,000. Not
only did the number of child deaths attributable to lead pipes number in the tens of thousands,
but the number of deaths was more than twice the current infant mortality rate. Further, we find
that the lead service pipes account for 47 percent of the so called urban penalty – the increased
child mortality from living in a town of more than 2,500 people. Many surviving children may
have experienced IQ and behavioral impairments as a result of water-related lead exposure,
although we cannot demonstrate this.
Our estimates are biased downward by four factors. First, we do not observe mothers’
residence at the time they had their children. Because the nineteenth and early twentieth century
was an era of rapid urbanization, some fraction of women we observe in cities with lead service
pipes may have had their children prior to the installation of the water system or in locations
where lead was uncommon. Second, by 1900 some cities that did not use lead pipes in 1897 may
have begun to use lead pipes later on, and vice versa. Third, some cities are identified as having
mixed lead-non-lead delivery systems. We code these cities as if they had only lead service
pipes. Fourth, we only observe the excess mortality due to lead. To the extent that some
children in cities without lead pipes were killed by lead from prior exposure in cities with lead
pipes, the actual effect would be larger than the estimated effect.
Because lead-related child mortality is clustered in heavily urbanized areas, particularly the
Northeast, the results here have implications for our understanding of the urban fertility
transition and regional variation in that transition. Previous studies of fertility change have been
predicated on the assumption that transition was voluntary in the sense that women were
choosing to engage in a variety of behaviors that had the result of reducing the birth rate.
Children were no longer as valuable, women had more opportunities outside the home, and
financial markets had produced alternatives to children as a means of ensuring support in ones
3

old age. If, however, this behavior was in part involuntary, because lead made it more difficult
to get pregnant, stay pregnant, and deliver a baby that would live to adulthood, this had
implications for our understanding of the transition and the role that industrialization and
financial markets played in the transition.
Other types of service pipes were available, as were methods to at least partially mitigate the
negative effect of lead service pipes. Nevertheless, even in the face of mounting evidence, use of
lead pipes continued. Today the issue of lead in water is resurfacing, in part because of changing
water treatment techniques. These new water treatment technologies are better able to destroy
newly emerging pathogens such as cryptosporidium but also tend to make water more lead
solvent. Recent lead levels in water in some locations in the District of Columbia are as high as
or higher than historical levels recorded at the turn of the century (Renner 2004; Troesken 2006).
Because testing of water in homes is rare, the extent of the problem is unknown.
Section 2 discusses the use of lead pipes and the circumstances under which leaching of lead
was most likely to occur. Section 3 presents evidence on the toxicity of lead, why its effects
were difficult to detect, and contemporary strategies for mitigation of the problem. Section 4
examines child mortality in the 1900 and 1910 samples. Section 5 discusses identification of the
lead effects and presents the main results. Section 6 addresses the effects on surviving children.
Section 7 concludes.
2. Lead Pipes
Municipal water systems became common beginning around 1880. Lead was often used in
the construction of water service lines that connected individual homes and apartment buildings
to street mains. Relative to other materials such as plain or galvanized iron or steel or cement
lined iron, lead had two features that made it attractive to the engineers who designed public
water systems: it was both malleable and durable. Malleability reduced labor costs by making it
easier to bend the service main around existing infrastructure and obstructions. As for durability,
the life of the typical lead service pipe was thirty-five years. By contrast, plain iron or steel pipe
lasted sixteen years; galvanized pipe twenty years; and cement lined pipe twenty-eight years.
Based solely on engineering concerns, these characteristics made lead the ideal material for
service lines. As one prominent trade journal wrote: “Lead is in many respects the most

4

satisfactory material to use for service pipes. Its pliability and its comparative freedom from
corrosive action make it almost ideal from a mechanical standpoint.”1
Despite its attractiveness from an engineering standpoint, lead did have drawbacks. First,
lead had higher up front costs. This was offset in many locations by its lower cost to maintain,
because replacing broken service mains often required digging up paved streets and working
around other infrastructure such as gas and sewer mains.2 Second, there were concerns that lead
service pipes affected water quality. Most engineers, however, appear to have believed that such
concerns were overblown.3
Despite these drawbacks, the managers of municipal water systems often chose to use lead
service pipes. This can be seen in two independent samples of cities. In 1916, the New England
Water-Works Association surveyed 304 cities and towns, largely in New England, and found
that 31 percent of these cities used lead or lead-lined services.4 A second and independent
sample is more geographically diverse and includes 797 cities and towns observed in 1897 from
all over the United States. Table 1, which breaks down lead use for the second sample by city
size, suggests a strong positive correlation between lead use and city size. For cities with
populations less than 8,000, 33 percent used lead service pipes. In contrast, for cities with
populations between 30,000 and 300,000, 72 percent used lead pipes; and for the largest cities,
those with populations greater than 300,000, all but one (94 percent) used lead service pipes
(Troesken and Beeson 2003).
In 1900, the Massachusetts State Board of Health, an early leader in examining the lead
problem, investigated the amount of lead contained in household tap water in twenty-two
municipalities across the state. Health officials took several samples of water from household
faucets in these cities after the water had passed through lead service pipes; measured the lead
content of these samples; and reported their findings in the annual report of the board of health.
1

Information and quotations in this paragraph come from the Engineering News, September 28, 1916, pp. 594-96
(hereafter cited as EN); and from the Committee on Service Pipes (1917), p. 328 (hereafter cited as CSP). The
editors of the Engineering News were not alone in suggesting that lead, even with concerns about safety, was the
best material for service lines. A survey of the superintendents of forty-one municipal water companies found that
about half (20) preferred lead service lines to all other types of lines. This survey was conducted in 1884 by water
industry expert from New London, Connecticut. The results were reported in the Journal of the New England Water
Works Association, September, 1917, pp. 346-47.
2
In bigger cities, the cost of lead pipes was a smaller share of real estate values.
3
EN, p. 595
4
CSP, pp. 326-30; and EN, p. 594.

5

Officials also reported data about the chemical composition and qualities of the local water
supply, including how hard the water was and how acidic it was.
The data derived from this investigation suggest four important observations. First, by
today’s standards, lead levels in the sampled municipalities were extraordinarily high. Across
the twenty-two towns in the study, the average amount of lead in water in normal use was
twenty-one times the EPA limit, and the average amount after standing overnight was fifty-eight
times the EPA limit.5 The largest value of a household in any town in ordinary use was 343
times the EPA limit and the largest value when left standing overnight was 762 times the EPA
limit.
Second, the use of lead pipes increased the amount of lead contained in household tap water.
Although there were plenty of possible sources of lead in tap water, two experiments suggest that
lead dissolved from the interior lining of service pipes was the primary source of lead in drinking
water. In the first experiment, eighteen samples of water from the Lowell, Boulevard well were
passed through iron and lead service lines. In ordinary use, the water that traveled through the
lead service line had three times the lead level of the water that traveled through the iron service
pipe. When the water was allowed to stand overnight, the water that traveled through the lead
service line had eight times the lead level of the water that traveled through the iron service
pipe.6 In an independent experiment conducted by two New York health officials during the
1930s, very similar findings were obtained.
Third, there were significant interaction effects. The amount of lead added to drinking water
by lead service lines depended on at least two characteristics of the water supply: how hard and
acidic it was. In towns with soft water or with water containing high levels of acid, large
amounts of lead dissolved into the water supply if lead pipes were employed. In towns with hard
or less acidic water, relatively small amounts of lead dissolved into the water.
The implications of the investigation were particularly severe for cities that used lead pipes
and were located along on the eastern seaboard, because these cities had water that was generally
both acidic and soft. Figure 1 shows the incidence of acid rain. While the data in the figure is
from 1999, industrialization of the eastern corridor was well underway during the nineteenth
century. The eastern corridor, particularly the Northeast, almost certainly experienced acid rain
5
6

The current EPA standards allow water to contain 0.0015 parts of lead per 100,000 units of water.
All reports of the Massachusetts State Board of Health are cited as MSBH. MSBH 1900, pp. 491-97

6

around the turn of the century. As early as the 1880s, scientists in England were discussing the
possibility that acid rain might increase the tendency of water to take up dangerous amounts of
lead. For example, Gilbert Kirker (1890) wrote a short article in the British Medical Journal
arguing that “the products of combustion, which in that part of the country” were “poured into
the atmosphere in great quantity and variety” gave the “moorland water supplies” their
“abnormal and constant plumbosolvent action.” Although Kirker did not refer to it as such, he
was talking about acid rain, which is now recognized as a contributor to water-lead levels.7
Further, many of the lakes and other water sources were already marginally acidic prior to
industrialization.8 Figure 2 shows that the eastern corridor had surface water sources that were
not able to resist acidification. According to the Environmental Protection Agency (2003)
“Whether surface waters can resist acidification depends on the ability of the water and
watershed soil to neutralize the acid deposition it receives. The best measure of this ability is
acid neutralizing capacity (ANC), determined by the amount of dissolved compounds that will
counteract acidity. ANC depends largely on the surrounding watershed'
s physical characteristics
such as geology, soils and size. Surface water with an ANC of 200 micro equivalents per liter
(µeq/L) is normal; ANC less than 50 micro equivalents per liter is considered highly sensitive to
acidification. As illustrated in this map, surface waters in Florida, the Northeast, the MidAtlantic, Upper Midwest and parts of the West are highly sensitive to acidification (with surface
water ANC of less than zero).”9 ANC appears to be quite persistent over time, particularly in
New England and the Ridge/Blue Ridge regions.10 Figure 3 shows the average hardness of
groundwater in the United States. The eastern corridor also had water that was soft (i.e., very
low on the hardness scale). Hardness is an attribute of the soil and is extremely persistent over
time.11 Thus, we would expect the negative effects of lead pipes to have been more severe on the
eastern seaboard than in other parts of the United States.
7

Alfred H. Allen (1882), a chemist, reported experimental results consistent with this argument.
“Lakes inferred to have been measurably acidified by atmospheric deposition were already marginally acidic,
typically with pH less than 6, before anthropogenic atmospheric pollution began more than 100 years ago.
Therefore, full recovery of acidic lakes will not yield neutral pH.” P. xii
9
EPA (2006).
10
EPA (2003), p. x.
11
According to the United States Geological Survey (2006), “Water hardness is based on major-ion chemistry
concentrations. Major-ion chemistry in ground water is relatively stable and generally does not change over time.
Although the map [a map similar to the one in figure 3] illustrates data from 1975, these data have been found to be
accurate and useful in current assessments.”
8

7

Fourth, the amount lead taken from the interior walls of lead service pipes varied inversely
with the age of the pipe. Holding the corrosiveness of water supplies constant, less lead was
dissolved from old pipes than from new.12 We will return to this issue later.
3. Lead Poisoning
To foreshadow later findings, the empirical work below suggests that the use of lead service
pipes had a substantial effect on child mortality rates. For such findings to be believable, three
questions need to be addressed. First, was the amount of lead contained in drinking water in
some states sufficiently large to kill an infant or small child? Second, a large increase in death
rates suggests that in at least some places, lead poisoning via water was killing a substantial
fraction of all infants and young children. How could such an enormous factor in infant
mortality have gone undetected? Third, how difficult was it for private homeowners to prevent
water-related lead exposure? For example, today health officials recommend flushing pipes
before using tap water for drinking or cooking to remove any residual lead from plumbing
fixtures. Were such practices known in 1900? Would they have had significant effects?
Was There Enough Lead in Tap Water to Kill an Infant?
Lead exposure is especially serious because children absorb more lead than adults, and
because the developing nervous systems of children are more susceptible to the effects of lead
than are the systems of adults (Needleman and Belinger 1991; and Nebraska Epidemiology
Report, 2001). At the turn of the century, infants and young children were exposed to lead
through four major pathways: in utero through maternal water consumption or contemporaneous
environmental exposure, in utero from leaching of lead from maternal bones, after birth through
breast milk, and after birth through the addition of water to cow’s milk.
Studies conducted during the early twentieth century suggest that high levels of maternal lead
exposure can have enormous effects on the health outcomes of the very young. In one British
study, women who were working in the lead industry experienced miscarriages and stillbirths at
rates three times greater than those of women working in non-lead industries. A French study
12

For example, Quam and Klein (1936 p. 779, particularly tables I and II.), using water samples with consistent
chemical properties, compare the amount lead that was taken off old lead pipes and new pipes. They find that
substantially more lead was introduced into water stored in new pipes than in old pipes. By the same token, studies
by the Massachusetts State Board of Health conducted during the 1890s and early 1900s found that the most serious
cases of lead poisoning tended to occur with newer lead pipes as opposed to old pipes. Empirically this could be
useful, if we knew the distribution of the age of lead water lines within each city. Unfortunately, we do not know
when cities began using lead lines or the fraction of households with lead service lines at any given point in time.

8

found that out of one thousand pregnancies among women working with lead, 608 culminated in
premature delivery. According to a study published in 1908, “in certain Hungarian villages,
where pottery glazing has been a home industry for generations, children born of lead poisoned
parents are not only subject to convulsions, but, if they live, often have abnormally large, square
heads, and this condition is associated with a lowered mentality.”13
The strongest modern-day evidence that lead exposure, even in very small amounts, can
result in fetal and infant death is presented by Wolpaw Reyes (2003). Using state-level data
from the U.S., Wolpaw Reyes shows that the phase-out of leaded gasoline reduced infant
mortality rates by 3 to 4 percent. Competing studies of the effects of lead on infant health are
plagued by concerns about small samples, unobserved heterogeneity, and reverse causality
whereby pre-existing poor health might determine the amount of lead exposure. Wolpaw Reyes,
however, is able to control for most relevant confounding variables and uses variation in the
consumption of leaded gasoline—a truly exogenous variable—to isolate the effects of moderate
levels of lead exposure.
Finally, one simple way to illustrate how dangerous water lead could be to the developing
fetus and child is to look at the history of abortion. During the late 1800s and early 1900s, a
handful of commercial enterprises began manufacturing and marketing abortion pills made of
diachylon (a lead-based plaster) in both England and the United States.14 One popular brand of
pill was described in the medical literature only as Dr. ___’s Famous Female Pills. The
instructions directed women to take two pills four times a day over a two week period. An
article in the British Medical Journal indicated that each pill contained .0005 grains of lead,
implying that if a woman took the recommended daily dose of eight pills, she would have
ingested .004 grains of lead per day (Troesken 2006). The efficacy of products like Dr. ____’s
Famous Female Pills were idiosyncratic, affecting some individuals much more than others.15
The medical literature of the day indicates that more than a few women overdosed and poisoned
themselves, sometimes fatally. In other cases, not enough lead was ingested and the subsequent
child was born small and unhealthy. However, most women apparently were able to ingest

13

These and other studies are summarized in a report by United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (1919).
Women were probably not aware that the active ingredient in the pills was lead, since this predates the pure food
and drug movement.
15
Also, it is not clear how carefully the suppliers of such pills calibrated the recommended dose.
14

9

diachylon pills with few outward signs of lead poisoning and simultaneously terminate their
pregnancies (Troesken 2006).
Using the data on how much lead was contained in the recommended daily dose of these
pills and comparing that level to the amount of lead contained in Massachusetts tap water,
Troesken (2006) constructs a measure referred to as the abortifacient equivalent (AE). The AE is
the amount of water an individual needed to consume in order to have been exposed to the same
amount of lead as was contained in the recommended daily dose of Dr. ____’s Famous Female
Pills. Data from Massachusetts in 1900 indicate that, in the typical Massachusetts town, a
housewife needed to drink around 80 ounces of tap water per day to reach the AE, assuming she
regularly flushed her pipes before drinking tap water. If, however, the housewife did not practice
flushing and regularly consumed water allowed to stand in pipes for several hours, she need only
have consumed 30 to 40 ounces of tap water per day. Furthermore, this is a situation where
measures of central tendency can be deceiving. In places like Attleborough, Lowell, and
Middleborough, housewives need only have consumed 1 to 10 ounces of tap water daily to reach
the AE. Similarly, in Lawrence, Newton, and Weymouth, housewives need only have consumed
6 to 28 ounces of water daily to have reached the abortifacient equivalent (Troesken 2006).16
Data on the effect of adult exposure to lead is also suggestive, since children were typically
more severely affected. Using a sample of more than two thousand Union-Army veterans,
Troesken and Beeson (2003) compare the health outcomes of veterans living in towns with lead
water lines to those of veterans living in towns with non-lead mains. They find evidence that the
use of lead water lines increased the rate of nephropathy (kidney failure) among adult males.17
Additional evidence of the adverse health effects of lead water lines can be found in two welldocumented episodes of water-related lead poisoning. These two episodes involve Milton–a
small town outside of Boston—and Lowell—a large industrial town in northeastern
Massachusetts. These case studies demonstrate that, in a fairly short time, lead service lines
could introduce enough lead into drinking water to cause death and insanity among adults
(Troesken 2006).
16

If she consumed the water as tea, which was common during the period, the required consumption would be less,
because boiling concentrated the lead.
17
Nephropathy is observed in adults when blood levels reach between 40 and 100 micrograms per deciliter ( g
Pb/dl). Similar blood lead levels in children cause encephalopathy (brain-swelling).See Perazella (1996) and
Xintaras (1992).

10

How Did All This Lead Poisoning Go Undetected?
Regarding the second question – How did all of this lead poisoning go unnoticed? – it is
useful to consider the diagnostic challenge lead poisoning represented. Because lead affected
multiple body systems, and because the symptoms of lead poisoning varied greatly from personto-person according to the individual’s size and general ability to withstand lead exposure, it was
difficult for doctors in the nineteenth and early-twentieth century to diagnose lead poisoning on
an individual basis. Absent some external or circumstantial condition to suggest lead poisoning
– e.g., the patient worked as a painter, or lived close to a lead refinery – doctors appear to have
been reluctant to ascribe the periodic case of paralysis, colic, constipation, kidney or liver
trouble, and the like, to anything other than arthritis, diet, family history of disease, or excessive
drinking.
For children, diagnosing lead poisoning accurately was even more problematic. In a recent
social history of lead poisoning in America, Warren (2000) describes cases of childhood lead
poisoning during the early twentieth century that were misdiagnosed as feeble-mindedness,
summertime colic, appendicitis, polio, and convulsions and paralysis of unknown origin.18
Warren, however, argues that the most common misdiagnosis for lead poisoning was tubercular
meningitis: The early stages of both diseases produce appetite loss, headache, vomiting, and
acute constipation. Gradually, neurological symptoms arise: photophobia, rigidity of the neck,
lethargy, and paralysis of the limbs or facial nerves. The most serious cases end in convulsions,
coma, and death. In summarizing a study of 105 tubercular meningitis cases treated in the Boston
Children’s Hospital between 1910 and 1913, Warren strongly suggests that more than half of
these cases were, in fact, the result of lead poisoning and not tubercular meningitis. This study
found that tubercle bacilli were identified in less than 25 percent of the cases, and that in over 60
percent of the cases, there was no pathological evidence of tubercular meningitis.
In terms of promoting a more accurate understanding of the effects of lead water lines, it is
perhaps unfortunate that there were not more epidemic-like outbreaks of lead poisoning. If there
had been, the dangers of lead pipes would have been clear and compelling. And municipalities
might have been forced to abandon lead pipes for pipes that were less desirable from an

18

Warren (2000), pp. 34-35.

11

engineering standpoint, but were much safer from a public health standpoint. Instead, lead water
pipes quietly killed thousands of children every year.
Private Prevention of Lead Poisoning
For the results presented below to be credible, a third question must be addressed as well –
Did homeowners know about the risk of lead in the water and if so were there ways to avoid lead
exposure? It is not clear that many consumers were aware of the dangers of water-related lead
poisoning. In turn-of-the-century America, most people were far more concerned about organic
pollutants in tap water than they were about inorganic pollutants such as lead.
In 1900, public officials in some locations recommended that families with lead service pipes
flush their plumbing systems by running taps for two minutes before using water for drinking
and cooking. As late 1936, however, the American Journal of Public Health was publishing
articles exhorting homeowners to flush their pipes before drinking tap water in order to minimize
water-related lead exposure.19 This suggests that at least some portion of the population was
unaware of this strategy.
Flushing pipes in this way did eliminate some of the excess lead in tap water, but it did not
eliminate all of it. Consider this excerpt from the Milton News (February 15, 1902), quoting the
Massachusetts State Board of Health: “If the water is allowed to run freely, the quantity of lead
taken up will be less than when the water is allowed to stand in the pipe for considerable time;
but even when allowed to run freely it may contain a sufficiently large quantity of lead to
produce serious injury.”20 The only way to have been sure of the lead content of one’s tap water
was to have it tested. If a homeowner did have their lead tested, a costly process, and found lead
levels to be high, the homeowner then had to locate a source of drinking water that had lower
lead levels. In the absence of compelling evidence on lead toxicity, few households were likely
to take such steps.
4. Child Mortality in the 1900 and 1910 Censuses
In this section, we present the data and establish basic stylized facts about child mortality in
1900 and 1910. In the next section, we discuss identification of the effects of lead and present
the main results.

19
20

Quam and Klein (1936).
Milton News February 15, 1902, p. 4

12

To investigate child mortality, we use the IPUMS 1-200 sample of the 1900 Census of
Population. The 1900 census asked women to report the number of children ever born and the
number surviving. The enumerator’s instructions with respect to children ever born are as
follows: “This question applies only to women, and its object is to get the number of children
each woman has had, and whether the children are not living on the census day. Stillborn
children are not to be counted.”21 The instructions for children surviving are: “Enter in column
12 the figure showing the number of these children living on the census day. Whether the
children are living in your district or elsewhere makes no difference. If the woman has had no
children, or if they are all dead, write. "0."” Like Costa and Kahn (2003), we restrict attention to
women ages 45 or younger who were married less than 15 years and for whom number of
children ever born is greater than zero and is less than or equal to the duration of the marriage.
Table 2 presents the summary statistics for mothers. The 1900 sample includes 24,483
women and 70,544 children ever born nationwide. The first three rows present the sample
averages for the fraction of a women’s children who have died, the number of children that died,
and the number of children ever born. It is important to note that the numbers in Table 2 may
understate the true child mortality rate, since we are only sampling women who were alive at the
time of the census. In particular, women who died in childbirth are not sampled, and many of
those babies may not have survived. The women in the sample were predominantly white,
literate, rural, did not own their own home and did not report that they were in the workforce.
The average age in both years was about 29. The average marital duration was 8 years. Figure 4
shows the distribution for the women in our sample of the number of children reported to have
died. In 1900, 69 percent of women had had no children die.
One significant issue when considering mortality is how to combine the experiences of
women and children of different ages. Following Trussell and Preston (1982), we create a
mortality index. Our index is at the level of the individual mother and compares her actual child
mortality to her expected child mortality for her martial duration. The latter is calculated using
the Coale and Demeny West model level 13. The index has the advantage of being simple to
interpret, since the mean mortality experience is 1.22
21

1900 enumerators instructions are from http://www.ipums.umn.edu/usa/voliii/inst1900.html#136.
The index could in principle have problems, because of difference in national mortality declines. According to
Preston and Haines (1992), “Because the national mortality decline was relatively slow in the years preceding 1900
22

13

The 1900 child mortality rates to age 5 implied by the mortality index – 0.175 – is somewhat
higher than, for example, white infant mortality rates reported by Haines (2005). In 1895 and
1904, the white infant mortality rates were 0.111 and 0.097. The difference arises for at least
three reasons. First, we are examining child and not just infant mortality. Second, 10 percent of
our sample was nonwhite and nonwhites, who were predominantly black, had higher infant
mortality rates than whites. Third, our sample is all children born to mothers up to age 45, thus
some children were born during periods of higher infant mortality. For instance, the white infant
mortality rates in 1880 and 1890 were 0.215 and 0.151.
Urban-rural differences in infant and child mortality during this period have been widely
discussed, and we observe these in our sample as well (Preston and Haines (1991))23. Table 3
summarizes the urban and rural averages for children ever born, children that die, and the
maternal mortality index for the 1900 census. In 1900 the mortality index for rural women was
statistically significantly lower than the mortality index for urban women.
The foregoing comparison of urban-rural mortality rates does not, however, control for the
mother’s characteristics or variation in state climates. It is important to control for variation in
climate across states, because this is known to affect both adult and child mortality. We use
three state variables – average temperature, average precipitation, and months of extreme
drought. Generally mortality is thought to be declining in temperature and increasing in
precipitation. Months of extreme drought captures the disease environment in very dry areas.24
To better understand child mortality, we turn to regression analysis. One issue we have not
yet addressed is the most appropriate econometric approach. Figure 4 suggests that either
negative binomial estimation on the raw count data might be appropriate. This would imply a
Tobit approach might be appropriate for the mortality index, because actual child mortality in 69
percent of the cases was 0, causing the index to be zero. The data is, however, not really
censored in the classical sense. We use ordinary least squares regressions primarily for
convenience of interpretation. Our results are remarkably robust to the choice of estimation
technique.
… the biases of intergroup comparisons should be minor.”, p. 90. In our subsample, the mean mortality experience
was slightly lower than for 1900 as a whole 0.909, so we recalibrated it so the mean was 1.
23
Urban is defined as cities of 2,500 residents or more.
24
The variables were constructed by aggregating the National Climatic Data Center county-level data available on
Price Fishback’s website: http://www.u.arizona.edu/~fishback/.

14

In column 1 of Table 4, we regress the maternal mortality index on maternal characteristics
and husband’s occupation. We include eight dummy variables for husband’s occupation and ten
dummy variables for the mother’s birthplace. The omitted variables are farmer and native born.
In column 2, we add the three measures of state climate to the variables in column 1. In column
3, we add a dummy variable for urban to the variables in column 2. Urban is defined by the
census as a town of 2,500 or more. The relatively small increases in fit as measured by Rsquared from the addition of the state climate and urban variables suggest that maternal
characteristics and husband’s occupation explain most of the variation in the mortality index.
All of the maternal characteristics, with the exception of the birthplace dummies, are significant
at the five percent level or better. The mortality index was lower for women with fewer children,
who had been in longer marriages, were white, could read, were in the middle of the age
distribution, were not working, and owned their own home. In columns 1 and 2, all of the eight
(unreported) coefficients on husbands’ occupational categories implied significantly greater
mortality than which was farmer. Once we control for whether the location was urban, the effects
are smaller and not always significant. The urban penalty in 1900 was a 12.1 percent increase in
the mortality index relative to the sample average.25
5. The Effect of Lead Pipes on Child Mortality
In this section, we begin by discussing a number of issues related to the identification of the
effects of lead and then present the main results.
Cross Sectional Identification
In principle, there are two possible ways to identify the effect of lead pipes on infant
mortality – using cross sectional data or time series data. After describing our approach to the
cross sectional identification, we will discuss two types of time series identification.
To examine the effect of lead pipes, we first determined, for every city identified by name in
the census sample, whether a city had lead service pipes or not. Data on this comes from The
Manual of American Waterworks, 1897.26 All but two of the cities were listed in the manual, as
were many other cities not specifically identified in the census sample. For 21 of the 170 cities
identified in the census sample, the listing in the manual did not specify the type of service pipes.
25

All increased mortality risks are relative to the sample average of 1. The actual increase relative to unaffected
women will be slightly higher.
26
There were both earlier and later versions of the manual. The earlier version (1892) was incomplete, and the later
version (1915) did not list the type of service pipes.

15

Table 5 shows for the census regions, their population share and the share of women in our
sample living in cities that are listed as having lead service pipes. Overall, 22 percent of the
women in our sample in 1900 lived in cities known to have lead pipes.
One issue is that a few cities not specifically identified in the census sample had lead pipes.
In the fourth column of Table 5, we impute whether a city had lead pipes based on the city
population for cities not listed by name in the census sample. The imputed values are based on
Table 1. This expands the percentage of women in our sample who lived in cities with lead pipes
to 29 percent in 1900.
There are at least two sources of bias in the coding of lead. First, if a city adopted or ceased
using lead service pipes after 1897, the city will be miscoded and the effect of lead will be biased
downward. Second, 32 of the 170 cities in 1900 were listed as having a mix of lead and some
other type of service pipes. We classify these together with the 72 cities that only listed lead as
known lead cities.27 Depending on the mix of lead and other service pipes, this will tend to bias
down any effect of lead.
If we were to find a positive coefficient on lead in a regression of child mortality, the
question is whether the coefficient on lead pipes is capturing just the effect of lead pipes or some
other features of the city, such as a poor disease environment. There are two possible approaches
to resolving this problem. One is to use city size together with state climate variables to
approximate the city level disease environment. The advantage of controlling for city disease
environments with a quadratic of population and average state-level temperature and
precipitation is that it allows us to use all of the data. The disadvantage is that these variables
may or many not provide a good fit. One lingering concern is that cities with lead pipes east of
the Mississippi are still somehow different from both similar sized cities without lead pipes east
of the Mississippi and similar sized cities with and without lead pipes west of the Mississippi. In
the second approach, rather than proxy for city-level disease environment, we use the death rate
from tuberculosis per 100,000 for the city in 1900.28 We use the tuberculosis rate, because it
captures the overall disease environment. For example, tuberculosis is highly correlated with the
city death rate; yet it is not a leading cause of death for young children. This limits the sample to
27

They were classified together, because we already have 10 lead-region combinations. There were not enough
observations for mixed lead cities (32) to identify an additional 5 mixed lead combinations.
28
Ideally these measures of the disease environment would be for an earlier time period, but the first reliable data
for registration cities begin in 1900.

16

cities explicitly identified in the census for which we were able to obtain data on the city disease
environment.
In both cases, we exploit regional differences in the impact of lead on child mortality to
identify the effect. As we discussed, the toxicity of lead pipes depended heavily on the
properties of the water running through them. For example, we would expect lead pipes to have
a more severe impact east of the Mississippi than west of the Mississippi, because of the acidity
and hardness of the water. Consider four cities, each with populations of 100,000. Let one city
be in the East and have lead pipes, one city be in the East and not have lead pipes, one city be in
the West and have lead pipes, and one city be in the West has not have lead pipes. If mortality
was a function of city size, we would expect, all else equal that women in the four cities would
have similar mortality experiences. If mortality was a function of lead, however, the women in
the East with lead pipes should have elevated mortality. Given variation in city sizes, locations,
and use of lead pipes, we can separate the city size and lead hypotheses.
What types of cities use lead pipes? In other words, is the adoption of lead pipes truly
exogenous? There are two sources of evidence on this. The first is the evidence from Table 1,
which includes a large number of cities. The use of lead pipes is clearly increasing in city size.
The second is the evidence from the smaller sample of cities that were i) identified by name in
the census, ii) listed in The Manual of American Waterworks, 1897 and the type of service pipes
was specifically identified. Table 6 presents logit regressions of lead pipes on city
characteristics. In the first column, we include just the log of city size. The coefficient is positive
and significant. In the second column, we add state temperature and precipitation. Neither is
significant, and the coefficient on log of city size remains positive and significant. In the third
regression, we include whether the city is located east or west of the Mississippi. The coefficient
on this dummy variable is not significant, but the coefficient on monthly precipitation is now
negative and significant. The reason for this is unclear. Finally, having adopted lead pipes prior
to 1897 is uncorrelated with 1900 tuberculosis rate. Thus, it would appear that conditional on
city size and precipitation, the adoption of lead pipes by cities was approximately random. We
believe that adoption of lead pipes can be treated as exogenous. For comparison purposes, we
will present instrumental variables results.
Time Series Identification
17

An alternative approach to identifying the effects of lead would be to examine mortality rates
in cities that had recently adopted or abandoned lead pipes. Although the sample of cities that
adopted pipes is large, time series data are not available on infant and child mortality prior to
1900. Even if such data were available, the data would not include maternal characteristics. The
evidence we discussed earlier on lead poisoning in Milton and Lowell suggests that the
introduction of lead pipes probably did cause infant and child mortality to spike, since it caused
adult mortality to do so. Further, using detailed data collected by the Massachusetts Department
of Health, Troesken (2003) shows that cross sectional infant death rates for children ages 0-1 and
ages 1-2 were strongly increasing in the percentage of water mains that were newly installed, but
only in cities using lead service pipes. This occurred because oxidization tended to reduce the
amount of lead leaching into the water over time. Thus, the available evidence suggests that lead
pipes were causally associated with death. Unfortunately, we do not have information on when
water mains or service pipes were installed, so we cannot control for this directly.
One could in principle also examine the small number of cases where lead pipes were
abandoned, which is to say cities literally dug up their lead pipes (Troesken 2006). Lead-pipe
abandonment, however, does not offer as clean an experiment as one might think for two
reasons. First, since lead solder was commonly used when joining non-lead service pipes, it is
possible that replacing lead service pipes could increase lead exposure. This is particularly likely
if the lead service pipes had been in use for some time, and so had oxidized. Second, recall the
four pathways through which infants and young children were exposed to lead: i) maternal water
consumption in utero, ii) maternal bone leaching, ii) maternal water consumption and bone
leaching via breast milk and iv) dilution of cows milk or transmission via cows milk if the cow is
exposed to lead. Even if lead exposure through maternal water consumption is reduced to zero,
maternal bone leaching will continue. Thus, death rates might not fall sharply in the short term.
Results
Table 7 summarizes the (known) lead and no lead averages for children ever born, children
that die, and the mortality index for the 1900. As expected, the difference between the mortality
in known lead and no lead areas is statistically significant in 1900.
Table 8 reports the regression that control for mother’s characteristics, father’s occupation,
two measure of a state’s climate, the natural log of city size, a dummy variable for a city size of
18

zero, and in columns 2-4, measures of whether a city had lead pipes or not. The unreported
coefficients on the mother’s characteristics are extremely similar to the coefficients reported in
Table 4.
In column 1, where we control for region but not lead, the coefficient on the natural log of
city population is statistically significant. In column 2, where we introduce five census regions
and five lead variables, the coefficients on some regions and lead variables are significant and
others are not. The important thing to note is the basic pattern. The coefficients for lead on
census regions east of the Mississippi are positive or negative and insignificantly different than
the Northeast and the coefficients on census regions west of the Mississippi are negative and
significantly different than the Northeast. This pattern is consistent with the eastern states
generally having relatively soft water (0-60), high levels of acid rain, and, to varying degrees,
water sources with low acid neutralization capabilities. We use this information to aggregate the
census regions into two superregions, one east of the Mississippi and one west of the Mississippi.
In column 3, we include three dummy variables that indicate superregion and lead. The
natural log of city size remains statistically significant and positive, but the coefficient is
substantially smaller than in column 1. As for lead dummies, the omitted variable is East-No
Lead. Relative to East-No Lead, East-Lead has an increased mortality risk of 9.3 percent. The
difference between East-No Lead and East-Lead is statistically significant. West-Lead is not
significantly different from East-No Lead, which supports our earlier findings regarding the
effect of lead in the West. Finally, West-No Lead is positive and statistically significantly
different from East-No Lead. At 10.2 percent, the increased mortality risk from being in WestNo Lead that is roughly the same size as the increased mortality risk from being in East-Lead.
We suspect this reflects greater isolation in more rural parts of these regions. Indeed, as we
demonstrate below, once the sample is restricted to towns with populations greater than 2,500,
this otherwise odd result vanishes.
In columns 4 and 5, we exclude cities with populations of zero and cities with populations of
less than 2,500. Excluding cities with population zero cuts the sample size roughly in half. The
effects in column 4 are, however, very close to what we found in column 3. That is, the
coefficients on East-Lead and West-No Lead are positive, significant, and of similar magnitude.
Again, the coefficient on the natural log of city size remains statistically significant and positive.
19

In column 5 when we exclude cities with populations of less than 2,500, the coefficient on WestNo Lead becomes insignificant, which is consistent with our hypothesis that it reflects the greater
isolation in small towns west of the Mississippi. The coefficient on East-Lead, however, remains
significant. The increased mortality risk – 9.6 percent – is similar to what we found in column 3.
The coefficient on the natural log of city size remains marginally statistically significant and
positive.
Overall, in 1900 the mortality index for women who lived east of the Mississippi and had
lead pipes was 9.3 percent higher than the sample average. In 1900, women in cities known to
have lead pipes East of the Mississippi were 19 percent of the United States population. If we
include women who we impute had lead, this increases to 24 percent of the United States
population. This represents roughly 44,000 child fatalities due to lead.29
We know that any effects of lead that we find are biased downward, because all cities for
which we do not have information on lead pipes are coded as zeros. To address this issue, in
Table 9, we limit our sample to cities for which we observe the type of service pipe. This
reduces the sample size to less than on-quarter the size of the sample in columns 1-3 of Table 8.
Because of the small sample size and the fact that a very large share of the observations are for
the East-Lead, we reduce the region-lead variables from four to two. One is East-Lead and the
other (omitted) variable includes West-Lead, West-No Lead, and East-No Lead.
In column 1 of Table 9, the coefficient on East-Lead is positive, significant, and of similar
magnitude to the coefficients in Table 8. The coefficient on the natural log of city size is not
significant, however, probably because of the diminished variation in city size. In column 2, we
control for the tuberculosis rate in 1900. This diminishes the sample size slightly relative to
column 1. To the extent that the tuberculosis rate captures the contemporaneous, and possibly the
retrospective, health environment, we would expect the coefficient on the natural log of city size
not to be significant, since we were using city size as a proxy for the health environment. City
size is not statistically significant.
One remaining concern is that the use of lead pipes is endogenous. In columns 3 and 4 of
Table 9, we present the results of instrumental variable estimates. As we found in Tables 1 and
6, the most natural instrument for lead is the natural log of city size. City size is a strong
29

70,000 children x 1-200 sample x 0.24 x 0.013 increase in mortality (as opposed to the mortality index) = 44,000.

20

instrument; the only strong instrument in the set of possible instruments that we explored.30 The
validity of the results depends on whether one believes the exclusion restriction. The coefficient
on the natural log of city size is not significant in columns 1 and 2, which is reassuring, but not
necessarily compelling. It is quite plausible, however, that state temperature, precipitation, and
drought either alone or together with the city-level death rate from tuberculosis capture all the
relevant dimensions of the city disease environment for this sub-sample of larger cities. The
coefficients on lead in the second stage are statistically significant and large. The women in
eastern cities with lead pipes have mortality indices that are 31.5-35.8 percent higher than the
sample average.
The 1910 Census also asked women about children ever born and children surviving. If we
follow the 1900 cohort of women forward by adjusting the age and marriage duration, we find in
unreported regressions similar effects of lead if we restrict attention to cities for which we know
in whether they had lead service pipes or not in 1897 (e.g. the cities in Table 9). If we add the
younger women, however, the effects are not always significant.31 This probably reflects the
gradual oxidization of lead service pipes, most of which would have been put in place prior to
1900. Oxidization would have diminished the amount of lead being leached over time. Thus,
younger women would have received lower lead exposure than their older counterparts.
Having found substantial increases in women’s mortality indices associated with lead, one
question is: How much of the urban penalty is actually attributable to lead and not to disease
environments of bigger cities? We find that that lead accounts for 47 percent of the urban
penalty.32
Comparison with Detailed Studies of Massachusetts
Apart from the instrumental variables estimates, the negative effects of lead we find are
smaller in magnitude than the negative effects Troesken (2003) finds for Massachusetts. For
example, he finds that towns with lead pipes had mortality rates for children 0-1 that were 39

30

We examined a number of state characteristics such as the slope, depth of soil, and share of clay in the soil. We
also examined the characteristics of the water system (Troesken 2003). The values of the F-tests in the first stage
were well below 10.
31
The instrumental variable regressions are significant for both cohorts.
32
We column 3 in Table 4 with the identical regression to which you add a dummy variable for whether a city is
East-Lead or not. The urban penalty falls from a 12.1 percent increase in the mortality index to a 6.4 percent
increase in the mortality index.

21

percent higher than towns without lead pipes. Similarly, mortality rates for children 1-2 were 24
percent higher in towns with lead pipes than in towns without lead pipes.
The difference in the magnitudes can be at least partially explained differences in the data.
First, because of the very detailed data maintained by the Massachusetts Department of Health,
Troesken is able to link current death rates to the town’s use of lead pipes. Because of the nature
of the census data, we are linking retrospective death rates for women currently living in a
particularly city with that city’s use of lead pipes. Recall the substantial shift in the population of
women living in towns with lead pipes between 1900 and 1910. Some of this represented literal
migration and some of it represented the growth of towns to a size where they warranted a
municipal water system. If 25 percent of the women in lead areas had had their children before
the introduction of lead pipes in their town or in other localities without lead pipes, the
magnitudes of our measured effects would rise by 33 percent to 12 or 13 percent.
Second, Troesken has detailed information on the age at which death occurs. Troesken
shows large and statistically significant negative effects of lead for children 0-2, but positive and
insignificant effects for children 2-4 and 10 and older. This suggests that some of the children
who were killed by lead might have later been killed by other diseases. In contrast, this study
examines retrospective death by all causes and does not include information on the ages of the
children who died. Thus, we estimate the net effect of lead on the death rate, and not the gross
effect as Troesken does. Finally, Troesken did not have information on mothers’ characteristics
or fathers’ occupation. We control for these characteristics directly.
6. Conclusion
The results here indicate that the use of lead water pipes increased the mortality index by
9.3 percent in 1900 for women living in cities with lead pipes. This implies that the use of lead
water pipes resulted in tens of thousands childhood deaths during the early twentieth century.
Having shown this, it is important to draw a distinction between partial and general equilibrium
effects. Clearly the partial effect was negative; many lives could have been saved by using
service pipes composed of iron, cement, or steel. However, the general equilibrium effects are
less clear. If avoiding the use of lead service pipes delayed the introduction and extension of
urban water supplies, many more children and adults would have died from waterborne diseases
22

such as typhoid fever and infantile diarrhea and deaths from these causes likely would have
exceeded deaths from lead poisoning. Alternatively, the upfront monetary costs of iron, cement,
and steel service pipes were actually lower than those associated with lead. It is, therefore,
possible that using pipes of other materials might have hastened the expansion of urban water
systems and promoted the willingness of homeowners (who often had to pay for the service pipe)
to connect to local water supplies. Having said this, Troesken (2003; 2006) explicitly tests this
proposition and finds no evidence to support the idea using non-lead pipes hastened the
expansion of urban water systems.
One area that we would like to explore in future research is the relationship between
water lead and adverse outcomes in terms of educational attainment, literacy, and criminal
behavior. In particular, it would be desirable to understand how water affected the children who
survived in utero and during the early stages of development. It is well known that lead exposure
reduces IQ and gives rise to behavioral problems in children and young adults. Moreover, it
seems likely that if there were enough lead in drinking water to induce death among developing
infants there likely would have been enough lead to inhibit the neurological development of the
surviving children. We are pursuing two possible avenues in this direction. Although data on
from intelligence tests during the early twentieth century are scarce and not especially reliable
even when available, it might be possible to use census data on literacy and recent moves to
explore the effects of lead on education. We are also searching for state-level education
departments circa 1910 for evidence on test scores and performance across cities with high and
low water-lead levels.

23

7. References
Allen, Alfred H. 1882. “The Action of Water on Lead,” Chemical News, 45:145-46.
Baker, Moses N. 1897. The Manual of American Water-Works. New York: The Engineering
News Publishing Company.
Carlson, Elof. 2001. The Unfit: A History of a Bad Idea. Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, 2001.
Committee on Service Pipes. New England Water Works Association. Report of Committee on
Service Pipes. Presented to the Association on March 14, 1917. Reprinted in the Journal
of New England Water Works Association. Volume 31. No. 3. September 1917, pp.
323-389. Cited in text as CSP.
Costa, Dora and Matthew Kahn 2003. Public Health and Mortality: What Can We Learn from
the Past? Working Paper. Available at
http://web.mit.edu/costa/www/costa_kahnsubmissionfinal.pdf
Engineering News. Various issues. Cited in text as EN.
Environmental Protection Agency. 2003 Response of Surface Water Chemistry to the Clean Air
Act Amendments of 1990, Executive Summary. http://www.epa.gov/ord/htm/CAAAExecutiveSummary-1-29-03.pdf
Environmental Protection Agency. 2006 Acidic Surface Waters in Surveyed Regions. Available
at http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/cmap/mapgallery/mg_acidic_waters.html#desc
Ferrie, Joseph and Werner Troesken. 2005. “Death and the City: Chicago’s Mortality Transition,
1850-1925.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper # 11427.
Haines, Michael R. 2001. “The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800-1940.”
Historical Paper, #134. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Haines, Michael R. 2005. "Fertility and Mortality in the United States". EH.Net Encyclopedia,
edited by Robert Whaples. January 22, 2005. URL
http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/haines.demography
Kirker, Gilbert. 1890. “The Action of Potable Waters on Lead,” British Medical Journal,
January 11, pp. 71-72.
Lanphear, B. and K.J. Rogham. 1997. “Pathways of Lead Exposure in Urban Children.”
Environmental Research, 74:67-73.

24

Massachusetts. State Board of Health. Annual Reports. Various years, 1890-1900. Cited in
text as MSBH
Milton News. Various issues.
Perazella, M.A. 1996. “Lead and the Kidney: Nephropathy, Hypertension, and Gout.”
Connecticut Medicine, 60:521-26.
Preston, Samuel H. and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in LateNineteenth Century America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Quam, G.N., and Arthur Klein. 1936. “Lead Pipes as a Source of Lead in Drinking Water.”
American Journal of Public Health, 26:778-80.
Troesken, Werner. 2003. Lead Water Pipes and Infant Mortality in Turn of the Century
Massachusetts. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 9549.
Troesken, Werner. 2006. The Great Lead Water Pipe Disaster. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Troesken, Werner, and Patty Beeson. 2003. “On the Significance of Lead Water Mains in
American Cities: Some Historical Evidence,” in Health and Labor Force Participation
over the Life Course. Edited by Dora L. Costa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
and NBER.
United States. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1919. Women in the Lead
Industries. By Alice Hamilton. Bulletin No. 253. Washington, DC: Government
Printing Office.
United States. Geological Survey. 2006. Explanation of Hardness.
http://water.usgs.gov/owq/Explanation.html
Warren, Christian. 2000. Brush with Death: A Social History of Lead Poisoning. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Wolpaw Reyes, Jessica. 2003. “The Impact of Prenatal Lead Exposure on Infant Health.”
Department of Economics. Amherst College.
Xintaras, C. 1992. Analysis Paper: Impact of Lead-Contaminated Soil on Public Health. U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry. Atlanta, GA. (http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/exlead.html).

25

Figure 1: Acid Rain in the United States

Notes: Image from http://www.epa.gov/castnet/images/ph_map.gif

26

Figure 2: Percentage of Acidic Surface Waters in Surveyed Regions

Notes: Image from http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/cmap/images/fig14x.gif

27

Figure 3: Water Hardness in the United States

Notes: Image from http://ga.water.usgs.gov/edu/graphics/HardnessMap.gif

28

0

.2

Density
.4

.6

.8

Figure 4: Distribution of Mothers by the Number of Children Who Have Died, 1900

0

5
chdie

10

29

Table 1: Use of Lead Service Pipes by City Size
Cities using
City size in 1900
Population > 300,000
30,000 < Pop < 300,000
8,000 < Pop < 30,000
Population < 8,000
All towns and cities

no. of
cities
16
107
156
518
797

only lead
8 (50%)
55 (51%)
46 (29%)
100 (19%)
209 (26%)

lead & other
7 (44%)
22 (21%)
36 (23%)
72 (14%)
137 (17%)

no lead
1 (16%)
30 (28%)
74 (47%)
346 (67%)
451 (57%)

Notes: From Troesken and Beeson (2003).

30

Table 2: Summary Statistics for 1900
1900
Children die
0.469
(0.866)
Children ever born
2.881
(1.759)
White
0.896
Literate
0.896
Urban
0.400
Own home
0.386
Working
0.035
Age
29.093
(5.614)
Duration marriage
7.858
(3.579)
Observations
24,483
Notes: These averages are computed at the level of the mother. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Standard
deviations are not reported for dummy variables.

31

Table 3: Urban-Rural Averages in 1900
1900
1900
Rural
Urban
Children born
4.09
3.72***
(1.98)
(1.91)
Children die
0.71
0.79***
(1.07)
(0.19)
Mortality Index
0.937
1.107***
(1.376)
1.552
Observations
44,252
26,292
Notes: These averages are computed at the level of the child. Standard deviations are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

32

Table 4: Mortality and Urban Locations
1
2
Mortality Index Mortality Index
Children born
0.176***
0.175***
0.014
0.015
Duration of
-0.042***
-0.042***
marriage
0.003
0.003
White
-0.338***
-0.313***
0.047
0.048
Read
-0.116***
-0.108***
0.031
0.025
Age
-0.111***
-0.109***
0.008
0.008
Age squared
0.0019***
0.0018***
0.0001
0.0001
Working
0.232**
0.211**
0.103
0.094
Own home
-0.076**
-0.070**
0.032
0.030
State
-0.002
temperature
0.003
State
0.020*
precipitation
0.011
State drought
-0.0031***
0.0007
Urban
Birthplace FE
Husband occ FE
Observations
R-squared

Y
Y
70,544
0.0720

Y
Y
70,544
0.0724

3
Mortality Index
0.177***
0.015
-0.042***
0.002
-0.310***
0.047
-0.118***
0.021
-0.111***
0.009
0.0018***
0.0001
0.208**
0.094
-0.056**
0.023
-0.0006
0.0023
0.017*
0.010
-0.0027***
0.0007
0.120***
0.038
Y
Y
70,544
0.0733

Notes: All regressions are run with robust standard errors clustered by city. Standard errors are reported below point
estimates. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. The mother’s birth
location fixed effects are as follows: birth location = 1 if born in United States (omitted), birth location = 2 if born in
Canada or the Atlantic Islands, birth location = 3 if born in Northern Europe, birth location = 4 if born in the United
Kingdom, birth location = 5 if born in Ireland, birth location = 6 if born in Germany, birth location = 7 if born in
Poland or the Russian Empire, birth location = 8 if born in Italy, birth location = 9 if born in Southern Europe
excluding Italy, birth location = 10 if born in Central or Eastern Europe excluding Poland and Germany, birth
location = 0 for all other locations. For more details, see http://www.ipums.umn.edu/usa/pethnicity/bplgb.html. The
husband’s occupation fixed effects are as follows: occupation = 1 if occupation is professional/technical, occupation
= 2 if occupation is farmer (omitted), occupation = 3 if occupation is manager, official, proprietor, occupation = 4 if
occupation is clerical and kindred, occupation = 5 if occupation is sales worker, occupation = 6 if occupation is
craftsman, occupation = 7 if occupation = operative, occupation = 8 if occupation is service worker or farm laborer,
occupation = 9 if occupation is a non occupational response or blank. For more details, see
http://www.ipums.umn.edu/usa/pwork/occ1950b.html

33

Table 5: Lead Exposure by Region of Women in Sample in 1900
Region
Pop Share Share with Share total Share with
known
pop with
known/
lead
lead
imputed
lead
1900
New England &
Mid Atlantic
0.27
0.41
0.11
0.50
East North Central
0.22
0.29
0.06
0.34
West North Central
0.13
0.13
0.02
0.19
South Atlantic &
East South Central
0.23
0.06
0.01
0.12
West South Central
& Mountain &
Pacific
0.15
0.10
0.01
0.17
Total
1.00
0.22

Share total
pop with
lead

0.14
0.07
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.29

34

Table 6: Determinants of Use of Lead Pipes (Marginal effects reported)
1
2
3
Lead
Lead
Lead
Ln(citypop)
0.112***
0.112***
0.120***
0.040
0.042
0.043
State temperature
-0.0003
0.0029
0.0083
0.0082
State precipitation
-0.096
-0.156*
0.076
0.088
West of
-0.179
Mississippi
0.168
Tuberculosis 1900
Observations
R-squared

147
0.0465

147
0.0606

147
0.0664

4
Lead
0.147***
0.052
0.0076
0.0109
-0.193*
0.109
-0.216
0.213
0.0006
0.0007
118
0.1001

Notes: *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. Only observations in which
the cities are listed by name in the census and are specifically identified as having lead service pipes or not having
lead service pipes are used.

35

Table 7: No Lead and Known Lead Averages in 1900
1900
1900
No Lead
Known Lead
Children born
4.01
3.73***
(1.98)
(1.91)
Children die
0.72
0.84***
(1.09)
(1.23)
Mortality Index
0.960
1.153***
(1.28)
(1.05)
Observations
55,903
14,641
Notes: These averages are computed at the level of the child. Standard deviations are in parentheses. In this table
and all tables that follow, *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

36

Table 8: Mortality Index and Lead Service Pipes
1
2
3
4
Mortality
Mortality
Mortality
MI
Index
Index
Index
Citypop>0
East North
-0.063***
-0.045***
Central
0.018
0.011
West North
-0.015
0.029*
Central
0.044
0.017
South Atlantic
-0.104***
-0.096***
& East SC
0.032
0.029
West SC &
-0.000
0.034
Mtn. & Pacific
0.043
0.026
Lead
0.077
0.053
Lead-ENC
-0.030
0.045
Lead-WNC
-0.221***
0.053
Lead-SAESC
0.146
0.135
Lead-WSCMP
-0.185**
0.089
East-Lead
0.093**
0.107**
0.045
0.043
West-No Lead
0.102***
0.140***
0.016
0.034
West-Lead
-0.041
-0.016
0.059
0.055
Ln(City Pop)
0.023***
0.017**
0.017**
0.016**
0.003
0.007
0.006
0.006
Zero Pop
0.026
0.010
0.006
0.016
0.021
0.019
State
0.0013
0.0009
-0.0021
-0.004**
temperature
0.0010
0.0010
0.0015
0.002
State
0.041***
0.046***
0.051***
0.066***
precipitation
0.012
0.010
0.009
0.021
State drought
-0.0014*
-0.0017**
-0.0025***
-0.0025*
0.0007
0.0015
0.0008
0.0008
Maternal
characteristics
Y
Y
Y
Y
Birthplace FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Husb. occ FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
70,403
70,403
70,403
32,846
R-Squared
0.0745
0.0751
0.0747
0.0856

5
MI Urban

0.095***
0.046
0.072
0.057
-0.017
0.059
0.015*
0.009
-0.006**
0.002
0.077**
0.031
-0.002
0.002
Y
Y
Y
26,009
0.0956
37

Notes: *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. All regressions are run with
robust standard errors clustered by city. Standard errors are reported below point estimates. The omitted region in
columns 1 and 2 is New England/Mid Atlantic. The omitted region-lead variable in columns 3-5 is East-No Lead.
ENC is East North Central; WNC is West North Central; SAESC is South Atlantic and East South Central; WSCMP
is West South Central, Mountain, and Pacific.

38

Table 9: Mortality Index for Cities Where the Type of Service Pipe is Known
1
2
3
4
Mortality Index Mortality Index
IV
IV
East-Lead
0.106**
0.096*
0.314**
0.357***
0.050
0.058
0.126
0.134
Ln(City Pop)
0.016
0.024
0.011
0.015
State
-0.0055
-0.0060
-0.0014
-0.0007
temperature
0.0041
0.0040
0.0053
0.0055
State
0.041
0.049
-0.014
-0.022
precipitation
0.040
0.042
0.053
0.053
State drought
-0.0059**
-0.0072***
-0.0087***
-0.010***
0.0023
0.0023
0.0029
0.003
Tuberculosis
-0.0006
-0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
Maternal
characteristics
Y
Y
Y
Y
Birthplace FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Husband occ FE
Y
Y
Y
Y
Observations
16,735
15,803
16,735
15,803
R-Squared
0.1000
0.1002
Notes: *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels. All regressions are run with
robust standard errors clustered by city. Standard errors are reported below point estimates. Birthplace FE were
reduced to a dummy variable for whether or not the woman was born in the United States or not. Husband’s
occupation FE were reduced by creating a single category for occupational categories 3-8. The F-test for the first
stage is 12.87 (column 3) and 10.24 (column 4)

39

