                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             A SIMPLE TEST OF THE EFFECT OF INTEREST RATE DEFENSE

                                            Allan Drazen
                                           Stefan Hubrich

                                        Working Paper 12616
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12616


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




Paper presented at the 18th Annual TRIO Conference, Tokyo, Japan, December 2005 and forthcoming
in the Journal of the Japanese and International Economies. For useful comments, we wish to thank
our discussants, Shin-ichi Fukuda and Shigenori Shiratsuka, as well as Takatoshi Ito, Andrew Rose,
and other conference participants. Corresponding Author: Allan Drazen, University of Maryland, NBER
and CEPR. Stefan Hubrich is currently employed as a quantitative analyst in the equity division of
T.Rowe Price Associates, Inc., in Baltimore/USA. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Allan Drazen and Stefan Hubrich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
A Simple Test of the Effect of Interest Rate Defense
Allan Drazen and Stefan Hubrich
NBER Working Paper No. 12616
October 2006
JEL No. F31,F33

                                             ABSTRACT

High interest rates to defend the exchange rate signal that a government is committed to fixed exchange
rates, but may also signal weak fundamentals. We test the effectiveness of the interest rate defense
by disaggregating into the effects on future interest rates differentials, expectations of future exchange
rates, and risk premia. While much previous empirical work has been inconclusive due to offsetting
effects, tests that disaggregate the effects provide significant information. Raising overnight interest
rates strengthens the exchange rate over the short-term, but also leads to an expected depreciation
at a horizon of a year and longer and an increase in the risk premium, consistent with the argument
that it also signals weak fundamentals.

Allan Drazen
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
drazen@econ.umd.edu

Stefan Hubrich
T.Rowe Price Associates, Inc
100 East Pratt St.
Baltimore, MD 21202
stefan_hubrich@troweprice.com
1. Introduction
       Raising the short-term interest rate is often used to defend a currency under attack. The
interest rate defense has had both successes and failures, some quite spectacular. Hong Kong
increased overnight rates to several hundred percent and successfully defended its currency in
October 1997 against speculative attack. Sweden similarly increased its interest rate by several
hundred percent in its currency defense in September 1992, but the success was short-lived.
Other cases of both success and failure can be cited, so that even a first look at episodes leaves
very much open the question of the effectiveness of an interest rate defense.
       Formal econometric tests of this question are also inconclusive. As Kraay (2003, p. 297)
puts it, in speculative attacks in developed and developing economies, there is “a striking lack of
any systematic association whatsoever between interest rates and the outcome of speculative
attacks.” Hence, we really have no clear answer to the question: Is raising the interest rate
effective in defending a currency?
       This leads to a more fundamental question, namely: Why do high interest rates deter
speculation? The standard argument is that they increase the opportunity cost of speculation.
When speculators borrow domestic currency to speculate against a fixed exchange rate (when
they “short” the domestic currency), high short-term interest rates make such borrowing very
costly. However, this argument runs into a simple “arithmetic” problem. If the horizon over
which devaluation is expected is extremely short, interest rates must be raised to extraordinarily
high levels to deter speculation even when the expected devaluation is small. For example, even
if foreign currency assets bore no interest, an expected overnight devaluation of 0.5 percent
                                                       . 365 − 1) *100 = 517 ) to make
would require an annual interest rate of over 500% ( (1005
speculation unprofitable. (See, for example, the discussion in Furman and Stiglitz [1998].)
       This reasoning has called into question how effective very high overnight interest rates
can be in deterring an attack, and has been used to explain why the interest rate defense may be
ultimately unsuccessful. Though the “arithmetic problem” addresses the question of why
“spectacular” defenses may have only limited effects, it raises other questions. On the one hand,
why then is the interest rate defense sometimes successful, especially when the interest rate used
to defend is not spectacularly high? And, why do short-lived increases in interest rates often
appear to have much longer-term effects? On the other hand, why does an interest rate defense



                                                 1
sometimes appear to lead to even greater speculative pressures against the currency? The effects
of raising interest rates must reflect more than a simple cost-of-borrowing effect.
       In this paper we investigate these questions by decomposing the effects of an increase in
the interest rate on the short-run expected exchange rate into a number of (potentially offsetting)
effects. Our focus is empirical, but one suggested by a specific conceptual approach to the
effectiveness (or ineffectiveness) of interest rate defense. We argue that the effects of high
interest rates may reflect the information that increasing interest rates provides to market
participants. If so, the direct cost implications of high interest rates for speculators may be
secondary to the signal they provide. By raising interest rates, a government signals that it is
committed to fixed exchange rates, but it may also signal weak fundamentals. Hence, a key
empirical implication is that raising interest rates leads to the expectation that future rates will be
high, but may also increase the probability speculators assign to collapse. As a consequence, the
net effect may be ambiguous.
       A key argument is that if the effects of high interest rates reflect the expectations they
engender about future policy (via the signal about unobserved government characteristics under
asymmetric information), then these effects should appear in expectations of future exchange and
interest rates. Hence, tests of the effectiveness of the interest rate defense looking at these
forward-looking variables should be informative. Empirical testing along these lines is the focus
of this paper.
       Our main conclusion is that while tests looking at the effect of high interest rates on
“summary measures” like the outcome of an attack (or the very short-term expected exchange
rate) are often inconclusive, tests that “disaggregate” these effects both across different time
horizons and across different determinants of short-term expected exchange rates (interest
differentials, risk premia, and long-term expectations) provide significant information. The
inconclusiveness of tests using summary measures may be due to offsetting effects, with tests on
disaggregated measures displaying some clear regularities to explain these offsetting effects.
Raising overnight interest rates strengthens the exchange rate over the short-term for most
countries in our sample via its effects on short-term interest rate differentials, consistent with
signaling commitment to defend. However, raising overnight interest rates leads to an expected
depreciation at a horizon of a year and longer, consistent with the argument that it also signals
weak fundamentals. High overnight rates also weaken the exchange rate via an increase in the

                                                   2
risk premium, consistent with the argument that they increase the risk of default.
        The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we quickly review standard
empirical tests of the interest rate defense, in which the probability of the fixed rate regime being
maintained is related to the stance of monetary policy. Given the inconclusiveness of the tests,
we argue that an alternative approach is required. In section 3, we consider tests of the effects of
the interest rate defense via the term structure of exchange rate expectations and interest rates,
using data from eight European countries. We show that disaggregating the effect of raising
overnight interest rates in the way outlined in the previous paragraph provides significant
information that is hidden in a test on a summary measure. These results are consistent with the
signaling hypothesis, but also in part with other arguments, as we will outline. Section 4
presents a summary of our main findings, as well as concluding comments.


2. Testing the Effectiveness of Interest Rate Defense
        We begin by reviewing the evidence on tests of the effectiveness of raising the interest
rate to defend against speculative attack, as well as conceptual arguments on why such tests may
be inconclusive. The most obvious test is to relate some measure of the level of interest rates or
monetary policy to attack outcomes. Recent empirical literature has produced a number of
empirical tests of the effectiveness of interest rate defense of this sort.
        The best known paper is probably that of Kraay (2003), who studies a large cross-country
sample of fixed exchange rate crises, and relates the stance of monetary policy to the outcome of
the crisis (collapse or survival of the peg). He uses an instrumental variable probit technique to
control for the endogeneity of the interest rate, since both the degree to which a country raises
interest rates and the probability that an attack succeeds (for given interest rates) are likely to
depend on the amount speculative pressure it faces. Hence, heavy speculative pressure may lead
a country to raise interest rates sharply but may also make failure likely, so that there is a
correlation between interest rates and attack outcomes that has nothing to do with the
effectiveness of interest rate defense ceteris paribus, that is, when speculative pressure or
characteristics are controlled for. 1 As indicated above, he finds little significant relationship

1
 For example, Hubrich (2001) shows that high-inflation countries are more likely to face a successful
speculative attack, and are more likely to resort to an interest rate defense when facing an attack. Thus,
high interest rates are associated with successful attacks (a failed defense) in a cross-country study, even

                                                      3
between monetary policy and attack outcomes one way or the other. Other studies of this sort
include Goldfajn and Gupta (1998) and Dekle, Hsiao, and Wang (1999), who find more support
for the conventional view. On the whole, the evidence is inconclusive.
        Theoretically, the inconclusiveness of tests should not be surprising. To see why,
consider the uncovered interest parity condition
        it = it* + St +1,t − St + Pt                                                         (1)

where i and i* represent the domestic and international interest rate, respectively, and S is the
(log of the) exchange rate in terms of domestic per unit of foreign currency. S t + k , t denotes the

expectation with respect to period t+k, formed in period t (so that S t +1, t − S t is simply the one-

period ahead devaluation expectation). P, the residual from uncovered interest parity, captures a
currency and a default risk premium.
        Speculative pressure on St would be reflected in increases in the expected one-period

ahead exchange rate S t +1, t or in the risk premium Pt , so that interest rate defense could be thought

of as the policy of letting i increase along with devaluation pressure on the right-hand side to
leave S t unchanged. Hence, for a given amount of speculative pressure (the right-hand side

components of (1) other than i* and S), a high enough nominal interest rate will successfully
defend the peg in the very short term, that is, it will ensure that interest rate parity holds.
        However, one cannot hold other components of (1) constant. Put another way, a failure of
the policy of raising interest rates must reflect higher interest rates increasing speculative
pressure against the exchange rate, reflected in a positive effect on S t + k , t or Pt , a possible

“perverse” feedback effect. 2 Hence, instead of relating interest rates to exchange rate outcomes,
one really needs to examine whether there are feedback effects from interest rates back to
speculative pressure. 3
        Why might raising interest rates have the effect of raising speculative pressure? One


though interest rate defense may have been effective on a per-country basis, controlling for inflation.
2
  One must distinguish an attack that succeeds due to the failure of a defense from an attack that succeeds
because the government chooses not to defend. If defense requires an extremely high interest rate
maintained over some period of time, the government may find it too costly to defend.
3
  Hubrich (2001) proposes to look not at the relationship between interest rates and exchange rate
outcomes, but at that between interest rates and speculative pressure (as identified through a structural
econometric model), and to estimate the feedback effects implied by different models.

                                                      4
argument is that high interest rates cause the fundamentals themselves to deteriorate, an
argument suggested by Drazen and Masson (1994). For example, if pressure against a currency
reflects the belief that a weak fiscal position means that debt will have to be monetized, then
raising interest rates only worsens the fiscal position, raising expectations of further
monetization. This argument is explored in detail by Lahiri and Végh (2003). Alternatively,
higher interest rates may destabilize an already weak banking system, leading to the belief that
defense of the fixed exchange rate must soon be abandoned (see, for example, Furman and
Stiglitz [1998] or Radelet and Sachs [1998]).
       A different type of argument is suggested by Drazen (2000, 2003), namely, signaling of
unobserved government characteristics. That is, there are unobserved characteristics of the
government that affect the probability that a defense will be mounted or continued, with policy
choices being correlated with these characteristics. Hence, with imperfect information about
these government characteristics, speculators use observed policy choices to make inferences
about them and hence form (that is, update) the probability they assign to a devaluation. Raising
interest rates therefore may affect speculator’s behavior because it serves as a signal of the
government’s willingness or of its ability to defend the exchange rate. (This argument may be
seen as more generally concerning exchange rate intervention.)
       The signaling view suggests not only why raising interest rates may increase speculative
pressures, but also why the effect may be ambiguous, leading to inconclusive empirical tests.
The effect of raising interest rates on speculative pressure depends on what speculators believe it
is signaling. If very high interest rates are taken as indicating the government's determination to
defend the exchange rate (no matter what the cost, one is tempted to add), then high interest rates
may succeed in lowering speculative pressure. This is certainly the signal governments that
engage in “spectacular” defenses would like to send. However, very high interest may be taken
to indicate very weak fundamentals (or, more generally, “panic”), in which case there will be a
“perverse” effect – raising interest rates would only encourage speculation.
       If the signal content of high interest rates is important, empirical tests in a cross section
of countries may be inconclusive if different things are being signaled in different countries.
Moreover, even within a country at a point in time, the effect may be ambiguous if the signal is
mixed or unclear, that is, if speculators infer that both willingness to defend and weak
fundamentals are being signaled, or if they are unsure what is being signaled. It may also be that

                                                  5
different unobserved characteristics are being signaled at different horizons, a point that we
stress in our empirical tests.
        A further implication of the signaling approach is that there may be “disproportionalities”
in the effect of interest rates on speculative activity. Raising interest rates may dampen
speculation far more than an “arithmetic” argument may suggest or may have little effect. To the
extent that it sends a negative signal, it may actually increase speculative pressures. If a
“persistent” fundamental is signaled, then a short-lived increase in interest rates may have a
much longer-term effect. Finally, the effects may be not only of different strengths at different
horizons, but also of different signs, raising interest rates strengthening the exchange rate in the
very short term, but weakening it at a longer horizon. We now turn to empirical assessment of
interest rate defense on the basis of these insights.


3. The Effect of Raising Interest Rates at Different Horizons
        A natural direct test of these ideas consists of relating exchange rate expectations and risk
premia at different horizons to interest rate policy. Therefore this section uses a set of survey
data for exchange rate forecasts at different horizons to study the effect of interest rates on
exchange rate expectations during the 1992/3 ERM crisis.
        The analysis is geared towards investigating a number of possible effects. First, the
impact of interest rates on exchange rate expectations is allowed to be non-linear, consistent with
the argument that the information content of the policy may not be proportional to the level of
the interest rate. Second, signaling models also suggest that temporary policies have longer-run
effects, in that the signaling effect of high interest rates may outlast the high interest rate policy
itself. This can be examined by looking at the ‘term structure’ of exchange rate expectations:
Does interest rate policy affect exchange rate expectations similarly at all horizons, or does it
only have an impact on short-term expectations? The more the effect is spread out across the
term structure, the more it would seem that something ‘fundamental’ is being signaled. In
addition, the analysis enables us to distinguish between the effects of policy on future interest
rates and those on risk- and term premia (with the effect on exchange rate expectations being the
sum of both).


A. Empirical Framework

                                                   6
        Recalling that X t + j , t refers to the expectation of the value of X at time t+j as formed at

time t (the current value is denoted X t ≡ X t , t ), we write the interest parity condition (1) as:

        d itk = S t + k , t − S t + Pt k                                                                                        (1a)

Here k denotes the maturity of the underlying asset (in other words, we are looking at, say, a k-
month money market rate). d itk is the interest rate differential itk − it*k and Pt k is the risk

premium from t to t+k (which may include a term premium, a currency risk premium, and a
default risk premium).
        Using monthly data for exchange rate expectations and money market rates at the 1, 3, 6
and 12-month horizon, we can use (1a) to decompose next month’s expected exchange rate S t +1 , t

into:
        S t +1, t = ( S t +1, t − S t +3 , t ) + ( S t +3 , t − S t + 6 , t ) + ( S t + 6 , t − S t +12 , t ) + S t +12 , t ,   (2)

where
        S t +1, t − St +3, t = ( Pt 3 − Pt1 ) − ( d it3 − d it1 )                                                               (3a)

        S t +3, t − S t +6 , t = ( Pt 6 − Pt 3 ) − (d it6 − d it3 )                                                             (3b)

        S t +6 , t − St +12 , t = ( Pt12 − Pt 6 ) − ( d it12 − d it6 )                                                          (3c)

        In other words, the above allows us to decompose next month's expected exchange rate
S t +1 , t into the accumulated effects of interest rate expectations and risk over four different

horizons. (Note that under a pure expectations hypothesis of interest rates, itk + j − itk is the

expected interest rate over the j-month interval from t+k to t+k+j, so that d itk +1 − d itk is the one-

month interest differential expected for t+k as of t. Other differences in (3) have similar
interpretations.) As interest rates increase and risk decreases, the exchange rate components
decrease (i.e., the exchange rate appreciates). This represents the common intuition underlying
the interest parity condition that higher interest rates will appreciate exchange rates, while
increases in risk premia (if not matched by interest rates) will lead to a depreciation.
        A key notion to take away from this decomposition is that S t +1 , t is essentially a sum that

we can break down into seven individual components along two dimensions – term and the
components of interest rates versus risk premia. This is illustrated by the following table:


                                                                               7
                                                                      TABLE 1
                          Determinants of the Expected Exchange Rate S t + 1 , t
Term Component     2-3 mo.                  4-6 mo.                  7-12 mo.                    12+ mo.             Sum
Interest Rates     d it1 − d it3            d it3 − d it6             d it6 − d it12                           d it1 − d it12

‘Risk’             Pt 3 − Pt1               Pt 6 − Pt 3               Pt12 − Pt 6                              Pt12 − Pt1

Long-Term                                                                                        S t +12 , t   S t +12 , t

Sum                S t +1, t − S t +3 , t   S t +3 , t − S t + 6 , t S t + 6 , t − S t +12 , t   S t +12 , t   S t +1 , t


         By examining how each of the inner components reacts individually to interest rate
policy (identified as changes in a very short-term money market rate), we hope to better
understand the effects of raising interest rates and to be able to distinguish signaling effects from
other, competing hypotheses. In general, we would expect that if interest rate policy bears an
information content that outlasts the policy itself, then interest rate policy should have longer-
term effects. These would show up in the above decomposition as decreases in the interest rate
components (representing increases in interest rate expectations) that are spread out across the
different horizons.
         To make this clearer, suppose first that an increase in the overnight policy rate is seen as
providing no information about future interest rate policy. (Assume for simplicity of exposition
that term premia are zero, so that the k-month interest rate is simply the sum of expected one-
month interest rates from t to t+k.) If the central bank raises the overnight interest rate rt (the

policy rate) in response to an attack, this might raise interest rates at very short horizons, but in
the absence of information effects, there would be no significant effect on interest rates beyond
the term over which the policy rate is kept high. Consequently, only the analogous short-term
components of S t +1 , t in (3) would improve.

         For example, suppose it is believed that a high overnight rate at t will be maintained for a
week to fend off an attack and then brought back down. The interest rate differential at t, d itk ,

for every horizon k will increase, but the interest rates for periods beyond the week (that is,
d it3 − d it1 , d it6 − d it3 , et cetera in the monthly data) would be unchanged. By equations (3) the

                                                                        8
expected exchange rate beyond the one-week horizon (the left-hand side of the equations) would
also be unchanged. Since S t +1 , t is simply the sum of these terms as in (2), it would be unaffected

as well in the absence of information or signaling effects.
        In contrast, now suppose that the temporary policy signals a permanent change in the
policy stance in the sense of a commitment to supporting the exchange rate. This translates into
permanently higher expectations of the one-month interest rate (“permanent” as long as this
commitment is believed to hold), so that the interest rate components at all horizons in (3a)-(3c)
will decrease. This will appreciate exchange rate expectations across the board and result in a
positive appreciation, as compared to the zero effect when information or signaling effects are
absent. As discussed above, this is the signal a defense is meant to send

        Finally, the decomposition of the exchange rate term component into an interest rate term
and a risk term allows us to analyze separately the effect on the risk- and term premia. For
example, if the Sachs-Stiglitz argument is correct (whereby higher interest rates may weaken the
banking sector), we should detect an increase in the risk components in response to an interest
rate policy hike, as risk premia increase. 4 This would be another “perverse feedback” effect.


B. Data and Regression Equations
        To perform the decomposition implied by equations (2) and (3) as illustrated in the
matrix, we use monthly data for nine European countries – Germany, Belgium, France, Italy,
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Ireland and Spain 5 – for the time period around the 1992/3 ERM
crisis to construct monthly time series for those seven components. The data cover the period of


4
  As data are available for exchange rate expectations and interest rates over different horizons, we are
able to obtain data for Pt k as the residual from interest rates and exchange rate expectations at the different
horizons, essentially using (3). If interest rate forecasts and k-month forward rates were consistently
available as well, we could also decompose Pt k into three components (a currency risk, default risk, and
term premium). Interest rates forecasts were indeed available for a small subset of the data, and were used
for a cursory exploration of the role of term premia. Forward rate data were available throughout – we
refrained, however, from using them to make a distinction between currency and default risk since this
distinction is not the focus of our present work.
5
  An obvious and interesting additional country would have been the UK. Unfortunately, we were unable
to obtain sufficiently long money market rate series from Bloomberg (which is the source for the money
market data for all the other countries). This reflects in part the lack of data at the beginning of the sample
period, and in part the fact that the pound sterling left the EMS in the fall of 1992, thus shortening the
relevant period to begin with.

                                                       9
1989:01 – 1994:12 for most countries 6 . During this period those countries essentially had their
exchange rates fixed against the benchmark country Germany. 7 These data permit to construct
the four exchange rate series on the right-hand side of (2), thus permitting us to look at the term
structure of exchange rate.
        Exchange rate forecasts were published monthly in the Financial Times Currency
Forecaster. This is a ‘combined consensus forecast’, the geometric mean of a sample of
professional currency forecasts from commercial banks and other multinational corporations. 8
The reference currency for these forecasts is the US Dollar, so the US Dollar/DM forecast has
been used to construct exchange rate forecasts relative to the DM. The forecasts come out
monthly on the fourth Thursday of the month, from data gathered earlier in the week. k-month
interest rate differentials (with respect to Germany) are represented through money market rates
(from the day of the exchange rate forecast) that were obtained from Bloomberg. The “risk” data
could then be backed out as the residual, according to (3a)-(3c).
        The following seven equations were estimated for each country (one for each cell in
Table 1), where for convenience we define X t j , n ≡ X t j − X tn :


        d it1, 3 = c1 + a1d rt + b1 ( d rt ) 2 + f1 S t + ε 1t                            (4a)

        d it3 , 6 = c 2 + a 2 d rt + b2 (d rt ) 2 + f 2 S t + ε 2 t                       (4b)

        d it6 ,12 = c3 + a3 d rt + b3 (d rt ) 2 + f 3 S t + ε 3 t                         (4c)

        Pt 3 ,1 = c4 + a 4 d rt + b4 (d rt ) 2 + f 4 S t + ε 4 t                          (4d)

        Pt 6 , 3 = c5 + a5 d rt + b5 (d rt ) 2 + f 5 S t + ε 5 t                          (4e)

        Pt12 , 6 = c6 + a6 d rt + b6 (d rt ) 2 + f 6 S t + ε 6 t                          (4f)


6
  Shorter time periods are used due to limited data availability (Italy, Sweden, Ireland) or in cases where
countries left the EMS and/or the exchange rate was officially floated after the crisis (Italy, Sweden,
Norway), in order to keep the sample restricted to “fixed” episodes
7
  Technically, with the exception of Norway and Sweden, these countries were part of the EMS system
where each country agreed to fix its currency to within a band around a weighted basket of all other
participating currencies. Treating Germany as the (sole) benchmark country simplifies the analysis, and is
justified in light of the fact that the DM had the biggest weight in that basket.
8
  Optimally, one would like to use expectations at a higher (say weekly) frequency to examine the very
short-run effects of interest rate increases on the expected exchange rate. Unfortunately, such data do not
exist, at least for this set of currencies in this time period.

                                                               10
         S t +12 , t = c7 + a7 d rt + b7 (d rt ) 2 + f 7 S t + ε 7 t                     (4g)


        The main regressor is an overnight or one-day money market rate differential
drt ≡ rt − rt* , which presumably reflects the degree to which the government chooses to engage

in an interest rate defense. Some of the governments in the sample actually increased overnight
rates to engage in interest rate defense, which should be picked up well by these very short-term
rates. Other governments merely engaged in interest rate defense to the extent that they chose not
to intervene, and “let” money market rates be driven up by devaluation expectations. This
interest differential is obtained as the average (from daily observations) between two exchange
rate forecasts, expressed in percentage points. It is allowed to enter squared as well, in order to
assess non-linearities related to signaling.
        The only other regressor (aside from a constant) is S t , the actual observed exchange rate

at the time of the forecast. This regressor was included to try to control, at least partially, for
potential biases stemming from the endogeneity of the policy measure drt ≡ rt − rt* . It is likely

that the same factors that affect policy (the onset of a crisis, speculative pressure etc.) also have a
direct effect on the dependent variable through the error term ε, which might lead to an
endogeneity bias in the coefficients a and b. To the extent that these factors also lead to
movements of the actual exchange rate (within its band 9 ), including the exchange rate can
control for this effect. Due to a lack of good instrumental variables we have been unable to treat
endogeneity more formally, so that we cannot be entirely certain that the estimation is free of
biases stemming from endogeneity.
        In order to be able to focus on the term structure (without distinguishing between interest
rate and ‘risk’ components), the following three equations were also estimated (the implied
equation for S t +12 , t is identical to (4g)):

         S t +1, t − S t +3 , t = c8 + a8 d rt + b8 (d rt ) 2 + f 8 S t + ε 8 t                   (5a)


9
 During the 1992-3 crisis, there were substantial fluctuations within the band, and periods of strong
speculative attacks were often characterized by the fact that the exchange rate under attack hit the
boundary of the band. In addition, there were realignments and widening of bands during the estimation
period. Including the actual exchange rate as a regressor is a natural way of trying to control for such
events.

                                                                 11
        S t +3 , t − S t + 6 , t = c9 + a9 d rt + b9 (d rt ) 2 + f 9 S t + ε 9 t                   (5b)

        S t + 6 , t − S t +12 , t = c10 + a10 d rt + b10 (d rt ) 2 + f10 S t + ε10 t               (5c)

        Note that since the risk premia P were backed out treating (3a)-(3c) as an identity, the
estimated coefficients in (5a)-(5c) are linked to those in (4a)-(4g) by construction: a1 + a4 = a8 ,
a2 + a5 = a9 , and so forth. The economic equivalent of this is that the effect of interest rate
policy on exchange rate expectations is the sum of its effect on interest rates and risk premia (see
table 1).
        Before running the actual regressions, we explored the time-series properties of the data
with a battery of unit-root tests. We found that for the majority of the series we could reject the
unit root hypothesis at the 10% level, using augmented Dickey-Fuller tests that included a
constant term but no trend. Most failures to reject the unit-root hypothesis occurred for interest
rate series, where we could reject the unit-root only for about 50% of the series. Since non-
stationary interest rates are difficult to conceptualize economically, we attribute these failures to
the weakness of the tests due to the generally small sample size for the regressions. Therefore,
being aware of the problems involved with over-differencing the data, we decided to run the
regressions in levels as laid out above.


C. Estimation and Reporting of Results
        We estimated equations (4a)-(4g) or (5a)-(5c) on a country-by-country basis using GMM.
Standard errors are both heteroskedasticity-consistent and accounting for up to 12
autocorrelation lags in the (monthly) data.
        In addition we estimated two cross-country versions of the model, distinguishing between
“crisis” and “non-crisis” periods. 10 In the absence of an exogenous crisis indicator, we chose to
look at interest rate levels in order to make this distinction. Interest rates generally were higher
during the beginning of the sample in 1989, came down as inflation expectations were reduced
and monetary policy aligned in EMS member countries, and finally shot up sharply starting in
the fall of 1992 with the onset of the various crises. This pattern implies that differentiating

10
  There are two exceptions to using GMM. First, there where not enough data available to include
autocorrelation lags for Italy. Second, the cross-country samples (“crisis” and “no crisis”) were estimated
without autocorrelation lags as well due to the patchy nature of the sample, with crisis and non-crisis
periods alternating throughout the sample.

                                                                 12
between periods simply by picking an interest rate threshold level for identifying crisis periods
would be misleading. We chose a heuristic approach instead, noting that the first (interest rate)
signs of the looming ERM crisis appeared in December of 1991 in Sweden. We took that date as
the dividing line and labeled the period 1989:01 – 1991:11 “no crisis” and the period 1991:12 –
1994:12 “crisis” for all countries, keeping in mind the systemic nature of the crisis as well. The
data were pooled in the two sub-samples, effectively forcing coefficients to be identical across
countries.
       Since the policy variable of interest, drt ≡ rt − rt* , enters the regression quadratically, the

point estimates of the coefficients are difficult to interpret. Therefore in tables 2-11 we report,
for each sample, two blocks of results. The top block of each table shows the estimated
coefficients a and b for the various regressions in (4a)-(4g) and (5a)-(5c), which reflect the
(possibly non-linear) impact of the policy variable on the corresponding component. The bottom
block then focuses on the economic meaning of the point estimates, as we discuss below.
       Since either equations (4a)-(4g) or equations (5a)-(5c) were estimated simultaneously,
the top block also reports some Wald tests of certain cross-equation restrictions. In the last
column of the table we shows tests against the null hypothesis that all the coefficients b in the
regression are equal to zero, in effect testing for the overall non-linearity present in the
regression. It turns out that linearity is rejected throughout, with very few exceptions. For these
two countries, linearity was rejected when looking at the interest rate and ‘risk’ components
separately. At the bottom of the top block, we show tests of the importance of splitting up a
given term component into an interest rate and a ‘risk’ component. For that split, it tests whether
the coefficients a and b are identical across interest rate and “risk” equations. While equality
sometimes cannot be rejected for individual coefficients, especially for the early 2-3 month term,
it is mostly rejected for both coefficients combined, especially when all terms are considered
simultaneously. To summarize, the Wald tests reject both the linearity of the impact of the
policy rate, and the equality of that impact across interest rate versus ‘risk’ components. This
points towards the non-linearities to be expected from a signaling environment, and it suggests
that the distinction between interest rate and ‘risk’ components will yield additional insight.
       In the bottom block of each table, we use the point estimates to calculate the impact of an
increase in the policy rate at different horizons. A negative value implies that increasing the


                                                  13
interest rate reduces the term component, and therefore appreciates S t +1, t . In particular, positive

signaling (for example, with high interest rates signaling strong commitment to defend) would
imply a negative entry in the case of S or di.
        We show, for each estimated equation, the impact of three different size interest rates
increases in the policy interest rate on the dependent variable, taking into account the non-
linearity inherent in the point estimates of a and b – an increase in the policy rate by one
percentage point over the sample mean; an increase by half the difference between the sample
mean and the sample maximum; and, finally, an increase all the way to the sample maximum. In
the latter two cases the change in the dependent variable was divided by the size of the increase
in order to get the effect per percentage point increase, which in turn allows us to compare the
three numbers. The dependent variable is measured as 100 x ln(.), while the policy measure is
expressed in percentage points. Therefore the table entries can be interpreted as elasticities,
giving the percentage change in a S t +1, t component per percentage point increase in the

overnight interest rate differential.
        For any size interest rate increase, the overall effect on exchange rate expectations across
the term (S in the bottom rows) can be decomposed into an interest rate effect di and a ‘risk’
effect P, the first and second rows, as in Table 1 above. By construction, the entry in the S rows
is the sum of the corresponding di and P entries. As can be seen in Table 1, the effect of raising
the overnight interest rate on the one-month-ahead expected exchange rate S t +1, t is the arithmetic

sum of three components – the effect on the interest rate over the twelve-month horizon, the
effect on risk premia over the twelve-month horizon, and the effect of the expected exchange
rate at a horizon of greater than twelve months. We use this below in interpreting the results.
        Looking down the rows for one component in a block, one can identify (and quantify)
non-linearities in the interest rate effect. A perfectly linear relationship (b = 0) would yield
identical entries in each row. By contrast, a concave relationship (where small interest rate
increases already have large effects, but additional increases have little additional effects) would
have the entries decreasing in absolute value as we are going down.
        Looking across the columns for one component in a block, we can examine the term
structure of interest rate effects. The leftmost column represents the nearest term (the next two
months), and the term increases as we move to the right. The far right column (labeled “1


                                                  14
month”) reports the cumulative effect across all terms (corresponding to the far-right cells in
table 1).


D. Interpretation of Results by Country
        In interpreting our results, we focus primarily on the common traits across countries,
where there are some clear patterns in the sample.
        First, and especially striking, for every country in the sample, at almost every horizon
and for almost every size of change in the interest rate, the interest rate effects are significant
with an increase in the overnight interest rate leading to an increase in the interest rate at all
horizons, which in turn strengthens the exchange rate. (Note that this is not just an arithmetic
shifting of the whole term structure, since the columns represent the j-month interest rate from
t+k to t+k+j.) This is consistent with increases in the overnight interest rate signaling an
unobserved characteristic, such as commitment to defend the exchange rate.
        Second, this strengthening of the currency via the interest rate component generally does
not however correspond to a higher one-month-ahead exchange rate forecast S t +1, t , as seen in the

southeast corner of the lower block in each table (the entries under “1 month” for expected
exchange rates). The effect of raising the overnight interest rate on S t +1, t is insignificantly

different from zero for three of the countries in the sample (Denmark, Italy, and Sweden). In
three cases raising overnight rates actually leads to an expected depreciation one month out
(Belgium, France, and Ireland). In only two of the eight countries, Spain and Norway, does
raising the overnight rate lead to an expected strengthening one month out. Even in this case, the
expected appreciation is far less than what the interest rate effect alone would predict.
        The reason that high interest rates do not lead to an expected appreciation in our sample
countries is that the interest rate effect is generally offset by a risk effect (at horizons greater than
one month) of the opposite sign. This phenomenon is observed strongly and very consistently in
four of the eight countries (Denmark, Norway, Spain, and Sweden) and to a lesser/less consistent
degree in Italy and Ireland. It is striking that the interest rate components di and the ‘risk’
components P quite often have significant movements of the about the same size, but in opposite
directions. Interest rate defense therefore seems to increase interest rate expectations and ceteris
paribus appreciate S t +1, t , but this is in general offset by an adverse increase in risk premia.


                                                   15
           The two exceptions to this pattern are Belgium and France, where increases in the
overnight interest rate do not lead to a significant increase in the ‘risk’ term. One possible
explanation is that these countries were argued to be “core” countries in the ERM, and therefore
may have been believed to have had a greater ability to borrow reserves. 11 This would be
consistent with the model in the sense that increases in the policy interest rate would be less
likely to be taken as a sign of low reserves. In both cases, the positive interest rate effect was
offset by a higher expected depreciation at horizons of twelve months or greater as a result of the
increases in the overnight rate, as was also found in Denmark, Ireland, and Italy.
           Both the interest rate and the risk terms are usually stronger in the longer term, thus
revealing important long-term effects for the usually short-term interest rate policy. The joint
occurrence of these two effects leads to a much smaller, more ambiguous effect on the exchange
rate expectations (the S rows) across the horizon. The “average” effect on exchange rate
expectations seems to be a small appreciation (a decrease) in the short term, coupled with a
deterioration in the long-term components, yielding a slightly positive and often insignificant
overall effect, usually on the order of less than 0.05%. The long-term deterioration tends to be
driven both by higher risk premia at the 4-11 month horizon and by a deterioration in the
expected exchange rate 12 months out. The latter could not be decomposed into interest rate and
risk components due to a lack of longer-term exchange rate forecasts, but it may well be driven
by risk premia as well. In other words, it appears that interest rate expectations dominate in the
short run, while ‘risk’ dominates the long run, and the two cancel out much of each other along
the way.
           Finally, regarding non-linearities, it is often the case that – for any of the components S,
di or P – the larger interest rate increases have different effects than the smaller ones. The
direction of that non-linearity, however, varies considerably across countries in the sample.
           Taken as a whole, this pattern suggests that certainly more is going on than the mere
“arithmetic”, opportunity cost-based effects of interest rate defense. We argue that these results
are consistent with a signaling argument. Short-term interest rate policy has strong effects on the
interest rate expectations embedded in long-term interest rates, with the sign of these effects
suggesting that an increase in overnight interest rates is taken as a signal to defend the exchange


11
     We are indebted to Richard Portes for pointing this out.

                                                      16
rate over a longer horizon. Moreover, these effects are often non-linear in nature. These
findings point towards information effects triggered by interest rate policy. Note here that the
signaling hypothesis would support both concavities (larger increases have smaller relative
effects) and convexities. Concavities could arise when the mere “activation” of interest rate
policy, even only a mild increase, signals the general preparedness of the government to use
monetary policy in defense of the exchange rate. Convex relationships, by contrast, could arise
when only unusually or unexpectedly high, “extreme” interest rates signal news about the policy.
The evidence gives more support to the former, whereby the (informational) effect of interest
rate increases is largely captured by small changes.
       An alternative argument for non-linear effects is that suggested by Lahiri and Végh
(2001). They stress the interaction between the direct effect of higher interest rates on demand
for domestic currency and the effect on government finances – higher interest rates worsen the
fiscal position and induce the expectation of greater future monetization. The first effect
strengthens the domestic currency, while the second weakens it. In their set-up, they find that
the first effect dominates for small increases in the interest rate, while the second dominates for
large increases. The effects differ over the horizon, with the first effect being stronger in the
short-term, the second in the long-term.
       It is also interesting to note that risk premia react as well, and almost as strongly, to
interest rate policy. This could be associated with the Sachs-Stiglitz argument, grounded in the
adverse effects of high interest rates on the domestic banking sector, and increasing default risk
premia accordingly. However, it might also be associated with a “negative” signaling story along
the lines of high policy interest rates signaling low reserves (or the lack of alternatives to an
interest rate defense). In that case, the peg may appear weaker than previously thought, which
would increase currency risk premia.


E. Some Additional Results
       The trends borne out by the country-specific regressions are mainly driven by the “crisis”
sub-sample. As shown in table 10, interest rate defense increases interest rate expectations (thus
supporting the exchange rate ceteris paribus), but deteriorates mid-term risk premia as well as
long-term (that is, 12+ months) exchange rate expectations. Interest rate defense comes out as
ineffective overall, as the net effect is a partially significant deterioration of the one-month ahead

                                                  17
exchange rate expectation. The ”no crisis” sub-sample (table 11), by contrast, bears out a
conventional (beneficial) response, albeit a weak one.
       Comparing the two sub-samples more closely, it is interesting to note that the difference
in terms of the overall effect varies across time. Compare the bottom three rows of tables 10 and
11. Overall, it appears that during non-crisis periods tight monetary policy deteriorates the
short- to medium part of exchange rate expectations, but instills long-term confidence enough so
that the overall effect is mildly supportive of the exchange rate. Crisis-periods, by contrast, have
the opposite pattern. Interest rate defense shores up short- to medium term expectations, but
deteriorates mid- to long term expectations due to its effect on risk premia, with the net effect
being adverse.
       A possible interpretation is that during non-crisis periods tight monetary policy may
signal both negative fundamentals and a willingness to defend the exchange rate. A contraction
in a seemingly “calm” environment may be perceived as a sign of imminent trouble, thus
deteriorating short- to medium term expectations, while longer-term expectations are improved
in light of the policymaker’s demonstrated resolve to support the exchange rate. In crisis periods,
by contrast, the current negative fundamentals are well established and known. High interest
rates are perceived as an effective short-to medium treatment of the symptoms, and stabilize
exchange rate expectations accordingly. From a long-term perspective, however, the perceived
new degree of vulnerability of the system, inferred from the government’s demonstrated concern
and resolve to intervene, more than outweighs the increased confidence in its ability to deal with
future episodes, which seem sure to come. In summary: during calm episodes, tight monetary
policy signals short-term frictions and long-term health. During crisis episodes, it relieves pain
effectively in the short-term, but emphasizes the long-term severity of the condition.
       Another possible split of the data is into EMS and non-EMS countries to see if EMS
membership per se made a difference. Since this would have amounted to merely grouping
Norway and Sweden in one group and all other countries in another, we opted against such a
“split”. However, simply examining the country results with EMS membership in mind is
instructive. Most importantly, all of the countries that had clearly adverse interest rate defense
results were EMS countries (Belgium, France, and Ireland). By contrast, Norway (non-EMS)
was one of only two countries with a clearly beneficial overall effect. Sweden, the other non-
EMS country, was ambiguous overall, as were Italy and Denmark in the EMS, and Spain was the

                                                 18
only EMS country with a clearly effective interest rate defense. So in the most general sense,
there might be an indication here that non-EMS countries did better than EMS countries 12 .
        A possible interpretation is that the systemic ties within the EMS may actually have made
the crisis worse for a number of reasons. For example, the EMS’s official correction mechanism
relied heavily on interventions by the strong-currency country (essentially Germany) to support
the currencies coming under attack, either through direct intervention or by extending credit to
countries under pressure. But Germany, still working out the enormous monetary consequences
of German reunification, was unable and/or unwilling to engage in such large-scale intervention
due to its impact on domestic price stability. It argued for a re-alignment instead, which was
initially rejected by other EMS members 13 . To the degree that EMS countries under attack
resorted to interest rate defense, they were effectively signaling that there was little to be
expected in terms of interventions by Germany, which was contrary to how the EMS was
supposed to work – in other words, a strong negative signal. The non-EMS countries Sweden
and Norway, by contrast, had no such expectations to begin with, so the fact that they resorted to
an interest rate defense carried less of a “disappointment” with it.
        Finally, there is a question as to the role of capital controls during the crisis. We know,
for example that Spain and Ireland officially instituted some capital controls during the
September – November, 1992, period. In addition there is some indication from, e.g., offshore-
onshore interest differentials that France imposed implicit controls – but the timing and extent of
that policy is difficult to pin down. Overall there are not enough clear, well-documented capital
controls episodes to account explicitly for this factor in our estimations 14 .


4. Conclusions

12
   Note however that the interest rate defense in Norway was the weakest in the sample. The average
differential to Germany was actually a negative 1.9%, and Norway’s maximum differential in the sample
is only 1.2%.
13
   See Buiter et al. (1998) for a detailed discussion of the macroeconomic backdrop leading up to the 1992
crisis, as well as anecdotes showing the rift between Germany and other EMS members at high-level
crisis summits such as the Euromeeting in Bath of September 5/6, 1992.
14
   We tried inserting a capital controls dummy in the regressions for Spain. The dummy effectively
reduced interest rate expectations (capital controls being a substitute) and increased risk premia (possibly
because of the associated liquidity issues for, e.g., international speculators), with an adverse but
insignificant net effect overall. We hesitate to make too much of these results, and do not report them,
since the dummy is likely endogenous to the amount of pressure on the peseta and might just as well


                                                    19
        In this paper we have considered both why high interest may be effective in deterring
speculation against a currency and how one may empirically test the effectiveness of the interest
rate defense. We have fleshed out one explanation for the effectiveness of high interest rates in
deterring speculation, namely that high interest rates serve as a signal of the government’s
willingness or ability to defend the exchange rate. We also presented several types of
econometric evidence consistent with the signaling approach.
        Our key empirical findings are as follows. First, the effects of changes in overnight
interest rates are clearly non-linear, often significantly so, and these effects may be either
concave or convex. This is in contrast to the simple “arithmetic” argument for the effect of
raising interest rates, but consistent with the signaling explanation (as well as some other
explanations). Second, there is little or no clear statistically significant effect of raising interest
rates on next month’s expected exchange rate S t +1 , t . (Belgium, France, and Ireland show some

evidence of an adverse effect.) However, this masks significant effects on different components
of S t +1 , t and at different horizons. Certain regularities are observed across countries. There are

effects at longer horizons, in contrast to what the simple arithmetic argument would imply.
More specifically, there is some evidence of a positive (i.e., appreciating the exchange rate)
short-term effect, coupled with a negative longer-term effect, at horizons of 12 months or longer.
In terms of the three determinants of next month’s expected exchange rate S t +1 , t listed in table 1

(interest rates and risk premia at horizons up to twelve months, and the twelve-month-ahead
exchange rate forecast), an increase in overnight interest rates often induces an increase in the n-
month ahead rate relative to the k-month ahead rate (n > k), thus implying an appreciation of
S t +1 , t , but also an increase in risk premia and S t +12 , t , the twelve-month-ahead exchange rate

forecast, implying a depreciation.
        We argued that these results are consistent with the signaling hypothesis. First, the
existence of longer term, non-linear effects by itself suggests that something more than the
arithmetic effect is at work. The sign of short-term interest rate policy on interest rate
expectations suggests that interest rate increases are taken as a sign of commitment to defend.
The deterioration over longer horizons may indicate that weak fundamental are being signaled.
As indicated, some of the results are also supportive of other models. Perhaps the most

simply capture the high point of the first crisis wave (starting in September 1992).

                                                     20
important conclusion that tests looking at the effect of high interest rates on “summary
measures” like the outcome of an attack are inconclusive due to offsetting effects, which become
clear when one disaggregates the effects of raising interest rates across different time horizons
and across different determinants of short-term expected exchange rates.




                                                21
References

Buiter, W., Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti (1998), “Interpreting the ERM Crisis: Country-
        Specific and Systemic Issues”, Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 84

Dekle, R., C. Hsiao, and S. Wang (2001), “Interest Rate Stabilization of Exchange Rates
       and Contagion in the East Asian Countries,” in Glick, Moreno, and Spiegel, eds.
       Financial Crisis in Emerging Markets, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
       Press.

Drazen, A. (2000), “Interest Rate and Borrowing Defense Against Speculative Attack,”
      Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 53, 303-48.

_______ (2003) “Interest Rate Defense Against Speculative Attack as a Signal: A
      Primer,” in M. Dooley and J. Frankel (eds.), Managing Currency Crises in
      Emerging Markets, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Drazen, A and P. Masson (1994), “Credibility of Policies versus Credibility of
      Policymakers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 735-54.

Furman, J. and J. Stiglitz (1998), “Economic Crisis: Evidence and Insights from East
      Asia,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1998, 1-114.

Goldfajn, I. and P. Gupta (1999), “Does Monetary Policy Stabilize the Exchange Rate
      Following a Currency Crisis? Puc-Rio, Working Paper No 396.

Hubrich, S. (2001), Interest Rate Defense Against Speculative Currency Attacks, Ph.D.
      Dissertation, University of Maryland.

Kraay, A. (2003), “Do High Interest Rates Defend Currencies During Speculative
       Attacks?,” Journal of International Economics 59, 297-321.

Lahiri, A. and C. Végh (2003), “Delaying the Inevitable: Interest Rate Defense and
        Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of Political Economy 111, 404-424.

_______ (2001) “On the Non-Monotonic Relationship Between Interest Rates and the
      Exchange Rate,” working paper.

Radelet, S. and J. Sachs (1998), “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies,
       Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1998, 1-74.




                                               22
                                                                         TABLE 2
                                                   Term Structure Regressions                                                                BELGIUM
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                         4-5 months                       6-11 months                        12+ months
                             a            b                   a                b               a                 b                a                b                  Nonlinear


            Sj,k           -0.086         0.073 *          -0.779 ***     0.2339 **        -0.3184 **       0.0401            1.266 *** -0.2664 ***              S:   ***

            dij,k         -0.1478 ***     0.0196 *** -0.2165 ***          0.0476 *** -0.2817 ***            0.0555 **                                           di: ***
                                                                                                                                                           di and P: ***
            Pk,j           0.0618         0.0534           -0.5626        0.1863           -0.0367         -0.0155                                               P:   -

 Equality across di, P           a: -          b: -              a: -              b: -           a: -               b: -                      Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: -                         a, b: -                          a, b: -

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                        6-11 months 12+ months         1 month

    dij,k                 0.752                    0.852                              -0.0987 ***     -0.0973 ***       -0.1426 **                     -0.3386 ***
                                                   2.500                              -0.0841 ***     -0.0616 ***       -0.1011                        -0.2468 ***
                                                   4.429                              -0.0499 **      0.0216            -0.0040                        -0.0322

    Pk,j                  0.752                    0.852                              0.1955          -0.0961           -0.0754                        0.0240
                                                   2.500                              0.2355          0.0433            -0.0870                        0.1918
                                                   4.429                              0.3289          0.3690            -0.1141                        0.5838

    Sj,k                  0.752                    0.852                              0.0968          -0.1934 *         -0.2181 **       0.5991 ***    0.2844 ***
                                                   2.500                              0.1514          -0.0183           -0.1881 **       0.3998 ***    0.3447 ***
                                                   4.429                              0.2790          0.3906            -0.1181          -0.0660       0.4856 ***

> Monthly data, sample period:                  89:1-94:12
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                    23
                                                                         TABLE 3
                                                   Term Structure Regressions                                                             FRANCE
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                        4-5 months                      6-11 months                       12+ months
                             a            b                  a                b              a                 b               a                b                    Nonlinear


            Sj,k          -0.5980 ***     0.1137 **        -0.9830 ***   0.2075 *** -0.4411 ***           0.0407            2.048 *** -0.3581 ***               S:   ***

            dij,k         -0.1917 ***     0.0191           -0.2446 ***   0.0275 **         -0.5421 ***    0.0833 ***                                          di: ***
                                                                                                                                                         di and P: ***
            Pk,j          -0.4063 ***     0.0946 **        -0.7384 ***   0.1799 ***        0.1010         -0.0427                                               P:   ***

 Equality across di, P           a: -          b: *              a: **            b: ***         a: ***            b: ***                   Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: -                         a, b: **                        a, b: ***

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                     6-11 months 12+ months         1 month

    dij,k                 1.211                    2.211                            -0.1262 ***     -0.1504 ***      -0.2569 ***                    -0.5335 ***
                                                   2.411                            -0.1224 ***     -0.1448 ***      -0.2403 ***                    -0.5075 ***
                                                   3.611                            -0.0995 ***     -0.1118 ***      -0.1403 **                     -0.3516 ***

    Pk,j                  1.211                    2.211                            -0.0826 **      -0.1227 *        -0.0451                        -0.2503 *
                                                   2.411                            -0.0637         -0.0867          -0.0536                        -0.2040
                                                   3.611                            0.0498          0.1292           -0.1048                        0.0742

    Sj,k                  1.211                    2.211                            -0.2088 ***     -0.2730 ***      -0.3020 ***      0.8225 ***    0.0386
                                                   2.411                            -0.1861 ***     -0.2316 ***      -0.2939 ***      0.7509 ***    0.0394 **
                                                   3.611                            -0.0496         0.0174           -0.2451 *        0.3213        0.0439 *

> Monthly data, sample period:                  89:1-94:12
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                  24
                                                                          TABLE 4
                                                   Term Structure Regressions                                                             ITALY
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                        4-5 months                       6-11 months                      12+ months
                             a            b                  a                b               a                 b             a                 b                   Nonlinear


            Sj,k           0.1669        -0.0407           -0.3037 ***    0.0318 ***       -1.523 ***      0.1639 ***        1.921 *       -0.1853             S:   ***

            dij,k          0.0040        -0.0151 **        0.2190         -0.0462 **       0.5436 **      -0.0954 ***                                         di: ***
                                                                                                                                                         di and P: ***
            Pk,j           0.1629        -0.0256           -0.5227 **     0.0779 ***       -2.066 *        0.2593 **                                           P:   ***

 Equality across di, P           a: -          b: -              a: **            b: ***         a: **              b: ***                  Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: -                         a, b: ***                       a, b: ***

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                      6-11 months 12+ months         1 month

    dij,k                 3.365                    4.365                            -0.1126 ***      -0.1380 ***      -0.1942 ***                    -0.4448 ***
                                                   4.973                            -0.1218 ***      -0.1661 ***      -0.2522 ***                    -0.5401 ***
                                                   6.581                            -0.1461 ***      -0.2404 ***      -0.4057 ***                    -0.7921 ***

    Pk,j                  3.365                    4.365                            -0.0347          0.0798 *         -0.0616                        -0.0165
                                                   4.973                            -0.0502          0.1272 **        0.0961                         0.1730
                                                   6.581                            -0.0913          0.2525 ***       0.5131 ***                     0.6741 ***

    Sj,k                  3.365                    4.365                            -0.1473 **       -0.0582 ***      -0.2558 **      0.4880 ***     0.0267
                                                   4.973                            -0.1720 ***      -0.0389 ***      -0.1562 *       0.3754 ***     0.0083
                                                   6.581                            -0.2374 ***      0.0122           0.1074 **       0.0773         -0.0405

> Monthly data, sample period:                   90:5-92:8
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                   25
                                                                        TABLE 5
                                                  Term Structure Regressions                                                              DENMARK
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                       4-5 months                       6-11 months                       12+ months
                             a            b                 a                b              a                  b              a                 b                   Nonlinear


            Sj,k          -0.1625 **      0.0125 **     -0.2531 ***     0.0204 *** -0.1311 **             0.0118 **        0.5854 *** -0.0474 ***              S:   ***

            dij,k         -0.1212 ***     0.0037 **     -0.1535 ***     0.0087 *** -0.2308 ***            0.0116 *                                           di: ***
                                                                                                                                                        di and P: ***
            Pk,j          -0.0413         0.0088 *      -0.0996 **      0.0116 ***       0.0996           0.0003                                               P:   **

 Equality across di, P           a: -          b: -            a: -              b: -          a: ***              b: -                     Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: ***                     a, b: ***                       a, b: ***

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                      6-11 months 12+ months        1 month

    dij,k                 2.209                   3.209                             -0.1011 ***     -0.1061 ***       -0.1681 ***                   -0.3754 ***
                                                  7.833                             -0.0840 ***     -0.0657 ***       -0.1146 ***                   -0.2644 ***
                                                  13.457                            -0.0632 ***     -0.0166           -0.0496 *                     -0.1293 *

    Pk,j                  2.209                   3.209                             0.0064          -0.0366           0.1012 **                     0.0709
                                                  7.833                             0.0470 **       0.0171 *          0.1025 ***                    0.1666 ***
                                                  13.457                            0.0965 ***      0.0824 ***        0.1041 ***                    0.2829 ***

    Sj,k                  2.209                   3.209                             -0.0948 **      -0.1428 ***       -0.0669 *       0.3283 ***    0.0239
                                                  7.833                             -0.0370 **      -0.0487 ***       -0.0121         0.1090 ***    0.0112 *
                                                  13.457                            0.0333 *        0.0658 ***        0.0545 **       -0.1578 **    -0.0042

> Monthly data, sample period:                  89:1-94:12
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                  26
                                                                        TABLE 6
                                                   Term Structure Regressions                                                            SWEDEN
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                       4-5 months                       6-11 months                      12+ months
                             a            b                 a                b               a                 b              a                b                  Nonlinear


            Sj,k          -0.1247 ***     0.0050 *** -0.0438            0.0011            -0.1276         0.0054 *          0.2699 *      -0.0095 **         S:   ***

            dij,k         -0.1421 ***     0.0046 *** -0.1843 ***        0.0048 *** -0.4119 ***            0.0120 ***                                        di: ***
                                                                                                                                                       di and P: ***
            Pk,j           0.0174         0.0004         0.1405 *** -0.0037 ***           0.2843 *** -0.0066 ***                                             P:   ***

 Equality across di, P           a: ***        b: ***          a: ***            b: ***         a: ***             b: ***                  Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: ***                     a, b: ***                        a, b: ***

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                     6-11 months 12+ months        1 month

    dij,k                 4.600                    5.600                           -0.0952 ***      -0.1358 ***      -0.2898 ***                   -0.5208 ***
                                                   17.207                          -0.0419 ***      -0.0806 ***      -0.1509 ***                   -0.2734 ***
                                                   29.813                          0.0161 ***       -0.0207 ***      0.0002                        -0.0046

    Pk,j                  4.600                    5.600                           0.0219           0.1027 ***       0.2171 ***                    0.3417 ***
                                                   17.207                          0.0270 **        0.0598 ***       0.1406 ***                    0.2273 ***
                                                   29.813                          0.0326 ***       0.0131 ***       0.0575 ***                    0.1031 ***

    Sj,k                  4.600                    5.600                           -0.0733 **       -0.0331 *        -0.0727         0.1728 *      -0.0064
                                                   17.207                          -0.0148          -0.0209 **       -0.0103         0.0622        0.0162
                                                   29.813                          0.0487 ***       -0.0076          0.0575 ***      -0.0579 ***   0.0406 ***

> Monthly data, sample period:                  89:4-92:10
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                  27
                                                                       TABLE 7
                                                   Term Structure Regressions                                                            NORWAY
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                       4-5 months                       6-11 months                      12+ months
                             a            b                 a                b               a                 b              a                b                  Nonlinear


            Sj,k          -0.0786         0.0388         0.2742         0.0692          0.5372 ***        0.1382 ***        -1.230 *** -0.3366 ***           S:   ***

            dij,k         -0.1927 *** -0.0120 **        -0.3143 *** -0.0295 **          -0.7314 **       -0.0910 **                                         di:
                                                                                                                                                       di and P: ***
            Pk,j           0.1141         0.0509         0.5885 *       0.0987           1.269 ***        0.2291 ***                                         P:   ***

 Equality across di, P           a: ***        b: **           a: **             b: *           a: ***             b: ***                  Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: ***                     a, b: -                          a, b: ***

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                     6-11 months 12+ months        1 month

    dij,k                 -1.934                   -0.934                          -0.1582 ***      -0.2298 ***      -0.4706 ***                   -0.8585 ***
                                                   -0.370                          -0.1650 ***      -0.2464 ***      -0.5218 ***                   -0.9332 ***
                                                   1.193                           -0.1838 ***      -0.2925 ***      -0.6641 ***                   -1.140 ***

    Pk,j                  -1.934                   -0.934                          -0.0319          0.3055           0.6114 ***                    0.8851 ***
                                                   -0.370                          -0.0032          0.3612           0.7406 ***                    1.099 ***
                                                   1.193                           0.0764           0.5154 *         1.099 ***                     1.691 ***

    Sj,k                  -1.934                   -0.934                          -0.1900          0.0758           0.1409          -0.2643       -0.2377 ***
                                                   -0.370                          -0.1681          0.1148           0.2188 **       -0.4541 ***   -0.2886 ***
                                                   1.193                           -0.1074          0.2230           0.4349 ***      -0.9805 ***   -0.4300 ***

> Monthly data, sample period:                  89:1-92:10
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                  28
                                                                         TABLE 8
                                                    Term Structure Regressions                                                           IRELAND
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                        4-5 months                      6-11 months                      12+ months
                             a            b                  a                b              a                 b              a                b                  Nonlinear


            Sj,k          -0.0902         -0.0054        0.0230          -0.0029           -0.0727 *      0.0055 **         0.3346 **     0.0029             S:   **

            dij,k         -0.1897 ***     0.0113 *** -0.1450 ***         0.0042 *** -0.5150 ***           0.0226 ***                                        di: ***
                                                                                                                                                       di and P: ***
            Pk,j           0.0994         -0.0166 ***    0.1680 *** -0.0071 ***            0.4423 *** -0.0171 ***                                            P:   ***

 Equality across di, P           a: ***        b: ***           a: ***            b: ***         a: ***            b: ***                  Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: ***                      a, b: ***                        a, b: ***

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                     6-11 months 12+ months        1 month

    dij,k                 1.741                     2.741                           -0.1391 ***     -0.1263 ***      -0.4135 ***                   -0.6790 ***
                                                    10.111                          -0.0560 ***     -0.0956 ***      -0.2466 ***                   -0.3982 ***
                                                    18.481                          0.0384 ***      -0.0607 ***      -0.0571 ***                   -0.0794 ***

    Pk,j                  1.741                     2.741                           0.0249          0.1364 ***       0.3656 ***                    0.5269 ***
                                                    10.111                          -0.0978 ***     0.0844 ***       0.2395 ***                    0.2261 ***
                                                    18.481                          -0.2371 ***     0.0254 ***       0.0962 ***                    -0.1154 ***

    Sj,k                  1.741                     2.741                           -0.1143 ***     0.0101           -0.0479 *       0.3478 ***    0.1957 ***
                                                    10.111                          -0.1538 ***     -0.0112          -0.0072         0.3695 ***    0.1974 ***
                                                    18.481                          -0.1986 ***     -0.0353 ***      0.0391 ***      0.3942 ***    0.1994 ***

> Monthly data, sample period:                  91:6-94:12
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                  29
                                                                         TABLE 9
                                                   Term Structure Regressions                                                               SPAIN
Estimated Coefficients
                          Horizon
  Dependent Variable           2-3 months                        4-5 months                      6-11 months                        12+ months
                             a            b                  a                b              a                 b                a                b                  Nonlinear


            Sj,k          -0.4656         0.0375           -1.111 ***    0.1108 *** -0.0971                 0.0082          1.960 **        -0.1873 **         S:   ***

            dij,k         -0.0542         -0.0081 *        0.0134        -0.0204 *** -0.1940                -0.0185                                           di: ***
                                                                                                                                                         di and P: ***
            Pk,j          -0.4114         0.0456           -1.125 ***    0.1312 ***        0.0969           0.0266                                             P:   ***

 Equality across di, P           a: -          b: *             a: ***            b: ***           a: -            b: -                      Overall di, P Equality: ***
                              a, b: ***                      a, b: ***                          a, b: ***

Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                   Horizon
  Dependent Variable        Mean Interest Rate       Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                      6-11 months 12+ months         1 month

    dij,k                 4.954                    5.954                            -0.1422 ***      -0.2088 ***      -0.3957 ***                    -0.7467 ***
                                                   6.781                            -0.1489 ***      -0.2256 ***      -0.4110 ***                    -0.7855 ***
                                                   8.608                            -0.1636 ***      -0.2628 ***      -0.4447 ***                    -0.8712 ***

    Pk,j                  4.954                    5.954                            0.0860 ***       0.3061 ***       0.3875 ***                     0.7797 ***
                                                   6.781                            0.1237 ***       0.4145 ***       0.4096 ***                     0.9478 ***
                                                   8.608                            0.2070 **        0.6541 ***       0.4582 ***                     1.319 ***

    Sj,k                  4.954                    5.954                            -0.0562 *        0.0973 **        -0.0082          -0.0831       -0.0501 **
                                                   6.781                            -0.0252          0.1889 ***       -0.0014          -0.2379       -0.0756 ***
                                                   8.608                            0.0434           0.3913 ***       0.0135           -0.5800 **    -0.1319 ***

> Monthly data, sample period:                  89:1-94:12
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be interpreted in
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).

                                                                                                  30
                                                                       TABLE 10
                                                   Term Structure Regressions                                                        CRISIS
Estimated Coefficients
                         Horizon
 Dependent Variable           2-3 months                        4-5 months                      6-11 months                   12+ months
                            a            b                  a                b              a                 b           a                b


            Sj,k          -0.0968 **     0.0025         -0.0015         -0.0010        -0.0329          0.1752 **      0.2071 **      -0.0030

            dij,k         -0.1246 ***    0.0047 *** -0.1583 ***         0.0042 *** -0.3233 ***          0.0099 ***

            Pk,j          0.0278         -0.0022        0.1567 *** -0.0053 ***         0.2904 *** -0.0082 ***




Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                  Horizon
  Dependent Variable       Mean Interest Rate        Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                  6-11 months 12+ months        1 month

    dij,k                1.851                     2.851                          -0.1026 ***      -0.1385 ***    -0.2767 ***                   -0.5177 ***
                                                   15.832                         -0.0417 ***      -0.0838 ***    -0.1481 ***                   -0.2736 ***
                                                   29.813                         0.0239           -0.0249 **     0.0096                        -0.0106

    Pk,j                 1.851                     2.851                          0.0173           0.1320 ***     0.2520 ***                    0.4013 ***
                                                   15.832                         -0.0117          0.0637 ***     0.1461 ***                    0.1981 ***
                                                   29.813                         -0.0429          -0.0099        0.0321                        -0.0207

    Sj,k                 1.851                     2.851                          -0.0852 **       -0.0065        -0.0247        0.1929 **      0.0746 **
                                                   15.832                         -0.0534          -0.0201 ***    -0.0020        0.1536 **      0.0782 **
                                                   29.813                         -0.0191          -0.0347 ***    0.0225 ***     0.1113         0.0800 *

> Monthly data, sample period:            89:1-94:12 or less (varies by country)
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).


                                                                                                 31
                                                                        TABLE 11
                                                  Term Structure Regressions                                                           NO CRISIS
Estimated Coefficients
                         Horizon
 Dependent Variable           2-3 months                        4-5 months                     6-11 months                      12+ months
                            a            b                  a                b             a                 b              a                b


            Sj,k           -0.531 *      0.0063           -0.1075 **    0.0265 *** -0.0783 **          0.0154 ***     0.2754 **         -0.0561 ***

            dij,k         -0.1497 ***    0.0002           -0.2208 ***   0.0005        -0.4380 ***      0.0004

            Pk,j          0.0966 ***     0.0061           0.1133 *      0.0260 **     0.3597 ***       0.0158 **




Economic Impact on Exchange Rate Epectations
(increase in dependent variable implied by increase in policy interest rate, divided by size of increase)
                                                                                  Horizon
  Dependent Variable       Mean Interest Rate        Changed Interest Rate 2-3 months 4-5 months                 6-11 months 12+ months          1 month

    dij,k                2.307                    3.307                          -0.1488 ***      -0.2182 ***    -0.4405 ***                     -0.8075 ***
                                                  5.457                          -0.1484 ***      -0.2171 ***    -0.4415 ***                     -0.8070 ***
                                                  8.608                          -0.1479 ***      -0.2156 ***    -0.4429 ***                     -0.8064 ***

    Pk,j                 2.307                    3.307                          0.1311 ***       0.2594 ***     0.4484 ***                      0.8389 ***
                                                  5.457                          0.1443 ***       0.3154 ***     0.4824 ***                      0.9420 ***
                                                  8.608                          0.1636 ***       0.3973 ***     0.5322 ***                      1.0930 ***

    Sj,k                 2.307                    3.307                          -0.0177          0.0413         0.0079            -0.0398       -0.0084
                                                  5.457                          -0.0041          0.0982 **      0.0409            -0.1606 *     -0.0256 *
                                                  8.608                          0.0157           0.1817 **      0.0893 *          -0.3375 ***   -0.0507 **

> Monthly data, sample period:            89:1-94:12 or less (varies by country)
> Dependent variables are expressed as 100xln(.) and main regressor (overnight money market rate differential) is expressed in percentage points, so results can be
terms of percentage devaluations in response to percentage point changes in policy variable.
> Regressions also include current exchange rate as well as a constant term (not reported).
> *, ** and *** stand for significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively (based on heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent standard errors).


                                                                                                32
