                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              RESERVATION WAGES AND UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE

                                            Robert Shimer
                                            Ivan Werning

                                        Working Paper 12618
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12618


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Robert Shimer and Ivan Werning. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Reservation Wages and Unemployment Insurance
Robert Shimer and Ivan Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 12618
October 2006
JEL No. J6

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper argues that a risk-averse worker's after-tax reservation wage encodes all the relevant information
about her welfare. This insight leads to a novel test for the optimality of unemployment insurance
based on the responsiveness of reservation wages to unemployment benefits. Some existing estimates
imply significant gains to raising the current level of unemployment benefits in the United States,
but highlight the need for more research on the determinants of reservation wages. Our approach complements
those based on Baily's (1978) test.

Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu

Ivan Werning
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E51-251a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu
1       Introduction
The goal of this paper is to develop a test for the optimal level of unemployment insurance
using a minimal amount of economic theory and a minimal amount of data. We approach this
by studying a risk-averse worker in a sequential job search setting (McCall, 1970). Our main
theoretical insight is that the worker’s after-tax reservation wage—the difference between
her reservation wage and the tax needed to fund the unemployment insurance system—
encodes all of the relevant information about her welfare. This is true regardless of whether
workers are able to borrow and lend to smooth their consumption, or whether they must
live hand-to-mouth.
    Intuitively, the after-tax reservation wage tells us the take-home pay required to make
a worker indifferent between working and remaining unemployed. Since take-home pay
translates directly into consumption, it is a valid measure of the worker’s utility. Given
the simplicity of the argument, it should not be surprising that this insight turns out to be
robust to many variations of our basic model.
    To prove this result, we develop a formal dynamic model of job search with risk-aversion.
Workers draw wages from a known distribution and accepted jobs last for a fixed amount
of time. In order to abstract from wealth effects, we assume workers have constant absolute
risk aversion (CARA) preferences.1 We first consider how workers behave when confronted
with an arbitrary level of unemployment benefits and reemployment taxes. We find that a
worker’s utility while unemployed is a monotone function of her after-tax reservation wage.
If she has no access to capital markets, her unemployment utility, measured in consumption
equivalent units, is equal to her after-tax reservation wage. If she can borrow and lend, it
is equal to her after-tax reservation wage plus the annuity value of her assets. This implies
that optimal unemployment insurance—the policy of an agency that chooses actuarially
fair unemployment benefits and reemployment taxes to maximize an unemployed worker’s
utility—simply seeks to maximize the worker’s after tax reservation wage.
    This insight leads to a novel test for the optimality of unemployment insurance: raising
benefits is desirable whenever it raises the after-tax reservation wage. This criteria can be
decomposed into two effects. On the one hand, higher benefits reduce the cost of remaining
unemployed and therefore raise the pre-tax reservation wage. Thus, if the pre-tax reservation
    1
    In Shimer and Werning (2005), we show that the behavior and insurance needs of a worker with constant
relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences is similar to that of a worker with the same absolute risk aversion
and CARA preferences. Thus one might interpret the results we report here as an approximation for other
preferences.



                                                     1
wage is very responsive to unemployment benefits, raising unemployment benefits has a
strong positive effect on workers’ welfare. However, the increase in benefits must be funded
by an increase in the employment tax. The higher is the unemployment rate or the more
responsive it is to unemployment benefits, the greater is the needed increase in the tax. Our
optimality condition nets out both effects.
    While a large literature studies the responsiveness of unemployment or unemployment du-
ration to unemployment benefits (e.g., Meyer, 1990), there is less research on the responsive-
ness of reservation wages to benefits. Exceptions include Fishe (1982) and Feldstein and Poterba
(1984). Fishe (1982) uses information on actual wages to infer reservation wages, while
Feldstein and Poterba (1984) uses direct survey evidence on reservation wages. Both papers
find that a $1 increase in benefits may raise pre-tax reservation wages by as much as $0.44.
Feldstein and Poterba (1984) interpret this as evidence of the moral-hazard cost of raising
unemployment benefits, but our approach turns this logic around, since our theory tells us
that the reservation wage measures the welfare of unemployed workers.
    If the numbers in Fishe (1982) and Feldstein and Poterba (1984) are correct, we show
that the marginal effect of a fully-funded increase in unemployment benefits is large. Of
course, these estimates are at best valid for small policy changes; according to the model,
sufficiently high unemployment benefits would eventually eliminate all economic activity.
Moreover, more recent estimates of the responsiveness of reservation wages to benefits are
smaller and imply that current benefit levels are too high. In our view, the uncertainty
around this critical variable calls for more precise estimates of it, but doing so goes beyond
the scope of this paper.
    Within the public finance literature, the standard approach to measuring optimal unem-
ployment insurance is based on the Baily (1978) test:

     “The optimal unemployment insurance benefit level is set when the proportional
     drop in consumption resulting from unemployment, times the degree of relative
     risk aversion of workers (evaluated at the level of consumption when unemployed)
     is equal to the elasticity of the duration of unemployment with respect to balanced
     budget increases in UI [unemployment insurance] benefits and taxes.” (p. 390)

While this approach is close in spirit to the one we adopt here, we see several advantages
to our test. First, our test is entirely behavioral, while the Baily test requires independent
estimates of risk-aversion. Indeed, Chetty (2006) argues within a Baily framework that the
relevant risk-aversion parameter depends on the context and may be higher for unemploy-


                                              2
ment risk. In light of such concerns, the fact that our test does not requires selecting this,
or any other, parameter is particularly convenient.
    Second, Chetty (2006) shows that in a dynamic environment, the Baily test requires a
long panel data set with information on total consumption. Unfortunately, no such data set
exists, so the best known implementation of the Baily test, Gruber (1997), uses panel data
on food expenditure. There are two main limitations to using food expenditure as a proxy
for total consumption: recent work by Aguiar and Hurst (2005) shows that the link between
food expenditure and food consumption is tenuous because of varying amounts of time spent
in household production; and food consumption is likely to react significantly less than total
consumption to income or wealth shocks.2
    Third, our exact test is robust to a number of extensions. In Section 6, we allow for the
possibility that jobs differ both in their wage and in their average duration, that the duration
of a job is stochastic, that an unemployed worker’s search effort affects the arrival rate of
offers, that workers are heterogeneous but there is a single unemployment benefit system, that
unemployed workers may be recalled to their previous job, and that unemployed workers are
eligible for benefits for only a finite amount of time. None of these extensions affects our basic
conclusion that the after-tax reservation wage measures the welfare of the unemployed and
therefore none substantially alters our behavioral test for optimal unemployment insurance.
    In contrast, although Chetty (2006) shows that extensions of the consumption-based
Baily test are possible, in our view they may be difficult to implement because they require
an empirically challenging comparison of the average marginal utility of consumption during
employment with that during unemployment over the worker’s entire lifetime—a moment of
consumption data not analyzed by Gruber (1997), for example.3 Nevertheless, our model
can also deliver easily implementable consumption-based tests, but we point out that their
derivation uses the full structure of the model, is less robust than the new test we propose
here, and requires unexplored consumption measures from panel data.
    As mentioned above, one challenge to implementing our behavioral test is that empirical
evidence on reservation wages is scarce. Our hope is that this paper, by underscoring its
usefulness as a welfare statistic, may lead to greater interest in reservation wage evidence,
   2
      Indeed, Chetty (2006) extends the consumption test so that it applies to food consumption. Unfortu-
nately, the test then requires setting a parameter for the curvature of the utility function with respect to
food, instead of risk aversion.
    3
      The Borch-Arrow condition for perfect insurance states that marginal utility should be equalized across
all states of nature. Absent full insurance, this condition fails and Chetty’s (2006) comparison provides a
metric for the extent of this failure.



                                                     3
much as Baily’s (1978) theoretical contribution led to empirical research on how much con-
sumption declines when workers lose their job. Ultimately, the two tests are complementary.
Both assess the optimality of unemployment insurance, but exploit different data sources.
    Macroeconomists have generally taken a different approach to optimal unemployment
insurance, calibrating a stochastic general equilibrium model and then performing policy
experiments within the model (Hansen and Imrohoroglu, 1992; Acemoglu and Shimer, 2000;
Alvarez and Veracierto, 2001). An advantage to this approach is that it can address issues
we neglect, such as the impact of unemployment insurance policy on capital accumulation.
But in order to do that, these papers rely heavily on the entire structure of the model and its
calibration, which sometimes obscures the economic mechanisms at work and their empirical
validity. This approach also makes evaluating the robustness of the results expensive. In
contrast, by focusing on the worker’s partial equilibrium problem—a component in richer
general equilibrium models—we are able to highlight, in a tractable way, the main tradeoffs
that seem important for understanding optimal unemployment insurance and to point out
how the relevant forces can be measured.
    A third strand of the literature focuses on the timing of benefits, and in particular, on
whether unemployment benefits should fall during an unemployment spell (Shavell and Weiss,
1979; Hopenhayn and Nicolini, 1997). This paper emphasizes the optimal level of benefits
but assumes that benefits and taxes are constant over time.4 In Shimer and Werning (2005)
we argue that, provided workers are given enough liquidity to easily borrow against future
earnings,5 constant benefits and taxes are optimal, or nearly so. Besides this difference in
emphasis, there are two modeling differences. The first is that here we work in continuous
time rather than in discrete time, a superficial change that simplifies the algebra. More im-
portantly, here we allow for separations, so that workers experience multiple unemployment
spells. This generalization is important for any quantitative exercise focusing on the level of
benefits.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: The next section presents our model
of sequential search. Section 3 analyzes how workers behave when confronted with constant
unemployment benefits and constant taxes. We consider two financial regimes. In the first,
workers have unlimited access to borrowing and lending at a constant interest rate, subject
only to a no Ponzi-game condition. In the second, workers must live hand-to-mouth, con-
   4
      Section 6.9 shows that our test for optimal unemployment insurance is robust even if benefits end after
a finite amount of time; however, we do not examine the optimal timing of benefits in that section.
    5
      Such liquidity might be provided by unemployment insurance savings accounts (Feldstein, 2005).



                                                     4
suming their income in each period. Section 4 describes the problem of an insurance agency
choosing the level of unemployment insurance subject to a budget constraint. Section 5
describes our new test for optimal unemployment insurance and discusses the available em-
pirical evidence that bears on the relevant parameters of that test. Section 6 considers
a number of generalizations to our model and shows that our test is unaffected by those
changes. Section 7 derives a version of the Baily (1978) test for our model, showing that
the exact test depends on all the details of the model and hence is less robust than our
behavioral test. We conclude in Section 8.


2       Unemployment and Sequential Search
There is a single risk-averse worker who maximizes the expected present value of utility from
consumption,                           Z             ∞
                                             E           e−ρt U (c(t)) dt,
                                                 0

where ρ > 0 represents the subjective discount rate in continuous time. We assume through-
out the body of the paper that the utility function exhibits CARA, U (c) = −e−γc with
coefficient of absolute risk aversion γ > 0.
    At any moment in time a worker can be employed, at some wage w with t periods
remaining in the job, or unemployed. An employed worker produces a flow of w units
of the single consumption good and pays an employment tax τ . When the job ends, she
becomes unemployed. An unemployed worker receives a benefit b and waits for the arrival
of job opportunities. The worker receives an independent wage draw from a cumulative
distribution function F with Poisson arrival rate λ.6 When a worker gets a wage offer, she
observes the wage and decides whether to accept or reject it. If she accepts, employment
commences immediately and the job lasts for exactly T ≤ ∞ periods.7 If she rejects, she
produces nothing and remains unemployed. The worker cannot recall past wage offers. With
CARA preferences recall is not optimal, so this last assumption is not binding.
    There is an unemployment insurance agency whose objective is to maximize an un-
employed worker’s utility8 by choosing a constant unemployment benefit b and constant
    6
     Section 6.4 shows that our results are robust if a worker’s search effort affects the arrival rate of job offers.
That section also allows for the possibility that workers have preferences over consumption and leisure.
   7
     Section 6.2 shows that our main results are robust if the worker draws both a wage and a job duration.
Section 6.3 shows they are robust if the duration of a job is uncertain. Section 6.8 shows they are robust if
unemployed workers may be recalled to their past wage.
   8
     Section 6.5 shows that our results are robust if the unemployment insurance agency also values the


                                                            5
employment tax τ ,9 subject to the constraint that the expected cost of the unemployment
insurance system is zero when discounted at the interest rate r = ρ.10 Let B ≡ b + τ denote
the net subsidy to unemployment, the sum of the benefit a worker receives while unemployed
and the employment tax she avoids paying. We show below that a worker’s behavior depends
only on the net unemployment subsidy.
    We consider two financial environments. In the first, the worker has access to finan-
cial markets, namely a riskless borrowing and savings technology, facing only the budget
constraint
                                ȧ(t) = ra(t) + y(t) − c(t),

and the usual no Ponzi-game condition.11 Here a(t) is assets, c(t) is consumption, and y(t)
represents current income, equal to the current after-tax wage w(t) − τ if the worker is
employed, or benefits b, otherwise. The rate of return r is the same for the worker and
the unemployment insurance agency. In the second environment, the worker lives hand-to-
mouth. She has no access to a savings technology, a(t) = 0 for all t, and so must consume
her income in each period, c(t) = y(t).
   We study these two extremes because they span the spectrum of financial environments
with incomplete markets and because both cases are analytically tractable. The intermediate
cases cannot be solved in closed form but could be studied numerically to see whether our
two cases provide a good benchmark; doing so goes beyond the scope of this paper.
   Finally, define                               Z t
                                      1 − e−rt
                                αt ≡           =     e−rs ds.
                                         r        0

This is the present value of receiving an additional unit of income for the next t periods.
The present value of income from a new job with wage w is αT w. Note that in the limit as
r converges to zero, αt = t.
utility of currently-employed workers. Section 6.6 shows they are robust if workers are heterogeneous and
the agency has access to lump-sum transfers to address any redistributional issues, while Section 6.7 argues
that the after-tax reservation wage is still critical even in the absence of lump-sum transfers.
   9
     In Shimer and Werning (2005) we show that this simple unemployment insurance system is optimal
when the worker can borrow and lend at interest rate r and jobs last forever. In any case, Section 6.9 shows
that our main results are robust if unemployment benefits decline during an unemployment spell.
  10
     Section 6.1 shows that our main results are robust if the discount rate and interest rate are not equal.
  11
     The no-Ponzi condition states that debt must grow slower than the interest rate, limt→∞ e−rt a(t) ≥ 0,
with probability one. Together with the budget constraints ȧ(t) = ra(t) + y(t) − c(t), this is equivalent to
imposing a single present-value constraint, with probability one.




                                                     6
3     Worker Behavior
We start by characterizing how a worker behaves when confronted with any constant benefit
system (b, τ ). We first consider a worker with no liquidity problems, that is, a worker with
access to borrowing and lending at rate r. We then turn to the opposite end of the spectrum
and consider a hand-to-mouth worker who must consume her current income.


3.1    Workers with Liquidity
We now prove the following results. A worker who can borrow and lend at the interest
rate r = ρ keeps her consumption constant during an employment spell since she faces no
uncertainty. She saves, however, gradually accumulating assets while on the job. In con-
trast, consumption steadily declines during unemployment, because remaining unemployed
represents a negative permanent-income shock. This is accompanied by dissavings: assets
are run down during unemployment spells. Consumption jumps up when an unemployed
worker becomes employed, because finding a job is a discrete positive shock to permanent-
income. When unemployed, the worker uses a constant reservation wage policy, accepting
jobs above some threshold w̄. Finally, the after-tax reservation wage is a sufficient statistic
for the welfare of the unemployed. Formally:

Proposition 1 Assume a worker has access to financial markets. For a given policy (b, τ ),
the lifetime utility of an unemployed worker with assets a is

                                              U (ra + w̄ − τ )
                                   Vu (a) =                    .                           (1)
                                                     r

The consumption of an unemployed worker with assets a and of an employed worker with
assets a, t periods remaining on the job, and a wage w are respectively

                                cu (a) = ra + w̄ − τ,                                      (2)
                                                         
                           c(a, t, w) = r a + αt (w − w̄) + w̄ − τ.                        (3)

The reservation wage w̄ is constant and solves
                                          ∞
                                  λ
                                      Z
                                                                
                      γ(w̄ − B) =             1 + U rαT (w − w̄) dF (w).                   (4)
                                  r     w̄


The proof is in the appendix.

                                                 7
     For the purpose of this paper, the most important part of this proposition is equation (1).
If a worker were to remain unemployed forever her lifetime utility would be U (ra)/r. Thus
w̄ − τ is the value an unemployed worker places on access to the labor market, measured in
units of per-period consumption.
     To get some intuition for equation (1), suppose a worker could accept a job at wage w
that lasts forever, so her after-tax income would be w − τ . With the discount rate equal to
the interest rate, a worker with a concave utility function U would keep her consumption
constant and so would consume this income plus the annuity value on her assets, ra. That
is, she would consume c(a, ∞, w) = ra + w − τ , her assets would be constant, ȧ = 0, and her
lifetime utility would be U (ra + w − τ )/r. Now define w̄ so that an unemployed worker is
indifferent between continuing to search and working forever at w̄, Vu (a) ≡ U (ra + w̄ − τ )/r.
This is equivalent to equation (1). The proof of the proposition in the appendix shows that
workers are in fact indifferent about continuing to search or working at w̄ for any amount of
time, so w̄ is the reservation wage.12


3.2     Hand-to-Mouth Workers
We now consider worker behavior under an extreme alternative, financial autarky, so a worker
must consume her income in each period: caut u = b while unemployed and c
                                                                             aut
                                                                                 (w) = w − τ
while employed at wage w. Under financial autarky, a worker’s consumption will typically
jump up when she finds a job and down when she leaves her job. Although this is qualitatively
different than when the worker has access to financial markets, one critical property is
unchanged, the worker’s lifetime utility depends only on her after-tax reservation wage:

Proposition 2 Assume a worker must consume her income. For a given policy (b, τ ), the
lifetime utility of unemployment is

                                                        U (w̄aut − τ )
                                            Vuaut =                    ,                                  (5)
                                                              ρ

where w̄aut is the reservation wage, the solution to
                                                    Z   ∞                              
                       aut
               U (w̄         − τ ) = U (b) + αT λ           U (w − τ ) − U (w̄aut − τ ) dF (w).           (6)
                                                    w̄aut
  12
     In general, workers may be willing to take a wage below w̄ for a while, accumulate assets, and eventually
quit to search for a higher wage. Acemoglu and Shimer (1999) explore this in an environment with decreasing
absolute risk aversion. This possibility is absent from our setup because of the CARA utility assumption.


                                                            8
The proof is in the appendix. This result is independent of the form of the period utility
function U . However, with CARA utility U (c1 − c2 ) = −U (c1 )/U (c2 ), so we can rewrite
equation (6) as
                                                    Z   ∞
                           aut
                                                            U (w) − U (w̄aut ) dF (w),
                                                                              
                   U (w̄         ) = U (B) + αT λ                                           (7)
                                                    w̄aut


which implies that w̄ is determined as a function of B = b + τ .
   It is worth noting that, since the reservation wage summarizes a worker’s utility both un-
der perfect liquidity and financial autarky, the difference in the reservation wage summarizes
the value of access to financial markets. More precisely,

Proposition 3 A hand-to-mouth worker has a lower reservation wage than a worker with
access to capital markets. Moreover, the difference in their reservation wages is the utility
gain from access to capital markets, measured in units of per-period consumption.

The proof is in the appendix.


4     Optimal Unemployment Insurance
4.1    The Unemployment Insurance Agency’s Problem
We now turn to the problem of an unemployment insurance agency that chooses actuarially
fair unemployment benefits b and employment taxes τ to maximize the worker’s utility given
by equation (1) (if the worker has liquidity) or equation (5) (if the worker is hand-to-mouth).
In both cases, this is equivalent to maximizing the worker’s after-tax reservation wage.
    To derive the actuarially fair relation between benefits and taxes, consider the net present
value cost C of the program, which must satisfy
                                                                    
                            rC = b + λ(1 − F (w̄)) e−rT C − αT τ − C .

In words, the flow cost, rC, is comprised of current benefits outlays, b, plus the opportunity
of becoming employed, which occurs with arrival rate λ(1 − F (w̄)) and reduces costs from C
to e−rT C − αT τ , since employed workers pay taxes and become unemployed after some time
T . Setting C = 0 gives the agency’s budget constraint

                                               Db = αT τ,                                   (8)

                                                        9
                          
where D ≡ 1/λ 1 − F (w̄) is the expected duration of an unemployment spell. It will prove
useful to consider as an approximation the limit as r → 0, so that αT = T and the budget
constraint becomes
                                      ub = (1 − u)τ,                                  (9)

where u ≡ D/(T + D) is the fraction of time a worker is unemployed, or equivalently, the
unemployment rate.
    The unemployment insurance agency recognizes that the worker will set her reservation
wage optimally given the chosen policy. Putting this together, the optimal unemployment
insurance problem is to choose benefits b, taxes τ , and a reservation wage w̄ to maximize w̄−τ
subject to two constraints: the worker sets her reservation wage according to equation (4)
(liquidity) or equation (7) (hand-to-mouth); and the insurance must be actuarially fair,
equation (8). Let {b∗ , τ ∗ } denote the optimal policy.
    To see whether unemployment insurance is optimal, all we need to know is how an
actuarially fair increase in taxes and benefits affects a worker’s after-tax reservation wage.
It is not necessary to make any assumptions about risk-aversion, discount rates, the speed of
finding a job, the duration of a job, the distribution of wage offers, or about whether workers
have liquidity or must consume hand-to-mouth since workers’ utility is a monotone function
of the after-tax reservation wage w̄ − τ .
    While this result is theoretically appealing, it may be difficult to implement because it
may be hard to discern how much taxes must rise to balance an increase in benefits. In
principle this question might be left to a budgetary authority like the Congressional Budget
Office, but such an organization would still need to understand how much the increase in
benefits raises unemployment duration. Instead, our behavioral test uses information on
how unemployment benefits affect the pre-tax reservation wage and on the elasticity of
unemployment duration with respect to benefits to characterize how taxes must change and
hence to characterize optimal policy.


4.2    A Behavioral Test
Equation (4) or equation (7) implies that the reservation wage depends on unemployment
                                                                     
benefits and taxes, w̄(b, τ ); let D(b, τ ) ≡ 1/ λ(1 − F (w̄(b, τ ))) denote average duration as
a function of b and τ . It follows that the resource constraint (8) defines taxes as a function




                                              10
of benefits τ (b). Differentiate (8) with respect to b to get

                                              bDb (b, τ (b)) + D(b, τ (b))
                                 τ ′ (b) =                                 ,
                                                 αT − bDτ (b, τ (b))

where subscripts denote partial derivatives. The denominator is positive if a tax cut reduces
the fiscal surplus, i.e., we are on the correct side of the Laffer curve. With CARA utility
and either perfect liquidity or hand-to-mouth consumption, the reservation wage and hence
unemployment duration depends only on the sum of benefits and taxes (see equations (4) and
(7), respectively), so Db = Dτ . Then letting εD,b ≡ bDb (b, τ )/D(b, τ ) be the the elasticity of
unemployment duration with respect to unemployment benefits, we can write the previous
equation as
                                            D(b, τ (b))(1 + εD,b )
                                  τ ′ (b) =                        .                          (10)
                                            αT − D(b, τ (b))εD,b
Next, since unemployment benefits should maximize w̄(b, τ (b)) − τ (b), a necessary condition
for optimal benefits is
                         w̄b (b∗ , τ ∗ ) + w̄τ (b∗ , τ ∗ )τ ′ (b∗ ) = τ ′ (b∗ ),

where as usual subscripts denote partial derivatives. Again, w̄b = w̄τ under CARA utility,
and so combining this equation with equation (10) gives our test for optimal benefits:

Proposition 4 If unemployment benefits are optimal,

                                               D(b∗ , τ ∗ )
                         w̄b (b∗ , τ ∗ ) =                     (1 + εD,b (b∗ , τ ∗ )).       (11)
                                             αT + D(b∗ , τ ∗ )

   If the left-hand-side of equation (11) is larger than the right-hand-side, a marginal in-
crease in benefits raises the worker’s after-tax reservation wage and so is welfare-improving.
   It is convenient to focus on the limit as r converges to zero. Following the same logic,
but starting with equation (9) instead of equation (8) gives
                                                                                
                                ∗    ∗            ∗   ∗ εu,b (b∗ , τ ∗ )
                          w̄b (b , τ ) = u(b , τ ) 1 +                               ,       (12)
                                                       1 − u(b∗ , τ ∗ )

where εu,b is the elasticity of the unemployment rate with respect to benefits. This also follows
from equation (11) as r → 0 using εu,b = (1−u)εD,b . This approximation is good for realistic
values of the discount rate. More importantly, we show in Section 6 that equation (12) is
robust to numerous extensions of our basic model.


                                                          11
   Our theory provides some guidance on how responsive the reservation wage is to un-
employment benefits. Differentiating equation (4) or equation (7), we can prove that w̄b ≥
D/(αT +D), and strictly so if workers are risk averse. However, to see whether equation (11)
holds requires looking at the data.


5     Available Evidence
To implement the test proposed in Proposition 4, we need to know five numbers: the interest
rate r, the duration of a job T , the mean duration of an unemployment spell D, the elasticity
of duration with respect to benefits εD,b , and the responsiveness of the reservation wage to
benefits w̄b . This section starts by examining evidence on the first four numbers, the right
hand side of equation (11), and then considers the last number, the left hand side of the
equation.


5.1    Threshold for the Response of Reservation Wages to Benefits
The interest rate r, the duration of a job T , and the mean duration of an unemployment
spell D determine D/(αT + D), which is approximately equal to the unemployment rate
u. Our results are therefore sensitive to the choice of the unemployment rate. We target
a 5.6 percent unemployment rate, equal to the average value in the United States between
1948 and 2005. We think of a time period as a week and set the interest rate at r = 0.001,
equivalent to an annual interest rate of 5.3 percent. The mean duration of an in-progress
unemployment spell between 1948 and 2005 was D = 13.4 weeks and so we set T = 225 to
hit the target unemployment rate. Together this implies D/(αT + D) = 0.062.
    We turn next to the elasticity of duration with respect to benefits, εD,b , the remaining
unknown on the right hand side of equation (11). Perhaps the best-known study of this
number is Meyer (1990), who uses administrative data from the Continuous Wage and Benefit
History (CWBH). The records cover men who received unemployment benefits in twelve
states from 1978 to 1983 and include information on the level and potential duration of
benefits, and on pre-unemployment earnings. Katz and Meyer (1990) explain that the source
of variation in benefits in Meyer’s data include nonlinearities in benefit schedules, legislative
changes, and the erosion of real benefits due to fixed nominal schedules between legislative
changes. By including state fixed effects and past wages in their regressions, both papers
effectively control for endogeneity of benefit levels. Moreover, these controls make it unlikely


                                               12
that workers who receive high benefits relative to their past wage and relative to other
workers in their state anticipate paying relatively high taxes in the future. Thus these papers
convincingly estimate the ‘partial’ elasticity εD,b that is needed, holding taxes constant.13
    In his preferred estimate, Meyer (1990, Table V, specification 5) finds that a one percent
increase in unemployment benefits reduces the baseline hazard rate of finding a job by 0.88
percent. Since the hazard rate is the inverse of expected unemployment duration, this implies
εD,b = 0.88. Combined with D/(αT + D) = 0.062, the right hand side of equation (11)
evaluates to 0.117. Reasonable parameter changes do not affect this number much. For
example, some of Meyer’s (1990) other estimates in Table V show an elasticity as small as
0.53, while Katz and Meyer (1990) find an elasticity of 0.54. Krueger and Meyer (2002, p.
2351) call 0.5 “not an unreasonable rough summary” of the literature on εD,b . This smaller
number would reduce the right hand side to 0.094. Conversely, if unemployment duration
were twice as long, D = 26.4, but job duration is also twice as long, T = 450, leaving the
unemployment rate unchanged, the right hand side increases to 0.129.
    These numbers represent a threshold for the responsiveness of the reservation wage to
benefits that determines whether changes in benefits improve welfare and the best direction
of any benefit change. For example, the point estimate 0.117, obtained above from Meyer’s
preferred estimate, implies that if a worker’s reservation wage rises by more than $0.117
for every $1 increase in benefits, then such an increase improves welfare. Conversely, if the
response is lower then benefits should be decreased. Benefits are locally optimal only when
the response of the reservation wage equals this threshold.


5.2     An Ideal Experiment
Before reviewing the available evidence on the responsiveness of the reservation wage to ben-
efits, we discuss two properties that an ideal measure should possess. First, we require an
unbiased measure of reservation wages.14 As we discuss below, our reading of the literature
suggests that workers can answer questions about their reservation wage, but estimates of
reservation wages using administrative wage data will also always be useful. Second, we
require variation in benefits that is orthogonal to any omitted characteristics of the worker
or the economic environment. This is achieved most directly via deliberate experimenta-
  13
     Most of the theoretical literature has interpreted these numbers as the ‘total’ elasticity of duration with
respect to an increase in benefits and an actuarially fair increase in taxes. One can show that the partial
elasticity εD,b = ε̂D,b αT /((1 + ε̂D,b )D + αT ) < ε̂D,b , where ε̂D,b is the total elasticity.
  14
     If there are non-wage components of compensation then we require a measure of the reservation wage
that holds these job attributes fixed.


                                                      13
tion; Meyer (1995) documents that U.S. states are sometimes willing to undertake such
experiments. In the absence of experiments, however, it should still be possible to exploit
nonlinearities in benefit schedules, combined with a rich set of controls for local labor market
conditions, to obtain the desired variation. Meyer (1990) and Katz and Meyer (1990) show
that this is feasible when measuring the impact of benefits on duration. It should also be fea-
sible when measuring the impact of benefits on reservation wages. Some other properties are
also desirable: larger data sets will yield tighter estimates, which is particularly important
since reservation wages are measured with error; and if we are concerned with the optimality
of the current United States unemployment system, we must use U.S. data since the desired
slope parameter w̄b is likely to vary across countries.


5.3    Direct Evidence on Reservation Wages
15 years ago, Devine and Kiefer (1991, Chapter 4) surveyed the existing evidence on the
behavior of reservation wages. The first problem this literature confronted was how to
measure reservation wages. Unlike unemployment duration, administrative records do not
have any direct information on reservation wages. Instead, Kasper (1967) used data from
the Minnesota Department of Employment Security, which asked workers simply “what wage
are you seeking?” Barnes (1975) looked at registered unemployed workers in 12 cities who
were asked their “lowest acceptable wage.” Sant (1977) examined the 1966 cohort of the
National Longitudinal Survey of Young Males (NLSY), which from 1967 to 1969 asked “what
wage are you willing to accept?” Holzer (1987) provides some validation that this type of
question contains useful information. Using data from a later cohort of the NLSY, he finds
that workers with higher reservation wages are less likely to accept a job offer (Table 4) but
earn a higher wage when they do take a job (Table 5). In any case, the variation in sample
selection and question design complicates any analysis of reservation wages.
    Feldstein and Poterba (1984) were the first to examine how self-reported reservation
wages respond to unemployment benefits. They study a supplement to the May 1976 Cur-
rent Population Survey (CPS) which asked 2,228 unemployment insurance recipients “What
is the lowest wage or salary you would accept (before deductions)?” The answers are sur-
prisingly high, on average seven percent above their previous wage. As subsequent authors
have noted, this casts some doubt on their results.
    In their main analysis, Feldstein and Poterba (1984) regress the ratio of a worker’s reser-
vation wage, w̄, to their last wage, w0 , on the ratio of their benefit, b, to w0 and a number


                                              14
of controls.15 They run the regression separately for workers reporting different reasons for
unemployment. In Table 4, they report that a one percentage point increase in b/w0 raises
w̄/w0 by 0.13 and 0.42 percentage points, so w̄b ∈ [0.13, 0.42]. The lowest slope estimate
is for job losers on layoff and the highest is for other job losers; the slope estimate for job
leavers is 0.29.
     Although this study advanced our understanding of reservation wages, it has some im-
portant shortcomings. First, if the last wage is measured with error, the main coefficient
estimate is biased towards 1 and hence overstates the true elasticity. Second, the source
of variation in their main independent variable, the ratio of benefits to the last wage, is
unclear. To the extent that there is a third factor correlated with both the benefit ratio and
the reservation wage ratio, their results are biased. Plausible candidates include human cap-
ital or any systematic correlation between benefits and local labor market conditions. The
authors include control variables to try to soak up such variation, but it seems unlikely that
they are able to capture all the relevant dimensions. For example, states that offer higher
unemployment benefits may differ systematically along other dimensions. At a minimum,
taxes must be higher to fund these benefits, which means Feldstein and Poterba (1984) mea-
sure the impact of an actuarially fair increase in benefits and taxes on reservation wages,
w̄b (b, τ )(1 + τ ′ (b)). But it is also likely that other social insurance programs and the relevant
taxes covary with unemployment benefits. In their analysis, the effect of these programs is
loaded on to unemployment benefits.
     Despite these shortcomings, it is worth understanding the quantitative implications of
Feldstein and Poterba’s (1984) estimates. They imply substantial gains from raising unem-
ployment benefits.16 A $1 balanced-budget increase in unemployment benefits raises the
after-tax reservation wage by

                                                w̄b (b, τ )(αT + D(b, τ )) − D(b, τ )(1 + εD,b (b, τ ))
         w̄b (b, τ )(1 + τ ′ (b)) − τ ′ (b) =                                                           ,
                                                               αT − D(b, τ )εD,b (b, τ )

or $0.34 for job losers not on layoff. In other words, the net welfare gain for an unemployed
worker is equivalent to increasing her consumption by 34 cents at all dates in the future. To
  15
     The controls include age, sex, number of years of education, and dummies for whites, married men, a
working spouse, and for the receipt of welfare payments and other supplementary income. The authors note
that theory often provides little guidance on how these variables should affect the reservation wage.
  16
     Curiously, Feldstein and Poterba (1984) interpret their estimates of the responsiveness of reservation
wages to benefits as an argument for lowering unemployment benefits because of the moral hazard costs.
Our model shows that, on the contrary, if the reservation wage is sufficiently responsive to benefits, then
benefits must be serving their purpose, improving the welfare of unemployed workers.


                                                         15
get a rough sense of the magnitude of this number, there are about 135 million workers in
the United States economy, with about 7.7 million unemployed at any point in time. Giving
every unemployed worker, including those not currently collecting unemployment benefits,
an extra $1 per week would cost approximately $400 million per year. The net welfare gain
is equivalent to (somehow) raising the consumption of all workers by $0.34 per week, for a
total of $2.4 billion per year. Of course, even if these estimates are correct, they are only
correct locally. Raising benefits by $1000 per week would probably not yield $2.4 trillion per
year in additional consumption-equivalent utility.
    In any case, more recent studies using different data and sometimes different method-
ologies have often reached different conclusions.17 Although it is not the main purpose of
their paper, DellaVigna and Paserman (2005, Appendix Table E1) regress the log of the
self-reported reservation wage on a dummy for whether the worker received unemploy-
ment insurance benefits and numerous controls using data from the NLSY. They find
that receiving benefits raises the reservation wage by 4.7 percent, significantly smaller than
Feldstein and Poterba (1984) estimate, and they cannot reject the null hypothesis that it
has no effect. There are again some serious concerns with using this study for our purpose.
First, it is small, with only 1,010 unemployed workers who reported all the necessary infor-
mation. Second, the measure of benefits is binary, which makes it difficult to compare with
the desired slope w̄b . Perhaps more importantly, only 12.9 percent of unemployed workers
in the sample receive benefits, much lower than in the population as a whole. This suggests
the possibility of a strong selection bias. Finally, although the authors include numerous
control variables, they do not attempt to address the possible endogeneity of unemployment
benefits or the correlation of benefits and other omitted policy variables.


5.4     Indirect Evidence on Reservation Wages
Another approach to measuring reservation wages is to infer them from data on accepted
wages. Perhaps the earliest such evidence comes indirectly from Ehrenberg and Oaxaca
(1976), who find that workers who receive higher unemployment benefits get higher wage
jobs.
   To see what this implies about reservation wages requires more structure. Fishe (1982)
  17
    There are also numerous studies using non-U.S. data sources; see, for example, Jones (1988),
van den Berg (1990), Gorter and Gorter (1993), Jones (2001), and Bloemen and Stancanelli (2001). While
these cannot tell us anything about the optimality of the current U.S. unemployment insurance system, they
may provide lessons on how to properly measure the impact of unemployment benefits on reservation wages.



                                                   16
uses the CWBH files for Florida, a 5 percent sample of state residents from 1971 to 1974.
Since this is administrative data, measurement error should be minimal. But since it does
not contain any direct information on reservation wages, he has to infer them using a cen-
sored regression model and data on actual wages paid. In his Table 2, he concludes that a
$1 increase in potential weekly benefits raises the (unobserved) reservation wage by $0.44,
slightly larger than Feldstein and Poterba’s (1984) biggest estimate. There are two main
drawbacks to Fishe’s (1982) approach. First, it seems likely that differences in unemploy-
ment benefits are driven at least in part by a third factor that is omitted from the regression,
biasing his results. Second, the approach requires some parametric assumptions in order to
infer how observed wages are related to the unobserved latent wage; Fishe (1982) assumes
joint normality of the errors in a wage offer equation and a reservation wage equation.
    Once again, more recent data casts doubt on this conclusion. Meyer (1995) studies a
number of experiments in which states subsidized workers who found a job quickly and kept
it for a specified amount of time; in our framework, this is equivalent to a reduction in
the net unemployment subsidy B and hence should lower both unemployment duration and
reservation wages. Meyer (1995, p. 96) confirms the first prediction but concludes that “the
experiments also tend to show that speeding claimants’ return to work does not decrease
total or quarterly earnings following the claim, but the evidence is less strong because the
estimates are imprecise.”18
    There are two ways to interpret this result. If unemployment benefits do not affect the
distribution of accepted wages, it suggests that reservation wages are unaffected as well.
Of course, this is inconsistent with our model, since we know that w̄b is at least equal to
D/(αT + D) ≈ 0.062, regardless of whether workers have liquidity or live hand-to-mouth.
The other possible interpretation is that the reservation wage lies at a value where the
wage distribution has a low density, i.e. F ′ (w̄) is small. This would make it hard to detect
changes in the distribution of accepted wages resulting from changes in the reservation wage.
Moreover, we can reconcile this with evidence that changes in unemployment benefits affect
unemployment duration by introducing a costly search effort decision; we show in Section 6.4
that our behavioral test extends to this case as well.
 18
      Card, Chetty and Weber (2006) get similar results using administrative data from Austria.




                                                     17
6      Extensions
We think the most attractive feature of the behavioral test for optimal unemployment insur-
ance is that, while it is theoretically well-grounded, it does not rely on much of the structure
of the model. For example, we have already shown that we do not need to know whether
workers have easy access to financial markets or no access at all. In this section, we dis-
cuss several modifications of, and extensions to, our basic framework in order to establish
the robustness of our approach. Each of these modifications alters the formula for how the
reservation wage reacts to benefits, but none of them substantially changes the behavioral
test in Proposition 4. To simplify the presentation we discuss each new element separately
and keep the mathematical formalities to a minimum.


6.1     Different Interest and Discount Rates
To simplify the exposition we have assumed throughout that the interest rate is equal to
the discount rate. While the relationship between r and ρ affects consumption, it is easy to
show that with CARA preferences the effect is simply a level-shift in consumption:

                                                            ρ−r
                                   cu (a) = ra + w̄ − τ +       ,
                                                             rγ

where γ is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion. Therefore the objective of the unem-
ployment insurance agency is still to maximize the after-tax reservation wage subject to
the budget constraint in equation (8). Thus, the characterization in equation (11) is un-
changed.19


6.2     Sampling Wages and Job Duration
In our baseline model, we assumed that all jobs last for T periods and are heterogeneous
only in the wage opportunity. We now prove that our results easily extend to the case when
jobs differ both in terms of their wage offer and in terms of their duration.
    Suppose that workers sample jobs distinguished by their wage-duration pair (w, T ) from
some joint distribution function F (w, T ). It is straightforward to prove that workers use a
reservation-wage rule, accepting all jobs that pay at least w̄, independent of T . Intuitively, a
worker employed at her reservation wage is indifferent about accepting the job and therefore
  19
    This argument ignores any possible general equilibrium effects of unemployment benefits on interest
rates.


                                                  18
indifferent about how long the job lasts. In particular, an unemployed worker with assets
a is indifferent about accepting a job offering her reservation wage forever, and therefore
consuming ra + w̄ − τ forever. This pins the value of unemployment, unchanged from
equation (1) in the case with liquidity and equation (5) in the case of financial autarky. In
both cases, a worker’s utility is still increasing in the after-tax reservation wage w̄ − τ .
    Optimal unemployment insurance maximizes the after-tax reservation wage subject the
resource constraint, Db = α̂τ , where α̂ is the expected value of αT conditional on the wage
exceeding w̄, a slight extension of equation (8). This leads to the following generalization of
equation (11):
                                            D
                                 w̄b =          (1 + εD,b − εα̂,b ),                          (13)
                                         α̂ + D
where εα̂,b is the elasticity of α̂ with respect to benefits. In the limit as r → 0, equation (13)
further reduces to equation (12), while in the special case where w and T are independent,
α̂ is a constant and so εα̂,b = 0, leaving equation (11) virtually unchanged.
     To see why this matters, suppose that higher wage jobs last longer. Then an increase
in benefits raises employment duration, εα̂,b > 0. This offsets the increase in unemployment
duration, reducing the elasticity of the unemployment rate and raising the attractiveness of
unemployment insurance. To our knowledge, the existing literature on optimal unemploy-
ment insurance has neglected this possibility.


6.3    Job Loss Risk
To focus on the risk of unemployment duration we have abstracted from job loss risk by
assuming that the duration of a job is known as soon as the job is accepted. In reality, of
course, even after finding a job, a worker faces uncertainty about its length. To be concrete,
suppose all jobs end according to a Poisson process with arrival rate s.
    The arguments behind Proposition 1 and Proposition 2 are unchanged. A worker em-
ployed at her reservation wage faces no uncertainty and therefore wants to keep her con-
sumption constant. If she has liquidity, this means she consumes the annuity value of her
assets plus her after-tax reservation wage. If she is hand-to-mouth, she simply consumes
her after-tax reservation wage. This implies that her utility, and therefore the utility of an
unemployed worker, is an increasing function of her after-tax reservation wage.
    The resource constraint changes slightly when job duration is uncertain, so equation (8)
becomes Db = τ /(r + s). Note that 1/(r + s) represents the expected present value of a unit
of income until a job ends, analogous to αT in the baseline model. This introduces a small

                                               19
modification into equation (11):

                                             D
                                   w̄b =    1   (1 + εD,b ).                              (14)
                                             +D
                                           r+s


Setting r = 0.001, D = 13.4, s = 1/T = 1/225, and εD,b = 0.88, the right hand side
evaluates to 0.128, slightly larger than the 0.117 obtained when all jobs last for exactly
T periods. Indeed, the only difference between these numbers comes from discounting. If
r = 0, D/(T + D) and D/(1/s + D) are both equal to the unemployment rate.


6.4    Costly Search
We have so far focused on a worker’s choice of which jobs to accept as the source for the
moral-hazard problem. An alternative approach models workers as making a costly search
effort choice that affects the arrival rate of homogeneous job opportunities. Reality likely
combines both elements; fortunately, so can our model.
    To maintain the tractability of our CARA specification, we assume that the search effort
is monetary so that the utility function is U (c − v(e)) for some disutility of effort function
v(e). Effort e improves the arrival of job opportunities λ(e).
    With this specification, any constant benefit system (b, τ ) induces workers to choose a
constant level of effort e∗ , independent of their wealth level. Effectively this reduces unem-
ployment income by v(e∗ ). While this naturally alters the reservation wage equation (4),
it does not affect the value of an unemployed worker conditional on her reservation wage,
which is unchanged from equation (1) and equation (5). Duration is now affected by policy
through two channels, the arrival rate of job offers λ(e) and the acceptance probability of
each 1 − F (w̄), but this does not modify the agency’s budget constraint equation (8). It
follows that Proposition 4 is unchanged by a monetary cost of search: our derivation of
equation (11) uses the elasticity of unemployment duration with respect to benefits, but the
reason why benefits affect unemployment duration is immaterial.
    We can also allow employed workers to decide how much to work. Suppose that a worker
offered a wage w and choosing work effort e earns ew at disutility v(e). Then she optimally
sets e to solve v ′ (e(w)) = w and so the model is isomorphic to one in which she draws income
e(w)w − v(e(w)) with no disutility of effort.




                                                 20
6.5    Employed Workers and Redistributive Motives
Our analysis has so far focused on optimal insurance for an unemployed worker. We now
extend the analysis to consider employed workers. We focus on the case where the worker
has perfect access to financial markets.
   To start, consider designing insurance for a worker who is initially employed at a wage
w with t periods remaining on her job. One simple way to achieve the optimum is to allow
the worker to defer entry into the optimal scheme for an unemployed worker. The worker
pays no tax until she next becomes unemployed; thereafter, she receives benefit b whenever
she is unemployed and pays tax τ whenever she is employed. If the worker quits her job at
time s ≤ t to become unemployed, her lifetime utility in consumption units is

                                 ra + (1 − e−rs )w + e−rs (w̄ − τ ).                     (15)

It follows that the worker keeps her job (sets s = t) if w ≥ w̄ − τ and quits it immediately
otherwise (s = 0), which is the socially efficient choice. We conclude that employed workers
also wish to maximize w̄ − τ and so demand the same b∗ and τ ∗ as the unemployed.
    Now suppose there is initially a mix of employed and unemployed workers, potentially
with different asset levels, wages and remaining job durations. Given the alignment of
opinions over benefits, the scheme just described is Pareto efficient. By construction it also
involves no redistribution and so everyone agrees on the unemployment benefit level.
    Most unemployment benefit schemes offer both insurance and redistribution, which nat-
urally breaks the agreement between employed and unemployed workers. One way to ensure
agreement on unemployment benefits is to rely on other taxes to take care of any desired
redistribution. To see this, suppose that the unemployment insurance benefits b and taxes τ
take effect immediately, but that workers must also pay an initial lump-sum tax κ(t) − αt τ
conditional on their remaining job duration t, which we assume is observable; an unemployed
worker has t = 0. After some manipulations, the agency’s budget constraint requires
                             ∞                                   
                                            e−rt       τ αT − bD
                        Z
                                     κ(t) +                             dG(t) = 0,       (16)
                         0                   r           αT + D

where G(t) is the given initial distribution over job durations. For a worker earning a wage
w with t periods remaining in her job, welfare in consumption units is

                             r(a − κ(t)) + (1 − e−rt )w + e−rt (w̄ − τ )                 (17)


                                                       21
Setting κ(t) = 0 implies that welfare is equivalent to equation (15). Thus, lump-sum transfers
can imitate the previous scheme.
    Since there is Ricardian equivalence in this environment, we may without loss of generality
                                                             R∞
restrict attention to tax and benefit schemes such that 0 κ(t)dG(t) = 0 so the budget
constraint equation (16) is equivalent to equation (8). In this case κ(t) is the net lump-sum
tax, after each worker has paid her own cost of unemployment insurance. Equation (17)
implies everyone agrees on maximizing w̄ − τ , independent of the redistribution chosen by
κ(t). In other words, given these instruments, all Pareto efficient policies maximize w̄ − τ ,
regardless of redistributional concerns. The same is true of more sophisticated lump-sum
transfers that may potentially depend additionally on the initial wage w or assets a.
    This analysis highlights an important point: unemployment insurance is, at best, a crude
redistributional tool and will not be used as such if sharper instruments, such as the lump-
sum taxes κ(t), are available. When this is the case, the optimal level of benefits will not
depend on redistributive concerns. For most of the paper, to focus on insurance rather than
redistribution, we assume either that there is no redistributional motive or that the agency
has access to lump-sum taxes.


6.6    Worker Heterogeneity with Lump-Sum Transfers
Up to this point we have considered the problem of an insurance agency confronted with a
single type of worker. The analysis is also immediately applicable if there are many types
of workers, and the agency can tailor the unemployment insurance design to each. We
now consider worker heterogeneity but assume that there can be only one unemployment
insurance policy that applies to all workers.
    Let there be finitely many types of workers denoted by n = 1, 2, . . . N with population
fractions π n . We allow the distribution of wages F n (w), the duration of jobs T n , and the
risk aversion parameter γ n to depend on the worker type. We assume the availability of
lump-sum taxes that depend on the worker type n and remaining employment duration t,
with unemployment again corresponding to t = 0. Let κn (t) − αt τ denote this lump-sum.
As before, Ricardian equivalence allows us to restrict attention to tax and benefit schemes
where N         n ∞ n
                     κ (t)dGn (t) = 0, so κn (t) represents the redistribution net of that done
       P         R
          n=1 π    0
by unemployment insurance policy.
    Let w̄n be type n’s reservation wage. Following the analysis from Section 6.5 closely,




                                              22
welfare for type (n, t) workers expressed in consumption units is

                          r(a − κn (t)) + (1 − e−rt )w + e−rt (w̄n − τ )

and the budget constraint is

                                    N
                                                             τ αT n − bDn
                                    X                                      
                                                n    n
                                               π ω                              = 0,       (18)
                                    n=1
                                                               αT n + Dn
             R∞
where ω n ≡ 0 e−rt dGn (t). Because lump-sum transfers κn (t) can achieve any redistri-
butional aims, all efficient policies must maximize average consumption and hence must
maximize
                                      XN
                                         π n ω n (w̄n − τ ),                      (19)
                                                n=1

while taxes and benefits solve the budget constraint equation (18).
   In the limit as r → 0, ω n → 1 for any fixed distribution Gn (t) and so equation (19)
becomes
                                     N
                                     X
                                        π n w̄n (b, τ ) − τ,                        (20)
                                                n=1

which we treat as an approximation for r > 0 but small. Similarly, the budget constraint
equation (18) reduces to
                             N       n
                                     τ T − bDn (b, τ )
                            X                            
                                  n
                                π        n + D n (b, τ )
                                                           = 0.
                            n=1
                                       T

Equivalently, a type n worker spends a fraction Dn (b, τ )/(T n + Dn (b, τ )) of her life unem-
ployed and the rest employed, so the budget constraint requires that u(b, τ )b = (1−u(b, τ ))τ ,
as in equation (9), where u(b, τ ) is the population unemployment rate when the unemploy-
ment insurance policy is (b, τ ).
    Our behavioral test for optimal unemployment insurance easily generalizes to this envi-
ronment. Unemployment benefits maximize equation (20), with taxes adjusting to balance
the budget. This implies

                          N                                               
                          X
                                    n              τ ′ (b∗ )          εu,b
                                π       w̄bn   =               =u 1+         .             (21)
                          n=1
                                                 1 + τ ′ (b∗ )       1−u

This is a natural generalization of equation (12). We need to know the average response of


                                                               23
reservation wages to benefits in the population, the unemployment rate, and the elasticity
of the unemployment rate with respect to benefits to perform this test.


6.7    Worker Heterogeneity without Lump-Sum Transfers
We now comment on what occurs if the agency cannot redistribute using a lump-sum tax or
any other instrument. For example, suppose there are two types of workers n = 1, 2, with
type 1 having the higher unemployment rate so that unemployment benefits redistribute
from type 2 to type 1 workers. Varying benefits b and adjusting taxes τ (b) in a budget
balance fashion traces out a utility locus V 1 (b), V 2 (b) . Any point on the northeastern
                                                              

portion of this set of utility points is efficient. The associated set of efficient benefit levels
b may be quite wide and include values that do not lie between the individually optimal
levels for both type 1 and 2. This may occur because benefits are no longer necessarily paid
by the party that receives them. This discussion illustrates that when redistributive devices
are severely limited it is hard to say much about efficient unemployment insurance, as this
instrument may have to carry the full weight of redistribution.
    Although general conclusions are hard to obtain, if we are willing to quantify the dis-
tributional concerns we can modify our test for optimal unemployment insurance. Suppose
for the sake of simplicity that all workers types n = 1, 2, . . . , N are initially unemployed, so
that their welfare is directly related to w̄n − τ , as well as the contribution from assets which
unemployment policy does not affect. The welfare criterion is a weighted average of these
welfare measures
                                         XN
                                             π n λn w̄n − τ,
                                        n=1
                                                  PN
where the weights λn are normalized so that               n n
                                                    n=1 π λ = 1. These weights determine
the desire for redistribution: the ratio λj /λi represents the rate at which we are willing to
transfer goods from type j to type i workers, i.e. the tolerable size of the hole in the “leaking
bucket” that takes goods from j to i. When lump-sum transfers are available this rate must
be unity and λn = 1.
   The optimality condition as r → 0 is

                                N                                
                                X
                                       n n                 εu,b
                                      π λ    w̄bn   =u 1+             ,
                                n=1
                                                          1−u

so that some weighted average of the increase in reservation wages must equal the term

                                                     24
capturing the increase in taxes required to finance a rise in benefits. The test is modified in
that the weights are no longer the population weights π n as in equation (21). Equivalently,

                      N                                         N
                      X
                                 n                 εu,b           X
                             π       w̄bn   −u 1+             =         π n (1 − λn )w̄bn .
                       n=1
                                                  1−u             n=1


Both sides of this equation are zero when lump-sum taxes are available; when they are not,
the right-hand side adds a correction that accounts for the redistributive role unemployment
benefits can play. Differences in responsiveness of the reservation wage to benefits w̄bn are
crucial: workers who gain more from an increase in benefits are those whose reservation wage
rises most. Reservation wages emerge again as an element in the diagnostic of unemployment
insurance policy, even when an allowance is made for its distributive role.


6.8    Temporary Layoffs
We have assumed throughout this paper that unemployed workers never return to their
old employer. In reality, many unemployment spells end when a worker is recalled to her
previous job. Following Burdett and Mortensen (1978), Pissarides (1982), and Katz (1986),
we allow for this possibility by distinguishing unemployed workers according to their last
wage w0 and allowing that an unemployed worker may be recalled to that wage according
to a Poisson process with arrival rate µ. We continue to assume that unemployed workers
get new wage offers at rate λ. Once a new offer is accepted, the worker loses access to her
previous wage.
    The possibility of recall implies that a worker’s reservation wage is an increasing function
of her past wage, w̄(w0 ); the precise formula is a slight complication of equation (4) (liquid-
ity) or equation (7) (hand-to-mouth). More importantly for us, the utility of an unemployed
worker is still equal to the annuity value of her assets plus her after-tax reservation wage.
It follows that if lump-sum transfers are available to address any distributional concerns, all
workers agree on maximizing the average after-tax reservation wage. In other words, tempo-
rary layoffs introduce ex post heterogeneity, but the test for the optimality of unemployment
insurance is identical to the one in an economy with ex ante heterogeneous workers.




                                                     25
6.9     Finite Benefit Eligibility
We have assumed until now that benefits last forever. In reality, most unemployment benefit
systems pay only for a specified amount of time; in the United States, this is typically 6
months. After this, a worker must be employed for some months before she is eligible to
collect benefits again. Our analysis readily extends to this case.
    When benefits fall with the duration of unemployment, there are two reasons why a
worker is willing to take a job: she earns a wage and she resets her eligibility for benefits.20 To
see why this matters, recall our intuition for why the after-tax reservation wage summarizes
a worker’s utility: an unemployed worker is indifferent between remaining unemployed and
working forever at the after-tax wage w̄ −τ ; and the utility of a working forever at a constant
wage is just the annuity value of assets plus the wage. But an unemployed worker may be
willing to take a bad job just long enough to reset her benefit eligibility but unwilling to keep
the job forever. That is, she has two different reservation wages, a low one for a job that she
can quit when she resets her benefit eligibility and high one for a job that she is willing to
keep past that point. Only the higher reservation wage informs us about her utility.
    For a newly unemployed worker with maximum eligibility, the two reservation wages are
the same. A worker with maximum eligibility takes a job only if she is willing to keep it
forever since taking a job and later quitting does not increase her benefit eligibility. This
implies that when benefits fall with the duration of unemployment, we should examine the
responsiveness of a newly unemployed worker’s after-tax reservation wage to benefits.
    While we do not know of any direct evidence on how the responsiveness of reservation
wages to benefits changes with unemployment duration,21 search theory suggests that when
benefit duration is finite, newly unemployed workers should be more responsive to a change
in benefits than workers who have used up part or all of their eligibility (van den Berg, 1990).
For example, consider a worker who has been unemployed for a long time and is no longer
eligible for benefits. Raising benefits will actually lower such a worker’s reservation wage
since it encourages her to accept a mediocre job in order to renew eligibility.
  20
     A similar logic and similar conclusions hold if the search environment is nonstationary for other reasons,
for example because the arrival rate of job offers declines during an unemployment spell.
  21
     Most of the studies summarized in Section 5 measure the average response of reservation wages to
benefits; van den Berg (1990) is an exception.




                                                      26
7     A Consumption-Response Test
The goal of this section is to link our model with existing tests for optimal unemployment
insurance which are based on the response of consumption to becoming unemployed (Baily,
1978; Gruber, 1997; Chetty, 2006). To do this, we return to the benchmark model of Section 2
and show how we can use the full structure to derive a test linking the decline in consumption
during an unemployment spell to risk aversion and the elasticity of unemployment duration
with respect to benefits. Our exact test depends on whether workers have liquidity. If
they do, our test looks at the average drop in consumption during an unemployment spell.
In the hand-to-mouth model our test examines the difference in consumption between an
unemployed worker and a worker employed at her reservation wage. Each of the extensions
analyzed in Section 6 would further modify our consumption-response tests since, in contrast
to our behavioral test, these tests build on the full structure of the model including the
determinants of consumption and reservation wages.


7.1    Workers with Liquidity
We start with the case when workers have access to financial markets. In this case, our
consumption-response test relates the speed of decline in consumption to the elasticity of
unemployment duration with respect to unemployment benefits:

Proposition 5 Assume workers have access to financial markets. If unemployment benefits
are chosen optimally, the expected absolute decline in consumption during an unemployment
spell is
                                     1 αT + D εD,b
                                                        .                            (22)
                                     γ αT 1 + εD,b
Equivalently, the expected percentage decline in consumption during an unemployment spell
should be
                                     1 αT + D εD,b
                                                      ,
                                     σ αT 1 + εD,b
where σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion evaluated at the consumption level at the
start of the unemployment spell, σ = γcu (a0 ).

The proof is in the appendix.
   As in most consumption-response tests, this optimality condition relates the average
decline in consumption to the elasticity of duration with respect to benefits, but there are


                                             27
some important differences: (i) we use the partial elasticity εD,b whereas previous studies
have used the total elasticity defined in footnote 13; (ii) the expression describes the average
decline in consumption during an unemployment spell; and (iii) the elasticity expression is
somewhat different than in previous work.
    These points need clarification. First we use the partial elasticity holding taxes fixed
because we believe this corresponds to the empirical evidence on the responsiveness of un-
employment duration to unemployment benefits summarized in Section 5. Turning now to
point (ii), Baily’s (1978) original analysis and Gruber’s (1997) subsequent work focus on
the discrete drop in consumption between employment and unemployment. For example, in
his empirical implementation of Baily’s (1978) test, Gruber (1997) uses PSID data to look
at the drop in food consumption for a worker who is employed in year t and unemployed
in year t + 1. Point (iii) is now easily explained. In these papers the optimality condition
equates some measure from consumption data to the elasticity of duration. Instead, we find
an expression involving the elasticity, but not equal to it. Since the consumption measures
differ, it should not be surprising that the optimality conditions call for equating these to
different expressions involving the elasticity.
    To implement this test, we plug the usual values r = 0.001, T = 225, D = 13.4, and εD,b =
0.88 into equation (22). In addition, assume that the coefficient of relative risk aversion at
the start of the unemployment spell is σ = 2. Then the model predicts that consumption
should decline by 25 percent during an unemployment spell if the unemployment benefit
level is optimal. If instead the observed decline in consumption is smaller, a decrease in
unemployment benefits would raise welfare.
    We know of no direct evidence on the magnitude of the decline in consumption during
an unemployment spell, but there is some indirect evidence based on food consumption and
expenditure. Gruber (1997) reports that food expenditures fall by about 6.8 percent when
a worker is employed one year and unemployed the next. Aguiar and Hurst (2005) find that
the unemployed spend 19 percent less on food than do the employed using cross-sectional
data; however, because of an increase in time spent on shopping and food preparation, this
translates into only a 5 percent drop in food consumption. Of course, since the income
elasticity of food consumption is less than 1, it seems likely that the expenditure on and
consumption of other goods declines more than this during an unemployment spell. In
addition, even if food consumption could proxy for total consumption, these measures do
not generally represent the average decline during a spell.



                                              28
7.2    Hand-to-Mouth Workers
We now turn to hand-to-mouth workers. In this case, our test relates the difference in
consumption between a worker at the reservation wage, w̄aut − τ , and an unemployed worker,
b, to the elasticity of unemployment duration:

Proposition 6 Assume workers must consume their income in each period. If unemploy-
ment benefits are chosen optimally, the difference between the consumption of an employed
worker at the reservation wage and the consumption of an unemployed worker is

                                        1
                                          log(1 + εD,b )                                  (23)
                                        γ

Equivalently, the percentage drop in consumption when a worker loses a job paying her reser-
vation wage should be
                                        1
                                          log(1 + εD,b ),
                                        σ
where σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion evaluated at the consumption level of a
worker earning the reservation wage, w̄aut − τ .

The proof is in the appendix.
     Once again, there are three important differences between our condition and most existing
formulas based on the response of consumption to unemployment: (i) we use the partial
elasticity εD,b ; (ii) we use the difference between the lowest acceptable level of consumption
while employed and consumption while unemployed, rather than the average difference; and
(iii) the final expression is slightly different than in previous work, with log(1 + ε) rather
than ε.
     Given the usual values of εD,b = 0.88 and σ = 2, the critical question in the hand-to-
mouth model is whether the consumption of a worker employed at her reservation wage
is 32 percent more than the consumption of unemployed workers. To measure this, we
need to know both the drop in consumption following unemployment and the worker’s
reservation wage. Data on food expenditures and consumption from Gruber (1997) and
Aguiar and Hurst (2005) suggest that many workers are willing to take jobs that raise their
consumption by less than 32 percent, so workers are currently over-insured.
     In our view, there are three drawbacks to the consumption-response tests we have pre-
sented here. The first is that the moments of the consumption data that we should look at
depend on the structure of financial markets. The second is the unavailability of reliable,

                                              29
high frequency consumption data for goods other than food. Finally, the behavioral test
is robust to assumptions like the predictability of job loss and the extent of heterogeneity.
Introducing these modifications is likely to further change the consumption-response tests.
    Chetty (2006) derives another consumption-based test that does not rely heavily on the
structure of the model and is identical in the hand-to-mouth and liquidity cases. This test
tells us to compare the average lifetime marginal utility of a worker when employed and when
unemployed. To implement such a test, we either need a very rich data set on the lifetime
path of consumption for a large panel of individuals or we have to make some assumption
about the economic environment so that we can extrapolate the desired moments from a
limited data set.


8    Conclusions
This paper argues that the after-tax reservation wage measures the well-being of unemployed
workers. Any policy that raises the average after-tax reservation wage is therefore beneficial,
and the benefit can be measured by the average increase in the after-tax reservation wage.
While we have applied this mainly to thinking about optimal unemployment insurance, the
insight is more general. For example, Proposition 3 shows that the after-tax reservation wage
encodes the value of liquidity. Going beyond this paper, when evaluating any policy towards
the unemployed—examples include severance payments, reemployment bonuses, training
subsidies, and job search centers—the key question is whether the policy raises the after-tax
reservation wage.
    We have assumed CARA preferences throughout the body of this paper. This assumption
is convenient but probably not essential. Proposition 2 shows that the after-tax reservation
wage measures a hand-to-mouth worker’s welfare regardless of her preferences. Moreover, in
our companion paper Shimer and Werning (2005), we argue that the behavior of a worker
with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences is quantitatively similar to that of
a worker with CARA preferences and the same coefficient of risk aversion if both workers
have access to liquidity. Indeed, our intuition for the proof of Proposition 1 explains why
this is true: the only reason the after-tax reservation wage would not measure the welfare
of an unemployed worker is if workers are willing to take jobs temporarily but not perma-
nently. While this is a theoretical possibility, we doubt that the phenomenon is quantitatively
important.
    Finally, our paper implies that a key empirical issue is the responsiveness of the reserva-

                                              30
tion wage to unemployment benefits or other labor market policies. Some existing estimates
suggest that reservation wages are very responsive, implying huge gains from increasing
unemployment benefit levels. Other estimates are much smaller and imply current benefit
levels are too high. An important goal for future research should be to obtain more precise
estimates of how labor market policies affect reservation wages.




                                            31
Appendix

A     Proof of Proposition 1
A Convenient CARA Property. We start by proving that

                           1                                                    1
                   Vu (a) = U (cu (a))               and           V (a, t, w) = U (c(a, t, w)),              (24)
                           r                                                    r

where V (a, t, w) is the value of an employed worker with assets a, t periods remaining on
the job, and a wage w. We prove this for the general case where r and ρ are not necessarily
equal. With additively separable utility, we have an Euler equation

                                                          ′
                                   U ′ (cs ) = e(r−ρ)(s −s) Es U ′ (cs′ ) ∀s′ > s,

where the expectation is taken using all the information available when cs is chosen. With
CARA, U ′ (c) = −γU (c), so the Euler equation implies implies per-period utility is a random
walk with drift:
                                                  ′
                                U (cs ) = e(r−ρ)(s −s) Es U (cs′ ).                       (25)

Now consider the lifetime utility Vs at time s of a worker facing some stochastic future
consumption path at all future dates s′ :
                   ∞                                      ∞
                                                                                                  1
               Z                                     Z
                       −ρ(s′ −s)               ′                   ′             ′
        Vs =           e           Es U (cs′ )ds =            e−ρ(s −s) e−(r−ρ)(s −s) U (cs )ds′ = U (cs ).
               s                                      s                                           r

The second equation uses equation (25) while the third equation solves the integral.
Shape of the Consumption and Value Functions. The shapes of the consumption and
value functions follow immediately from equation (24). It is feasible for a worker with assets
a to consume ra more than a worker with assets 0 and vice-versa, assuming the two have
the same employment duration and wage. This implies

                                          c(a, t, w) = ra + c(0, t, w).                                       (26)

   Next, consider two employed workers, one at a wage w and another at a wage w′ . If each
has t periods remaining in his job, the present value (as of the end of the previous period)




                                                              32
of the difference in earnings is
                                           Z       t
                                       ′
                               (w − w )                e−rs ds ≡ αt (w − w′ ).
                                               0


If the present value difference happens to equal the difference in the two workers’ asset levels,
they have the same resources and will behave the same:

                             c(a, t, w) = c (a + αt (w − w′ ), t, w′ ) .

Combining with equation (26) gives
                                                         
                          c(a, t, w) = r a + αt (w − w′ ) + c(0, t, w′ )                    (27)

for any w′ .
    Note that if the job is finished, t = 0 and α0 = 0, the worker is unemployed so c(a, 0, w) =
c(a, 0, w′ ) for all w and w′ . It is convenient to define cu (a) ≡ c(a, 0, w) as the consumption
of a worker who starts a period unemployed and Vu (a) ≡ V (a, 0, w) as her value function.
Reservation Wage. Consider a worker who accepts a job at wage w. Her value function
is V (a, T, w) and so she takes the job if V (a, T, w) ≥ Vu (a). Using equation (24), this is
equivalent to c(a, T, w) ≥ cu (a), which by equation (26) implies a reservation wage rule,
independent of assets, satisfying
                                     c(0, T, w̄) = cu (0).                              (28)

Combine equation (28) with equation (27), evaluated at w′ = w̄, to get a convenient expres-
sion for the consumption of a newly employed worker:
                                                          
                            c(a, T, w) = r a + αT (w − w̄) + cu (0).                        (29)


Behavior of the Employed. A worker who starts a period with t ≥ 0 periods remaining
in her job faces no uncertainty until the job ends and therefore keeps consumption constant.
That is, for any t > 0,
                                       dc(a(t), t, w)
                                                      = 0,
                                             dt
where ȧ(t) = ra + w − τ − c(a(t), t, w) is the rate of increase in assets. Differentiating gives
                                                           
                       ca (a, t, w) ra + w − τ − c(a, t, w) = ct (a, t, w),

                                                          33
where subscripts denote partial derivatives. Note from equation (27) that ca (a, t, w) = r, so
this is a differential equation for c as a function of t with terminal condition equation (29).
The solution is

            c(a, t, w) = ra − (w − τ ) er(T −t) − 1 + er(T −t) rαT (w − w̄) + cu (0)
                                                                                   
                                                                                                        (30)

This provides an alternate expression for c(a, 0, w), which we know is equal ra + cu (0).
Simplifying this equality pins down the constant in the consumption function,

                                                         cu (0) = w̄ − τ.                               (31)

Substituting equation (31) into equation (29) yields the consumption functions for unem-
ployed and employed workers found in equation (2) and equation (3), while substituting
these into equation (24) gives the value of an unemployed worker in equation (1). All that
remains is to determine the worker’s reservation wage.
Behavior of the Unemployed. Expected marginal utility for an unemployed worker is a
Martingale. This implies
                                                Z    ∞                                   
                  ′′
              U        (cu (a))c′u (a)ȧ   +λ             U ′ (c(a, T, w)) − U ′ (cu (a)) dF (w) = 0,
                                                 w̄


where ȧ = ra + b − cu (a) = B − w̄ using equation (31). Since U ′′ (c) = −γU ′ (c) = γ 2 U (c)
and c′u (a) = r, we can rewrite this as
                                                         Z    ∞                              
               γrU (cu (a))(B − w̄) = λ                           U (c(a, T, w)) − U (cu (a)) dF (w).
                                                             w̄


Next, use U (c1 )/U (c2 ) = −U (c1 − c2 ) and U (0) = −1 to get
                                            Z       ∞                             
                        γr(w̄ − B) = λ                   U c(a, T, w) − cu (a)) + 1 dF (w).
                                                w̄


Simplifying using equation (29) yields equation (4). This completes the characterization of
worker behavior in Proposition 1.                                                        




                                                                  34
B     Proof of Proposition 2
We use a pair of recursive equations. Let Vuaut denote the expected utility of an unemployed
worker living under autarky and let V aut (w, T ) denote the corresponding value for a newly-
employed worker at a wage w. These solve
                                             Z       ∞
                  ρVuaut                                 max V aut (w, T ) − Vuaut , 0 dF (w)
                                                            
                           = U (b) + λ
                                                 0
                                                 Z       T
                               aut
                           V         (w, T ) =               e−ρt U (w − τ )dt + e−ρT Vuaut
                                                     0


The flow value of an unemployed worker comes from her current utility U (b). In addition, at
rate λ she gets a wage draw w which she may accept, giving capital gain V aut (w, T ) − Vuaut ,
or reject. An employed worker in a new job earns U (w − τ ) for the next T periods and then
has continuation value Vuaut .
    The Bellman equation for a newly-employed worker implies

                           V aut (w, T ) − Vuaut = αT U (w − τ ) − ρVuaut ,
                                                                         


since ρ = r, so the reservation wage solves U (w̄aut − τ ) = ρVuaut . Equivalently, the lifetime
utility of an unemployed worker is given by equation (5). Substituting this into the Bellman
equation for an unemployed worker gives equation (6) for the reservation wage.                 


C     Proof of Proposition 3
We start with two inequalities. At any w ≥ w̃,

                     −U (B − w̃) − 1 = exp(γ(w̃ − B)) − 1 > γ(w̃ − B),
                           1 + U (rαT (w − w̃)) ≥ rαT (1 + U (w − w̃)).

The first equality uses the definition of U and the first inequality uses convexity of the
exponential function. To prove the second inequality, note that 1 − y ≥ e−xy − ye−x when
x > 0 and y ∈ [0, 1]. When x = 0, this is trivially true. Moreover, the derivative of the
right-hand-side with respect to x is y(e−x − e−xy ). Since y ∈ [0, 1] and x ≥ 0, x ≥ xy and
hence e−x ≤ e−xy , so the right-hand-side is decreasing in x. Hence the inequality holds for
any positive x. If x = γ(w − w̃) > 0 and y = rαT ∈ [0, 1], this is equivalent to the desired


                                                                35
inequality.
   Now suppose w̄ solves equation (4). The previous inequalities imply

  − U (B − w̄) − 1 > γ(w̄ − B) =
                    λ ∞
                      Z                                       Z ∞
                                                                                
                          (1 + U (rαT (w − w̄)))dF (w) ≥ αT λ     1 + U (w − w̄) dF (w).
                    r w̄                                       w̄


It is easy to confirm that the first expression is decreasing in w̄ and the last expression is
increasing, so the solution to
                                                         Z    ∞
                                aut
                                                                  1 + U (w − w̄aut ) dF (w)
                                                                                    
                   −U (B − w̄         ) − 1 = αT λ
                                                          w̄aut


requires w̄aut < w̄. Under CARA utility, U (c1 + c2 ) = −U (c1 )U (c2 ), so this is equivalent to
the reservation wage equation (7).
    Finally, under financial autarky, equation (5) shows that an unemployed worker’s utility is
U (w̄aut −τ )/ρ. With access to financial markets, equation (1) shows that it is U (ra+ w̄−τ )/ρ.
The worker is indifferent to the scenarios if a = (w̄aut − w̄)/r, a reduction in assets that lowers
the worker’s consumption by ra = w̄aut − w̄ in every future period.                              


D      Proof of Proposition 5
First take the partial derivative with respect to b of both sides of equation (4), holding fixed
the tax rate τ :                              Z ∞
                       γ(w̄b − 1) = −w̄b αT λ     U ′ (rαT (w − w̄))dF (w).
                                                         w̄

Since U (c) = −γU (c), we can eliminate the integral using equation (4). Solving this expres-
        ′

sion for B = b + τ gives                                    
                                        1      1     αT + D
                            B = w̄ +              −            .
                                      rαT γ w̄b         D
Second, note that while a worker is unemployed, assets fall at rate ȧ = ra+b−cu (a) = B − w̄,
where the second equality uses equation (2). Since a unit decrease in assets reduces cu (a)
by r, consumption falls linearly during an unemployment spell, ċu = r(B − w̄). Substitute
B from the previous equation.
                                                                        
                                               1          1    αT + D
                                      ċu =                  −               .
                                              αT γ       w̄b     D

                                                          36
This holds for any tax and benefit policy. At the optimal policy, we can eliminate w̄b using
equation (11) to get
                                         1 αT + D εD,b
                               Dċu = −                   .
                                         γ αT 1 + εD,b
Finally, if an unemployment spell lasts for t periods, the drop in consumption is ċu t. The
density of the duration of an unemployment spell is e−t/D /D, so the expected drop in con-
sumption during an unemployment spell is
                                                         ∞
                                                             e−t/D ċu t
                                                   Z
                                                                         dt = Dċu .
                                                    0           D

Combining these equations completes the proof.                                                                            


E       Proof of Proposition 6
Totally differentiate equation (6):
                                  Z   ∞                            
              aut                                  aut
                                                         − τ )dF (w) w̄baut + w̄τaut τ ′ (b) − τ ′ (b)
       ′                                    ′
                                                                                                      
      U (w̄         − τ ) + αT λ           U (w̄
                                   w̄aut
                                                                                      Z ∞
                                                                       ′
                                                                    = U (b) − αT λ           U ′ (w − τ )dF (w)τ ′ (b).
                                                                                         w̄aut


The left-hand-side is zero if benefits are chosen optimally, to maximize w̄aut (b, τ (b)) − τ (b).
Then use equation (10) to eliminate τ ′ (b) from the right-hand-side:

                                               U ′ (b)          αT (1 + εD,b )
                                                          aut
                                                              =                ,
                                       E(U (w − τ )|w ≥ w̄ )
                                          ′                     αT − DεD,b

where the denominator on the left-hand-side is the expectation of the marginal utility of
consumption conditional on the wage drawn from F exceeding w̄aut .
    Under CARA utility, this simplifies further since the ratio of marginal utility is the same
as the ratio of utility,
                                   U (b)              αT (1 + εD,b )
                                                   =                 .
                         E(U (w − τ )|w ≥ w̄aut )     αT − DεD,b
Since equation (6) implies

                                     U (b)                     αT
                                                    =                            ,
                                                      (D + αT ) (w̄U (b)−τ ) − D
                                                               U
                                                aut                 aut
                             E(U (w − τ )|w ≥ w̄ )


                                                                    37
the previous two equations give

                                       U (b)
                                                  = 1 + εD,b .
                                   U (w̄aut − τ )

Since U (c) = −e−γc , the result follows immediately.            




                                               38
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Robert Shimer, “Efficient Unemployment Insurance,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (5), 893–928.

   and , “Productivity gains from unemployment insurance,” European Economic Review,
  2000, 44 (7), 1195–1224.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 2005, 113 (5), 919–948.

Alvarez, Fernando and Marcelo Veracierto, “Severance payments in an economy with
 frictions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2001, 47 (3), 477–498.

Baily, Martin Neil, “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of
 Public Economics, 1978, 10 (3), 379–402.

Barnes, William F., “Job Search Models, the Duration of Unemployment, and the Asking
 Wage: Some Empirical Evidence,” The Journal of Human Resources, 1975, 10 (2), 230–
 240.

Bloemen, Hans G. and Elena G. F. Stancanelli, “Individual Wealth, Reservation
  Wages, and Transitions into Employment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2001, 19 (2),
  400–439.

Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen, “Labor Supply Under Uncertainty,” Re-
 search in Labor Economics, 1978, 2, 109–157.

Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber, “Does Cash-in-Hand Matter? New
 Evidence from the Labor Market,” 2006. Mimeo.

Chetty, Raj, “A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance,” Journal of
 Public Economics, 2006, 90 (10–11), 1879–1901.

DellaVigna, Stefano and M. Daniele Paserman, “Job Search and Impatience,” Journal
 of Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (3), 527–587.

Devine, Theresa J. and Nicholas M. Kiefer, Empirical Labor Economics: The Search
 Approach, Oxford University Press, 1991.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G and Ronald L. Oaxaca, “Unemployment Insurance, Duration of
 Unemployment, and Subsequent Wage Gain,” American Economic Review, 1976, 66 (5),
 754–66.

Feldstein, Martin, “Rethinking Social Insurance,” American Economic Review, March
  2005, 95 (1), 1–24.


                                         39
   and James Poterba, “Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages,” Journal of
  Public Economics, February-March 1984, 23 (1-2), 141–167.

Fishe, Raymond P. H., “Unemployment Insurance and the Reservation Wage of the
  Unemployed,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1982, 64 (1), 12–17.

Gorter, Dirk and Cees Gorter, “The Relation between Unemployment Benefits, the
 Reservation Wage and Search Duration,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
 1993, 55 (2), 199–214.

Gruber, Jonathan, “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
 American Economic Review, March 1997, 87 (1), 192–205.

Hansen, Gary D. and Ayse Imrohoroglu, “The Role of Unemployment Insurance in an
 Economy with Liquidity Constraints and Moral Hazard,” Journal of Political Economy,
 1992, 100 (1), 118–42.

Holzer, Harry J., “Job Search by Employed and Unemployed Youth,” Industrial and Labor
 Relations Review, 1987, 40 (4), 601–611.

Hopenhayn, Hugo and Juan Pablo Nicolini, “Optimal Unemployment Insurance,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105 (2), 412–438.

Jones, Stephen R. G., “The Relationship between Unemployment Spells and Reservation
  Wages as a Test of Search Theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1988,
  103 (4), 741–765.

  , “Reservation Wages and Job Search Behaviour: Evidence from the Survey on Repeat Use
  of Employment Insurance,” in Saul Schwartz and Abdurrahman Aydermir, eds., Essays
  on the Repeat Use of Unemployment Insurance, Ottawa: SRDC, 2001, pp. 63–89.

Kasper, Hirschel, “The Asking Price of Labor and the Duration of Unemployment,” Re-
 view of Economics and Statistics, 1967, 49 (2), 165–172.

Katz, Lawrence and Bruce Meyer, “The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unemploy-
 ment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment,” Journal of Public Economics, February
 1990, 41 (1), 45–72.

Katz, Lawrence F., “Layoffs, Recall and the Duration of Unemployment,” 1986. NBER
 Working Paper 1825.

Krueger, Alan and Bruce Meyer, “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance,” in Alan
 Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Elsevier Science
 B.V., 2002, chapter 33, pp. 2327–2392.

McCall, John, “Economics of Information and Job Search,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 1970, 84 (1), 113–126.

                                          40
Meyer, Bruce, “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,” Econometrica, July
 1990, 58 (4), 757–782.

Meyer, Bruce D., “Lessons from the US Unemployment Insurance Experiments,” Journal
 of Economic Literature, 1995, 33 (1), 91–131.

Pissarides, Christopher A., “Job Search and the Duration of Layoff Unemployment,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1982, 97 (4), 595–612.

Sant, Donald T., “Reservation Wage Rules and Learning Behavior,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, February 1977, 59 (1), 43–49.

Shavell, Steven and Laurence Weiss, “Optimal Payment of Unemployment-Insurance
  Benefits over Time,” Journal of Political Economy, 1979, 87 (6), 1347–1362.

Shimer, Robert and Iván Werning, “Liquidity and Insurance for the Unemployed,”
  Staff Report 366, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis December 2005.

van den Berg, Gerard J., “Nonstationarity in Job Search Theory,” The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 1990, 57 (2), 255–277.




                                        41
