                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MILITARY ENLISTMENTS:
          WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM GEOGRAPHIC VARIATION?




                         Charles Brown



                     Working Paper No. 1261




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         January 19814




I have benefited from help with data sources and/or comments on a
previous draft from George Abrahams, Bernard Bell, Ed Byerly,
Michael Cimini, Charles Dale, Curtis Gilroy, Daniel Hamermesh,
Philip Knorr, Walter Oi, Thomas Schneider, Gary Solon, Marvin
Trautwein, and seminar participants at Cornell, George Washington,
Maryland, Michigan State, NBER, and Virginia. Cheryl Hansen pro-
vided very careful research assistance. Any remaining inadequacies
are my doing. This study was financed by the U.S. Army Research
Institute; additional computer support was provided by the
University of Maryland Computer Science Center. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, ABI, or the
Department of Defense.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #1261
                                                     January 1984




                            Military Enlistments:
                What Can We Learn From Ceographic Variation?


                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper analyzes the determinants of the supply of enlistees to the
U.S. Army, using quarterly data from 1975:4 through 1982:3 for the 50 states
and the District of Columbia.

     For high—quality enlistees, defined as those with test scores in the top
half of the population or top. scoring individuals who are also high school
graduates, supply elasticities with respect to military compensation are
estimated to be about 1.0. Elasticities with respect to the unemployment rate
                                                                            have
center on 0.5, larger than most previous estimates. Recruiting resources
the expected effects (Army recruiters increase and other services recruiters
reduce Army enlistments). Advertising (both national and local) does not have
consistently positive effects. Results are similar for high school graduates,
except that the effect of military compensation depends crucially on how it is
measured. Estimates of the supply of enlistees of all qualities are weaker
still: estimates of compensation effects vary widely, and estimated effects of
recruiters and advertising are less plausible. Unemployment elasticities of
about 0.3 are smaller than for high—quality recruits, but hardly negligible.

     A tentative explanation for the weaker results of the latter two groups
is that the number of such enlistees is not supply determined, but reflect
demand constraints as well. Further work is needed to determine how standards
for enlistees vary in each recruiting district in response to both national
and local fluctuations in recruit supply.


                                                   Charles Brown
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   University of Maryland
                                                   College Park MD 20742
                                                   (301) 454—4182
     The decision to end the draft in 1973 and return to reliance on voluntary

enlistments can be seen as a commitment, an experiment, or (perhaps most

accurately) a commitment to an experiment. Given the size of the force

considered necessary and a limit to the political willingness to pay for the

All—Volunteer Force (AVF), the number of volunteers who could be attracted at

politically realistic wages has been a key question.

     This supply issue has arisen often in the brief history of the most

recent AVF ——    first   when the end of conscription was being planned, and later

when renorming of the entrance test (Armed Forces Vocational Aptitude Battery)

showed a decline in the mental abilities of recruits. The more satisfactory

recent recruiting experience has been attributed by some to uncommonly high

unemployment but by others to the pay increases which occurred at about the

same time. If the high—unemployment explanation is correct, the viability of

the AVF could once again be in doubt if unemployment rates decline

substantially.

     It is difficult to summarize the results of previous econometric work on

the supply of enlistees because the supply measure has been defined in so many

ways. Some studies analyze total Defense Department enlistments, while others

look at enlistments in particular services. Most focus on high—quality

recruits, though "high—quality" is defined in different ways. Estimates of

the elasticity of enlistments with respect to military compensation center a

bit below 1.0 (Dale and Gilroy, 1983; Morey and McCann, 1983). Elasticities

with respect to unemployment are much smaller; Morey and McCanns (1983)

surveys range of 0.2 to 0.5 is representative. The strongest statement of

the unimportance of unemployment is Ash, Udis, and McNownTh (1983, p. 147)

conclusion that "The evidence on the lack of an unemployment effect on

accessions is overwhelming."




                                           1
     The purpose of this paper is to examine the supply of enlistees with a

different empirical strategy—— pooling cross—section and time—series data from

the all—volunteer period. In Section I, the analytic issues raised by

previous studies are considered. One conclusion which motivates the remainder

of the paper is the difficulty of learning about the supply of volunteers to a

peacetime army from information about enlistments over a period which includes

the Vietnam War, the draft, and the post—war experience. In Section II, the

data for studying determinants of Army enlistments in fiscal years 1976—82 are

described. The malor results appear In Section III. While the response of

enlistments to compensation is quite complicated, the effect of unemployment

on enlistments is unambiguous and larger than typically estimated in previous

studies. Conclusions are presented in Section IV.




                                       2
I. Theory and Estimation Issues

     The economic theory of voluntary military enlistments was outlined by 01

(1967) and Fisher (1969), and succeeding papers have been (at least

implicitly) based on their approach. In this model, the proportion of those

eligible who enlist is equal to the fraction for whom the military wage Wm

exceeds the reservation wage for military service Wr (i.e., for whom

Wm/Wr exceds one). An important determinant of Wr is the

alternative civilian wage Wc• If Wr is a constant multiple of Wc

supply depends on the ratio Wm/Wc• This proportionality restriction

is often convenient in theoretical (Friedman, 1976, pp. 239—40) as well as

empirical work on occupational choice. However, while the theory implies that

the supply function is homogeneous of degree one in Wm Wc and

prices, homogeneity in Wm and     alone is an assumption rather than an

implication of the theory.

     In empirical work, aggregated data are often used, and Wc

represented by the mean of the civilian wage distribution. In principle, the

distribution of    around its mean is also relevant, although this is

usually assumed constant across the sample of observations.

     Fisher noted that observed civilian wages do not include the best

opportunity (perhaps zero) open to those unemployed. Thus, the unemployment

rate (or some similar measure) is typically included in enlistment supply

functions.

     Finally, changes in tastes can affect the relationship between Wc and

Wr• These can be Included as determinants of supply when suitable proxy

variables are available.

     Since Fishers paper, there have been relatively few theoretical

developments in modelling enlistment behavior. Rather, most of the attention




                                       3
has been directed toward correctly estimating the determinants of the supply

of volunteers.

     One important point which was recognized in Fisher's original paper is

that the Armed Forces are neither pure price takers nor pure quantity takers.

Rather, they attempt to fill a predetermined number of positions at a

predetermined wage, with recruit quality varying to equate supply and demand

(DeVany and Saving, 1982). Thus, the number of high—quality enlistees is

supply determined, but the total number of enlistees reflects both supply and

demand forces (or demand alone if targets are always exactly fulfilled).

High—quality enlistees are taken to be those with superior mental—test scores

(Altman and Fechter, 1967; Fisher, 1969; Fechter, 1979), high school graduates

(Dale and Gilroy, 1983) or high—scoring high school graduates (Cooper, 1977;

Grissiner, 1979; Jehn and Shugart, 1979). One recent study of total

enlistments (divided by race) cautions that demand constraints may be

important (Ash, Udis, and McNown, 1983, pp. 147, 154).

     Focusing on high—scoring graduates is probably the best strategy if one's

goal is to isolate supply behavior. Studying either high scorers or graduates

may reduce but not eliminate the problem of demand—side constraints. Because

both test scores and high school graduation are desired attributes, a change

in standards for either attribute may change the number of enlistees

possessing the other attribute, even if supply conditions and the target

number of enlistees is constant. For example, in 1981 the Army restricted

enlistment of those with low test scores, leading to a drop in the proportion

of enlistees who were high school graduates (Huck, Kusmin, and Shepard, 1982,

p. 5) as higher—scoring nongraduates replaced low—scoring graduates. Periodic

Congressional pressure to reduce the number of nongraduates may have analogous

negative effects on the 'supply' of high—scoring enlistees. An unintended




                                       4
 experiment in the late 1970s may also have distorted apparent supply. An

 error was made in norming the entrance exam, leading to a substantial increase

 in the proportion of low—scoring enlistees (Office of the Assistant Secretary

 of Defense, 1982, pp. 17—19) and more enlistments than would have occurred

 otherwise at the announced wage and intended quality standards.   Presumably,
 the error led to a real increase in the number of high—school graduate

 enlistees (as some with low "true" scores were mistakenly accepted) and an

 apparent increase in the number of high—scoring enlistees (unless one uses the

 corrected score data).

     A second issue is the usefulness of pooling data from years in which

there was both a war and a draft with data from the peacetime all—volunteer

period. The existence of a draft stimulates draft—encouraged volunteers, who

enlist "voluntarily" because the prospect of being drafted interferes with

civilian employment (Oi, 1967, p. 60), or to secure preferred assignments, or

just to avoid being drafted later. Nearly 40 percent of those who volunteered

in the period before the 1965 Vietnam buildup were draft motivated (Altman and

Fechter, 1967, p. 23). On the other hand, some of those who would have

eventually volunteered are drafted, reducing the supply of volunteers. There

are two strategies for dealing with the effects of the draft. Some studies

(e.g., Fisher, 1969; Grissmer, 1979; Ash, Udis, and McNown, 1983) include a

variable which measures the probability of being drafted;1 other studies

(e.g., Cooper, 1977) try to determine the number of "true" volunteers during

the draft period. Cooper used the enlistment behavior of those with high

draft—lottery numbers, who presumably faced little threat of being drafted, to

gauge the supply of true volunteers during the lottery phase of the draft.

    Each of these strategies has its problems. One difficulty with using a

draft pressure variable Is that the probability of induction for




                                      5
"high—quality" individuals (the population being studied) would vary with

omitted factors like selective service regulations as well as with the level

of overall inductions. The alternative strategy of inferring true volunteers

from enlistments by those with high lottery numbers risks some error because

it requires making assumptions about who perceived themselves to be draft—safe

(Cooper, 1977, p. 194). This is particularly chancy during the early history

of the lottery when the eventual probabilities were not well known. Because

the draft period was by design a period of low military pay and by accident a

period of low unemployment, errors in holding constant the effect of the draft

are likely to bias the remaining coefficients.

     Controlling for the effect of the draft, however, is not enough—— supply

behavior might be expected to differ in periods of war or threat of war and

peace, apart from the draft per Se, because of "taste" factors such as wishing

to be patriotic, or liking or disliking combat. Even the direction of these

taste shifts may change as the period of danger wears on. For example, there

is evidence of increased voluntary enlistments during the Berlin crisis

(Altman and Fechter, 1967, p. 20), but it is not clear that such positive

responses continued throughout the prolonged conflict in Vietnam. Fisher

(1969), Cooper (1977), Grissmer (1979), and Ash, Udis, and McNown (1983) do

not attempt to distinguish observations according to degree of military

involvement, leaving the draft—pressure variable and perhaps the time trend to

perform this chore as well.

     A third estimation issue is lags in the response of enlistments to

changes in military pay and civilian alternatives. In general, previous

studies have short lags in these responses (one quarter for both relative pay

and unemployment in Fisher, 1969; no lags in Cooper, 1977; six quarters for

unemployment but none for relative pay in Fechter, 1979; six months for




                                       6
relative pay and two months for unemployment in Grissmer, 1979; one quarter

for relative pay and none for unemployment in Ash, TJdis, and McNown, 1983).

These lags are either assumed or found to fit better than no lags; longer lags

seem not to have been considered. The short lags are consistent with the lag

between contract signing and beginning service which is sometimes offered as a

justification (e.g., Grissmer, 1979, pp. 107—108). It is difficult to say

much about the lag between contract signing and beginning of active duty

because "enlistment" seems to mean contract signing in some studies (e.g.,

DeVany and Saving, 1982) and beginning of active duty in others (Grissmer,

1979). Lagged values are also used in order to avoid reverse causation

running from enlistments to the rate of unemployment or the level of civilian

pay. However, both unemployment and wages are influenced by the stock of

military—age individuals in the armed forces; a quarters fluctuation in the

flow of enlistments cannot have a very large effect on this stock (and hence

on civilian wages or unemployment). Nor is it clear that a one—quarter lag

would be sufficient to avoid any simultaneity that exists if errors in the

enlistment equation are serially correlated (Ash, Udis, and McNowns equation

for Army enlistments suggests a correlation of about .35 between errors for

semiannual observations) or if the previously mentioned lag between a decision

to join the armed forces and beginning active duty leads to labor force

withdrawal during this interval. In any case, the possibility that

enlistments are dependent on alternatives expected over a three—year term of

enlistment, and that these expectations are based on lagged values of the

unemployment rate and level of wages, suggests that the possibility of

somewhat longer lags ought to be considered. Of course, the age of the

enlistees (typically in their late teens) argues against a very long lag that

might be appropriate in other markets.




                                         7
     Dale and Gilroy (1983) follow earlier papers in lagging the unemployment

rate, but use the military/civilian compensation ratio with a four—month lead.

The lead is justified largely on goodness— of—fit grounds. Given that

military pay is usually changed only at the start of the new fiscal year, that

the change is usually known in advance, and that their dependent variable is

the number of contracts signed (rather than the number beginning active duty),

a short lead is not implausible.2

     A final issue which has become important since the expiration of the GI

Bill for new recruits in January 1977 is the appropriate way of incorporating

changes in educational benefits into ones measure of military compensation.

The CI Bill was replaced by VEAP (Veterans Educational Assistance Program)

which both offered lower benefits and required that the enlistee contribute

one dollar for every two dollars the government provided. This was modified

in fiscal year 1979 by the introduction of Ultra—VEAP (or the "Kicker"), under

which the enlistee received an additional educational benefit for entering

hard—to—fill occupations, typically in the combat arms (Military Manpower Task

Force, 1982, Chapter V). Unlike the GI Bill and VEAP, the Kicker is available

only to Army recruits. While maximum VEAP benefits have remained fixed at

$5400 for a three year enlistment, the maximum Kicker grew from $4000 to

$12000. Although the matching requirement of VEAP and the limited

availability of the Kicker suggest that these dollar values overstate their

importance, variations in these benefits are very large relative to the

limited variation in other components of military compensation in the

post—draft period.

    Previous work has had limited success In estimating the effect of these

benefits on recruitment. Ash, Udis, and McNowns (1983) military compensation

variable ignores the switch from the GI Bill to VEAP and the introduction of




                                      8
modest Kicker payments (their sample ends before the sharp fiscal—year 1982

increase in the Kicker). Dale and Gliroy (1983) treat the GI Bill, VEAP, and

the Kicker as separate variables with some success (all are significant in

their Army—recruiting equation) but several puzzling results emerge (VEAP is

more effective per dollar of benefits than the less restrictive GI Bill for

Army, Navy, and Marine Corps recruiting, and neither helps Air Force

recruiting.)

     Thus far, the analysis has concentrated on time—series estimates, which

are more common in the literature than are cross—section studies. Viewed in

comparison with the time—series approach, the cross—section strategy (e.g.,

Fisher, 1969; Jehn and Shugart, 1979; Daula, Fagan, and Smith, 1982) offers

both advantages and disadvantages. The main advantage is that one can obtain

reasonably—sized samples without including observations which are burdened by

draft—era complications. A second feature, which may be both an advantage and

a disadvantage, is that there is no3 variation in military pay across

observations. If one is hesitant to accept the relative— pay restriction in

the supply function, this is a serious limitation. If one is willing to

accept this assumption, at least as an approximation, the lack of pay

variation can become an advantage. Without such variation, there is no need

to worry about the more complicated forms which such variation can take over

time, i.e., the various educational benefits mentioned above.

     The major disadvantage of the cross—section approach is the danger that

unmeasured taste and ability factors will be correlated with civilian

compensation. To cite the simplest example, the historically greater

propensity to enlist in the South may be due to lower civilian wage

opportunities or to differences in "cultural attitudes toward the military.

To the extent that such attitudes differ only between the South and the North




                                       9
(somehow defined) a dummy variable would solve the problem. But to the extent

that both earnings and attitudes differ within regions (New Hampshire and

Massachusetts come to mind), the problem is not so easily solved.

     Failure to control for differences in entrance test scores across areas

can also bias cross—section estimates. Ideally, one might want to study the

proportion of high mental ability high school graduates who choose to enlist.

In practice, one knows the ratio of high mental ability graduates who enlist

to total graduates (or, even worse, total population) in the enlistment—prone

age group. Thus) the dependent variable will be affected by differences in

the proportion of high school graduates who score well on standardized tests,

as well as differences in properly defined supply behavior. One might

conjecture that test scores among high school graduates would be positively

related to civilian pay; on this conjecture, the estimated effect of civilian

pay would be less negative than its true effect. The estimated value could

even be positive, though this does not appear to happen in practice (Fisher,

1969; Jehn and Shugart, 1979; Daula, Fagan, and Smith, 1982k).

     A related omitted—variable issue is the dispersion of earnings. As

Fisher noted, this is usually taken as constant in time—series work. But-the

variance of earnings does differ geographically, so that its omission might be

important in cross—section work.

     When one considers the strengths and weaknesses of the time—series and

cross—section approaches, pooling cross—section data over the all—volunteer

period emerges as an alternative worth considering. The cross—sectional

dimension allows us to avoid worrying about holding constant the effects of

the draft and the Vietnam War, and gives a good deal of variation in

unemployment rates and some variation in civilian earnings. Pooling several

cross—sections allows one to introduce state—specific dummy variables to deal




                                       10
with state—specific differences in tastes and ability.5 It also provides

some variation in military compensation, though obviously less than would be

available in longer time series.

     Pooling several cross—sections and adding state—specific intercepts

changes the interpretation of the coefficients from that usually offered in

purely cross—sectional work. It is often argued that, if there are lags in

responses to the independent variables, cross—section estimates provide

estimates of long—run impacts. This is because differences across states will

be primarily "permanent" rather than "transitory" differences, and responses

to these permanent differences will be more or less complete. With

individual—specific intercepts, variations around state means for each of the

variables over the sample period is what Is identifying the coefficients, and

so a shorter—run response Is being captured. Of course, If one believes that

such lags are really important, estimating the pattern of response over time

would be desirable.




                                      11
     II. Data

     The dependent variables used in this study are ratios of the number of

contracts signed by male nonprior—service Army enlistees to the enlistment—age

population6. Contracts cross—tabulated by high school graduation and

mental—test category by state for fiscal years 1976—82 were made available by

the Defense Manpower Data Center. The mental—test categories have been

corrected when necessary by DMDC for the forming error mentioned above. Four

types of recruits were analyzed: total, high school graduates, those in the

top half of the test—score distribution (mental categories (CAT) I—lilA) and

high school graduate CAT I—IIIAs. For total and high test score contracts,

the dependent variable is expressed as the ratio of contracts to population

18—20 years of age; the population data are from the U.S. Census Bureau (1980,

1982, 1983). For high school graduates and high scoring graduates, the

dependent variable is the ratio of contracts to the number of high school

graduates in the past three years; the latter series is published by state

each year by the National Center for Educational Statistics. Because the

numerator of the dependent variable is the number of contracts signed in the

quarter, rather than the number of enlistees beginning active duty, the lag

between decision to enlist and beginning military service mentioned above is

not relevant.

     Military pay is most often measured by basic military compensation, BMC,

which includes the value of allowances and tax advantages as well as base pay.

The level of BMC for first—year enlistees was obtained from the Army Research

Institute, which also provided data on benefits under the various educational

benefit programs

    An attempt was made to combine basic military compensation and

educational benefits into an overall compensation measure. For various




                                       12
reasons—— the fact that such benefits are received in the future, the

possibility that the benefits will not be used at all, and the reluctance of

many VEAP participants to contribute the maximum amount—— these benefits are

thought to be "worth" less to the recruit than their stated value. Huck,

Kusmin, and Shepard (1982) calculated a range of estimates of the value of

each type of educational benefit to the recruit. Using the average of the

high and low estimate, and taking account of the fact that the Kicker is

available to only about half the high—scoring graduates recruited by the Army,

the various educational benefits were combined into a single variable. If

total compensation equals BMC plus ED( the value of the educational benefits)

then

       ln(total compensation) = ln(BMC) + ln(1+ED/BMC)

                                                     ln(BMC) + ED/BMC

Since the discounted ED averaged only about 4 percent of BMC, the

approximation ln(1+x)=x is quite accurate.

       Military compensation consists of a large number of benefits and bonuses

not included in BMC. Indeed, a recent study (Office of the Secretary of

Defense, 1982) listed 60 categories of compensation apart from those included

in BMC. Adding them into an explicit measure of military pay would be

difficult because they are usually available to only some members of the

military, and the number of recipients and amount of benefits is often not

detailed by service and length of service. Many are quantitatively

unimportant (Experimental and Stress Duty Pay, Leprosy Duty Pay) but others

(e.g., enlistment bonsues) may be quite important.8 These problems can be

avoided if one is willing to accept the hypothesis that it the ratio of

military pay to civilian pay which determines enlistments. In this case,

fiscal—year dummy variables can control for variations in      and the




                                        13
effect of both military and civilian pay determined from the coefficient of

w.
 c
     Civilian earnings W are measured by the quarterly average (by state)

of monthly earnings of private workers, based on Unemployment Insurance (UI)

records. Almost all private employment is covered, apart from railroad

workers, domestics, agricultural workers, and some employees of small

nonprofit organizations. The reported earnings are total earnings, not just

the portion of earnings subject to UI taxes.

     Current—dollar figures such as those mentioned above require deflation

for economy—wide changes in prices; the consumer price index was used for this

purpose. A further deflation may be necessary to compare data from different

states at one point in time7. The value of one dollar of military

compensation is, arguably, worth the same to a prospective recruit no matter
                                                                      will bear
what state he is currently living in, since his ultimate assignment

little relationship to his current residence. However, this is not true for

civilian alternatives—— a dollar earned in Massachusetts will (apart from

occasional tax—evading runs to New Hampshire package stores) be spent in

Massachusetts, so its real value depends on the cost of living in

Massachusetts. The regional Consumer Price Indices published along with the

 National CPI are not the appropriate deflator, since the base year takes a

 value of 100 in each location. Instead, data from the Bureau of Labor

 Statistics (BLS) Urban Family Budget series for a low—income family of 4 (a

 budget of about $14000 in 1981) were used. The index created for each state

 reflected the BLS budget indices for urban and nonurban areas of the region to

 which the state belongs, weighted by the share of the state's population which

 resides in urban and nonurban areas.

      The unemployment rates used in this study are quarterly averages of




                                        14
 monthly unemployment rates tabulated from the Current Population Survey (CPS).

 These were provided by the BLS, though they emphasize that the monthly CPS

 tabulations are "official" unemployment rate estimates only for the 10 largest

 states. Even these unofficial tabulations were not available for about 20 of

 the smallest states prior to January 1976; the missing values were imputed

 from regressions (using 1976—82 data) which related the state unemployment

rate to the national rate, the state and national employment—population

ratio, and a time trend.

     Because military compensation is not the only tool available to the Army

to influence the supply of volunteers, controlling for other dimensions of the

recruitment effort is desirable. The number of Army and Defense Department

recruiters and local and national media advertising expenditures were

available for the period 1976:4 through 1982:2. Each of these series except

national media advertising vary by state as well as over time. The four

variables used in the estimation were REC, the logarithm of the number of Army

recruiters divided by the military—age population; DoD, defined similarly for

Defense Department (i.e., all four services) recruiters; NADV and LADy, the

logarithms of real national and local media advertising expenditures divided

by military—age population.

     One might argue that these recruitment resources are not appropriate

"independent" variables, since their allocation may depend on (as well as help

determine) the number of recruits. While a full similtaneous—equation model

of enlistment decisions and recruitment— resource allocation is beyond the

scope of this paper, a less formal inspection of the data does not suggest

that this a major problem. While number of Army and DOD recruiters increased

during the period studied, their allocation across regions was very nearly

constant. Indeed, much of the variation in the recruiter/population ratio




                                       15
seems to have come from population changes rather than recruiter shifts.

Local advertising expenditures showed a bit less stability across regions, but

the most striking fluctuations were the quarter— to—quarter fluctuations

within fiscal years. In any case, the fact that the recruitement resources

are available for a shorter sample period, coupled with the possibility that

they are endogenous, argues for estimating supply equations using both the

1975:4—1982:3 period omitting recruiter resources and the 1976:4—1982:3 period

including them.

     The desire to build a quarterly file of data by state led to the use of

statewide series on civilian earnings and unemployment, rather than the

youth—specific variables which appear in several other studies. Particularly

for forecasting purposes, this is not a very serious loss since forecasted

values of young workers wages and unemployment rate would, apart from trend,

be very   closely   related to all workers wages and unemployment rate.9




                                          16
III. Results

     Before turning to the regression results, it is useful to get a feel for

the extent of regional variation over time in the most important variables.

Regional patterns of the unemployment rate, civilian earnings, and two

measures of enlistment supply are shown in Table 1. Each variable is

expressed as an index number, with the national average in each fiscal year

equal to 100. Thus, in the first panel of Table 1, the unemployment rate in

the Northeast was 121.7 pecent of the national unemployment rate in fiscal

year 1976, and declined to 93.0 pecent of the national unemployment rate in

fiscal year 1982.

     The well—known increase in unemployment in the Midwest appears quite

clearly in the table, with the unemployment rate there rising from 89 percent

of the national average in 1976 to 114 percent in 1982. Relative unemployment

Is roughly constant in the South (with the index increasing by 4.5 percentage

points), and decreases significantly in the Northeast and West.

     Civilian earnings show less regional variation. There is a modest rise

in the South, a modest decline in the West, and very gentle U and inverted—U

patterns in the Northeast and Midwest.

     The regional pattern of the two recruiting measures mirrors the regional

unemployment variations. Both measures show a sharp drop in the Northeast,

where (relative) unemployment rates were falling, and a striking increase in

the Midwest, where unemployment was soaring. Indeed, by either recruiting

measure the Midwest replaced the South as the dominant per capita supplier of

recruits to the Volunteer Army. Relative recruiting rates declined in the

West, along with the relative unemployment rate. The one exception to the

otherwise— regular pattern is the South, where modest declines in the

recruiting index accompanies modest increases in relative unemployment.




                                         17
     Regional variations In civilian earnings are, as noted above, more modest

and it is hard to find a clear relationship between them and changes in

recruiting success. Thus, in contrast to unemployment effects (where we have

a natural "experiment" which provides enormous geographic differences in

patterns over time), the pooled cross— sections seem (at least at this level

of aggregation) to give a less promising basis for estimating

relative—earnings effects.

     Regression results are presented in Table 2. These regressions are based

on 28 quarterly observations (1975:4 through 1982:3) for 50 states and the

District of Columbia. The four dependent variables are those discussed in

section II. For each dependent variable, military compensation is measured by

BMC or a set of dummy variables. Both OLS and GLS estimates are

presented.1° The GLS estimates (which correct for first—order serial

correlation) probably deserve greater weight, but the fact that the serial

correlation coefficient must be estimated makes the issue less clear

cut.11

     The dependent variables, BMC, and        are all entered logarithmically,

so that the coefficients of BMC and Wc are elasticities. Given the

variation in unemployment rates noted above, there seemed reason to hope that

the unemployment response could be estimated with considerable precision;

hence a quadratic specification was adopted. The unemployment rate is in

percent, and coefficients of the quadratic unemployment term have been

multiplied by 100. The remaining columns of the table are the coefficient of

the time trend (which runs from 1 to 28), the standard error of the equation,

and the elasticity of the recruiting measure with respect to the unemployment

rate at the sample—mean unemployment rate of 7 percent. Not shown in the

 table are dummy variables for individual states12 and quarter of the year.




                                         18
Each states bbservatjons were weighted by the average number of persons 18—20

years old in the state.

     The dependent variable in the first four equations of Table 2 is the

logarithm of the number of CAT I—lilA high school graduate contracts divided

by the number of high school graduates. The estimated elasticity of supply

with respect to military compensation is about 0.5 when BMC is used, but the

implied elasticity is 1.0 to 1.5 when the dummy—variable approach is used.

Civilian wages are negatively related to enlistments. In the equations with

BMC, the restriction that supply is determined by the ratIo of military to

civilian pay (i.e., equal, opposite—signed coefficients of BMC and
                                                                      Wc)
cannot be rejected.

     The unemployment rate has very large effects on enlistment. At the mean

unemployment rate of 7 percent, a one percent reduction in the unemployment

rate reduces enlistments by about 10 percent. Given the difficulty of

estimating unemployment effects with        precision with time—series data (Ash,

tJdIs, and McNown, 1983), the significance of these estimates is worth

underlining.

     The most anomolous result is the very large coefficient of Ed/BMC. In

theory, its coefficient should equal that of BMC; in fact it is much larger.

Part of the explanation may be that the procedure used in deriving this

variable over—discounts the value of the benefits, but it is hard to argue

that this is a full explanation. In any case, since Ed/BMC was highest when

unemployment was highest in the sample period, overestimating the effect of

Ed/BMC is likely to lead to underestimating the unemployment effects.

     The second set of equations focuses on the supply of CAT I—lilA

enlistments (both graduates and nongraduates).     The conclusions which emerge

are very similar to those reached for CAT I—lilA graduates. Compensation




                                       19
elaticities tend to be a bit larger,and the unemployment elasticities are a

bit smaller. The unemployment elaticities remain important in practical

terms.

     When supply is measured by the proportion of high school graduates
                                                                          who

enlist (third set of equations), the results are less satisfactory. Taken at

face value, the first two specifications suggest that educational benefits

significantly increase recruitment, but increased BMC reduces it. The dummy

variable specifications show quite clearly, however, that recruitment success

is inversely related to civilian alternatives, and the estimated elasticity

(—1.1 or —1.2) is fairly sizeable. The effect of military compensation is

just not very reliably estimated in this set of equations.

     Estimated unemployment elasticities, however, remain significant in both

a statistical and practical sense. Moreover, they are not very sensitive to

the choice of military—pay specification.

     The difficulties of estimating the effect of compensation on the ratio of

 total contracts to population is very similar to that encountered in analyzing

 the high—school graduate measure. Neither of the estimates based on explicit

measures of military compensation (first two lines of this set) are plausible.

 The compensation elasticity of 1.85 implied by the OLS dummy variable

 specification is right—signed, but GLS estimation reverses this.

         Although the estimated effects of unemployment on total contracts are

 smaller than for the other dependent variables, they are once again

 statistically significant and consistent across the three specifications.

                                                                        that have
 Given the relatively large percentage changes in unemployment rates

 occurred in the past decade, an elasticity of 1/3 implies non—trivial

 percentage changes in the number of recruits.

         An unavoidable question is why the compensation elasticities are more




                                           20
 satisfactory for the first two supply measures than for the last two. While

 the difficulties of measuring such compensation are certainly important, the

 rough similarity among the alternative estimates for each of the first two

 measures suggests that this is an unlikely explanation for why the last two

 measures do not exhibit such stability. A more plausible explanation is that

 the number of CAT I—lilA enhistees is supply determined, but the number of

 total enhistees is largely demand determined. The simplest story along these

 lines—— that changes in standards offset any changes in the supply of

 enlistees—— would predict that estimated effects would be smaller than real

ones, perhaps even zero, but would not lead one to expect wrong—signed

 "effects". This would seem to require that the total number of recruits

demanded be negatively related to the offered wage. While military manpower

demands are not usually thought of as having a significant demand elasticity

in the short run, such a negative correlation could arise either by chance

(recall there are only seven fiscal years of data) or because higher military

compensation reduces the demand for new recruits by improving retention. If

in a period of excess supply recruitment standards are raised uniformly, one

might expect that those variables with significant geographic variation would

determine how the demand—limited total of enlistments would be distributed

across the country. Thus, demand constraints might be consistent not only

with wrong—signed estimates for military pay, but right—signed estimates of

the impacts of civilian pay and unemployment. While DeVany and Saving have

modelled the way in which discrepancies between the supply of enlistees of the

desired quality and the desired number of such enlistees is reconciled at the

national level, there seems to be little available research on how demand

constraints make themselves felt locally.

    Table 3 presents estimates for a slightly shorter sample period (1976:4




                                      21
through 1982:2), for which the additional measures of recruitment effort were

available. The effects of military compensation, civilian earnings, and

unemployment are broadly similar to those in Table 2. The most consistent

difference is the slightly smaller unemployment effect.

     For the first three measures of high—quality recruit supply the recruiter

variables tell a generally sensible story. Additional Army recruiters

increase enlistments, but increases in other Services recruiters (an increase

in DoD holding REC constant) reduces them. Increasing both Army and other

recruiters by, for example, 10 percent would increase both REC and DoD by .10,

and increase enlistments by .10 times the sum of the coefficients of REC and

DoD. Since this sum is positive, proportional increases in all services

recruiters increase Army enlistments. National media advertising sometimes

has a positive effect, but this is unstable across specifications. Local

media advertising seems to have no detectable positive effect on recruitment.

One interpretation is that such advertising is concentrated on areas where

enlistments are below expectations, but the limited available evidence seems

inconsistent with this explanation (Morey and McCann, 1983).

     The estimates for all enlistees (last three lines of Table 3) do not show

a negative effect of DOD recruiters on Army enlistments, but do show

consistent positive national advertising coefficients.




                                        22
IV. Conclusions

     In order to achieve an adequate sample size without including

draft—period observations, and to take advantage of large regional differences

in the path of unemployment in recent years, the determinants of Army

enlistments were estimated from quarterly data by state for fiscal years

1976—82. In sharp contrast to several previous papers, unemployment rates had

quite strong effects on recruitment success. For various categories of "high

quality" recruits, the elasticity of contracts signed with respect to the

unemployment rate ran from .4 to .8. For hIgh qualIty recruits defined as

those with scores in the top half of the distribution on the military's

entrance test (or those with these scores and a high school degree), estimates

of the elasticity of contracts with respect to military compensation centered

roughly on 1.0. For total contracts and contracts signed by high school

graduates (regardless of test score) the compensation elasticity could not be

estimated with any confidence. This may be because the number of such

enlistments is demand constrained rather than supply determined. There was,

however, consistent evidence that the number of contracts was inversely

related to alternative (civilian) earnings.
•

     These results suggest that, if unemployment rates fall, the Army will

have difficulties attracting current numbers of high—quality recruits at

currently offered compensation levels. There are several options for dealing

with this difficulty within the all—volunteer framework. The most obvious is

to increase the compensation of new enlistees. A subtler strategy is to focus

on retention of those already in the Army, reducing the number of high—quality

enlistees who must be recruited)3 A third option is to expand the role

of women. A final issue is whether the current number of high—quality

recruits ought to be maintained, since that level was at least partly caused by the




                                      23
recession. This involves comparing the marginal value of relatively able

individuals in military and civilian employment.

     Two quite different directions for future research seem desirable, given

the results of this paper. First, research on how recruiting standards

respond to local or national shortages or surpluses of recruits meeting a

given standard would be very useful. Second, the lag (if any) in the response

of enlistments to military and civilian compensation, unemployment, etc.

deserves greater attention.




                                      24
                                   FOOTNOTE S



      1. More precisely, Fisher used the ratio of total accessions (volunteers

 plus draftees) to population rather than the ratio of draftees to population.

He argued that with target levels of total accessions given, draft calls

 depend inversely on the number of volunteers, so that the draft/population

 ratio used in other studies was endogenous.

     2. There is a two month lag between the announcement of the survey

results on private—sector pay on which federal pay increases are based and the

beginning of the fiscal year. However, pay increases which military personnel

actually receive are not automatically determined by the survey results.

Therefore, the lag between the decision on military pay and the start of the

fiscal year is less than two months.

     3. Daula, Fagan, and SmIth (1982), using cross—section data on

individuals, allow the allowances and tax advantages of the military pay

system to vary with marital status and number of dependents, but this

variation must be less than that contributed by variations in civilian

earnings.

     4. Daula, Fagan, and Smith (1982) attempt to account for tastes and

ability in a two—equation model in which civilian earnings are determined by

the usual factors and the decision to enlist depends on relative pay and

various taste factors. However, they assume that several of the earnings

determinants do not directly affect enlistments, but operate only through

their effect on civilian earnings. Thus, the decline in enlistment propensity

as people age is attributed only to the effect of aging raising experience and

hence earnings; health problems are constrained to increase the probability of

enlisting, since they lower earnings and are not allowed to directly affect

enlistments.



                                       25
     5. Goldberg and Greenstein (1983) pool time series and cross section data

but do not adopt the dummy—variable strategy. Instead they include the

proportion black and proportion urban as controls for tastes and abilities.

     6. The data and data sources are described in more detail in the

Appendix.

     7. The three cross—section studies cited earlier apparently did not

deflate their civilian—earnings measure to account for regional variations in

the cost of living.

     8. A more basic objection to the BMC variable is that it fails to reflect

the opportunities for those whQ contemplate a career in the military. This

objection is more forceful the greater the changes in the service—earnings

profile over time. If one assumes the most important "career" indicator is

the compensation received by those beginning their second term of enlistment,

then the omission of such compensation is not an important problem in the

period studied. The sum of regular pay and housing and subsistence allowances

of those beginning a second term (grade E—4 with three years of service) was

consistently 121 to 123 percent of first year pay plus allowances.

     9. Apart from data availability, there are other reasons for preferring

"all—worker" variables to "youth—specific" ones. First, the civilian

prospects of high school graduates with above—average abilities may be

captured as well by all—worker means as by means for "youth" not stratified by

high school graduation or mental ability. Second, even where available,

youth—specific variables are subject to greater sampling error. Finally, the

all—worker variables would be even less subject to reverse causation running

from enlistment to civilian wages and earnings than would the youth—specific

variables.

     10. The first—order serial correlation was estimated by the method




                                      26
described by Nickell (1982) and Solon (1983). The equation was then

quasi—first—differenced using this estimate.

       11. OLS underestimates the standard errors of coefficients in the

presence of serial correlation, but in these data the standard errors changed

little when GLS was used. GLS also provides smaller true standard errors when

the serial correlation coefficient is known, but this gain does not

necessarily occur when the correlation is estimated. In unpublished Monte

Carlo experiments, Gary Solon finds virtually no gain when using 50

cross—sectional unitS and 10 observations per unit when the true correlation

is 0.4. Whether the gains are appreciable when there are more observations

per unit is uncertain, particularly when the true correlation is less than

0.4.

       12. To reduce computational costs the equations were actually estimated

by deviating all variables from their state—specific means, which is

equivalent to including state—specific dummy variables.

       13. Educational benefits may be effective in encouraging new high—quality

enlistments, since they are a way of paying college—eligible recruits more

than others. However, because they are valuable only when one returns to

civilian life, their effect on retention may be perverse. Allowing those who

have earned educational benefits but remain in the military to transfer their

benefits to spouses or children has been proposed as a way of blunting the

disincentive to re—enlist.




                                        27
                                    REFERENCES


Altman, Stuart H. and Fechter, Alan E. "The Supply of Military Manpower in

  the Absence of a Draft," American Economic Review,vol. 77, no. 2, May 1967,

  pp. 19—31.

Ash, Cohn, Udis, Bernard, and McNown, Robet F. "Enlistments in the

  All—Volunteer Force: A Military Personnel Supply Model and Its Forecasts,"

  American Economic Review, vol. 73, no. 1, March 1983, pp. 145—155.

Cooper, Richard V.L. Military Manpower and the All—Volunteer Force (Santa

  Monica: The Rand Corporation, Septembr 1977).

Dale, Charles and Gilroy, Curtis. "The Effect of the Business Cycle on the

  Size and Composition of the U.S. Army," Atlantic Economic Journal, vol. 11,

  no. 1, March 1983, pp. 42—53.

Daula, Thomas V., Fagan, Thomas W., and Smith, D. Alton. "A Microdata Model

  of Enlistment in the Armed Forces," paper presented at meeting of the

  Econometric Society, June 1982.

DeVany, Arthur S. and Saving, Thomas R. "Life Cycle Job Choice and the

  Demand and Supply of Entry—Level Jobs—— Some Evidence from the Air Force,"

  Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 64, no. 3, August 1982, pp.

  457—465.

Fechter, Alan E. "The Supply of Enlisted Volunteers in the Post—Draft

  Environment: An Evaluation Based on Pre—1972 Experience," in Richard V.L.

  Cooper, ed., Defense Manpower Policy (Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation,

  1979), pp. 87—99.

Fisher, Anthony. "The Cost of the Draft and the Cost of Ending the Draft,"

  American Economic Review, vol. 59, no. 3, June 1969, pp. 239254.

Friedman, Milton. Price Theory (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1976).

Goldberg, Lawrence and Greenston, Peter. "A Time—Series, Cross—Sectional



                                       28
  Study of Enlistment Supply," paper presented at meeting of the Southern

  Economic Association, 1983.

Grissmer, David W. "The Supply of Enlisted Volunteers in the Post—Draft

  Environment: An Analysis Based on Monthly Data, 1970—1975," in Richard V.L.

  Cooper, ed., Defense Manpower Policy (Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation,

  1979), pp. 100—115.

Buck, Daniel, Kusmin, Lorin, and Shepard, Edwin, "Improving Educational

  Benefits: Effects on Costs, Recruiting, and Retention," U.S. Congressional

  Budget Office, March 1982.

Jehn, Christopher and Shugart, William F. "Modelling Recruiting District

  Performance," in Richard V.L. Cooper, ed., Defense Manpower Policy (Santa

  Monica: The Rand Corportion, 1979), pp. 137—148.

Morey, Richard C. and McCann, John H. "Armed Services Recruiting Research:

  Issues, Findings, and Needs," unpublished paper, 1983.

Military Manpower Task Force. "A Report to the President on the Status and

  Prospects of the All—Volunteer Force," (Washington: U.S. Government

  Printing Office, November 1982 (revised)).

Nickell, Stephen, "Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,"

 Econometrica, vol. 49, no. 6, November 1981, pp. 1417—1426.

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense. "Profile of American Youth,"

 mimeographed, March 1982.

Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military Compensation Background Papers

  (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, second edition, 1982).

Oi, Walter. "The Economic Cost of the Draft," American Economic Review, vol.

 77, no. 2, May 1967, pp. 39—62.

Solon, Gary. "Estimating Autocorrelations in Fixed Effects Models, Working

 Paper No. 160, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, April 1983.




                                     29
        Table 1. Key Variables      Region        Fiscal Year

 (Index numbers: National average in each fiscal year = 100)


Region
________           1976    1977    1978    1979     1980   1981    1982

           Unemployment Rate
Northeast         121.7   121.7   116.4   114.5    103.8   98.4    93.0

Midwest            88.6    85.8    88.5    92.4    111.8   113.8   114.4

South              88.5    89.8    93.4    93.6     89.8   92.3    93.0

West              112.3 114.0     109.9   106.1     97.5    96.6   100.6

           Civilian Earnings

Northeast         101.1 100.0      99.6   100.0    100.9   101.4   101.3

Midwest           105.5 106.7     107.0   106.5    104.9   104.7   104.1

South              95.8    96.0    96.4    96.8     97.7    97.8    98.0
West               98.2    97.5    96.7    96.5     96.4    96.1    96.6

           Contracts/Population

Northeast          94.2    93.6    85.3    84.5     87.8    84.8    86.9

Midwest            98.4    96.0    87.4    91.6 104.2 111.7 115.3

South             107.7 113.1     127.5 123.7 108.8 108.6 104.3

West               95.1    89.7    85.6    87.1     92.0    85.4    86.0

           High Scoring Graduate Contracts/High School Graduates

Nottheast         101.2    99.5    90.7    90.4     85.2    83.0    81.1

Midwest            90.6    95.5    90.5    98.4 109.9 116.0 114.4
 South            105.0 103.3     114.4   106.6     96.0    95.6    99.4


 West             106.3 102.8     104.5   104.7 110.2 103.8 102.4
                      Table 2. Enlistment Equations


        BMC Ed/BMC            W          UR          UR2 Trend         s.e.     p

A       .61    10.8 —1.04                .17        —.34        .019 .2358           .86
    (   2.5)   (38.2) (       3.8)   (   9.7)   (    3.3)   (13.3)

        .44      9.9   —.17              .10        —.05        .028 .2057     .42   .68
    (   1.5)   (30.0) (  .6)         (   5.5)   (     .5)   (15.2)

         d        d      —1.00           .10        —.06         d     .2468         .65
                         (    3.4)   (   5.1)   (     .5)
         d        d      —1.50           .09         .01         d     .2382   .11   .64
                         (    6.1)   (   4.5)   (     .1)
B       .96     9.1 —1.52                .11        —.15        .002 .2074           .60
    (   4.5)   (36.5) (       6.3)   (   6.9)   (    1.7)   (   1.6)
        .95      8.3   —.99              .06         .06        .009 .1827     .34   .49
    C   3.8)   (30.0) ( 3.9)         (   3.7)   (     .6)   (   6.3)
         d        d      —1.59           .07        —.02         d     .2320         .49
                         (    5.9)   (   3.9)   (     .2)
         d        d          —.09        .06         .03         d     .2268   .07   .44
                         (     .4)   (   3.1)   (     .3)
C   —1.28        6.9   —.55              .10        —.09        .007 .2103           .65
    (   5.9)   (27.5) ( 2.2)         (   6.6)   (     .9)   (   5.3)
    —2.06        7.3    .22              .07         .03        .011 .1874     .50   .53
    (   7.1)   (23.1) (  .8)         (   4.1)   (     .3)   (   5.9)
         d        d      —1.14           .08        —.01         d     .2130         .55
                         (    4.6)   (   4.7)   (     .1)
         d        d      —1.21           .08         .01         d     .2046   .26   .55
                         (    5.3)   (   4.1)   C     .1)
D   —3.06    4.8   —.75                  .02         .21 —.025 .2019                 .32
    (14.6) (19.7) ( 3.2)             (   1.1)   (    2.4)   (20.8)

    —4.07    5.5   —.59                  .02         .22 —.025 .1808           .51   .33
    (14.4) (17.9) ( 2.2)             (    .9)   (    2.2)   (14.0)

         d        d      —1.85           .05         .02         d     .2055         .36
                         (    7.7)   (   3.0)   (     .2)
         d        d          1.00        .04         .01         d     .2196   .26   .32
                         (    4.1)   C   2.2)   (     .1)
                                 Table 2. (continued)


Sample: 51 states, quarterly, from 1975:4 to 1982:3 = 1428 observations

Dependent Variables:
     A = High Scoring Graduate Contracts/High School Graduates
     B = High Scoring Contracts/Population
     C = Graduate Contracts/High School Graduates
     D = Contracts/Population

Notes:
     d = BMC, ED/BMC, and TREND replaced by fiscal—year dummies
     t statistics are in parenthese below coefficients
     Each coefficient of the quadratic unemployment term is multiplied by 100
            Table 3. Enlistment Equations with Additional Recruitment Variables


            BMC ED/BMC                   W              IJR                            REC             DoD         NADV         LADV     Trend
                                          C                            i.JR2                                                                          s.e.          p
                                                                                                                                                                         n
             .87       13.6 —1.41                       12            —.16              .84           —.30         —.07         — .05        .010    • 1987             .67
        (   3.7)   (32.0) (             4.6)       (   6.9)       (    1.6)        (   8.7)       (    3.7)    (    4.0)    (    3.1)    (    6.1)
            1.16        4.9            —.87            .08            —.02              .57           —.14         —.07         —.01         .032    • 1825   .34       .55
        (   4.1)   (    5.0)       (    2.5)       (   4.3)       (      .2)       (   5.2)       (    1.7)    (    4.2)    (      .5)   (   9.9)
              d          d              .21             10            —.05             .45            —.29          .19         — .03          d     .2269              .65
                                   (     .6)       (   4.9)       (     .4)    (       3.7)       (    3.2)    (    9.8)   (     1.5)
             d           d             —.69            .07             .03             .32            —.12         —.04         —.01          d      .1745    .15       .49
                                   (    2.3)       (   3.8)   (         .3)    (       3.1)       (    1.5)    (    2.4)   (      .9)
             .89        9.4 —1.07                      .07            — .03            .78            —.19          .08        —.07                                     .43
       (    4.7)   (27.9) (             4.4)   (       4.8)   (         .4)    (10.2)         (        3.0)    (    5.4)   (     5.1) ( 5.4)
             .79        6.9 —1.16                      .05             .03             .64            —.09          .08         —.04     —.003       .1531    .29       .39
       (    3.4)   (    7.7)       (    4.1)   (       3.3)   (         .3)    (       7.1)   (        1.2)    (    5.9)   (     3.3) ( 1.0)
             d          d              —.04            .07        —.02                 .53            —.15          .26        —.06           d      .1942              .48
                               (         .1)   (       4.1)   (         .2)    (       5.0)   (        1.9)    (15.7)      (     3.2)
             d          d              —.99            .04             .06             .42        —.01              .05        —.05           d      .1535    .10       .34
                               (        3.9)   (       2.7)   (         .8)    (       4.7)   (         .2)    (    3.6)   (     3.5)
 C     —1.43           10.5 —1.34                      .08              02             .42        —.15             —.03        —.02      —.006 .1938                    .57
       (    6.2)   (25.3) (             4.5)   (       4.7)   (         .2)    (       4.5)   (       2.0)     (    1.4)   (     1.0)    (   3.7)
       —1.52           4.2         —.24                .05             .08             .27        —.05             —.01          .03         .016 .1681       .48       .43
       (    5.3)   (   5.9)    (         .7)   (       2.8)   (         .7)    (       2.6)   (         .6)    (     .9)   (     2.1)    (   4.9)
             d          d          —.34                .08             .00             .31        —.21              .18        — .02          d      .2066              .58
                               (        1.1)   (       4.4)   (         .0)    (       2.8)   (       2.5)     (10.0)      (     1.1)
             d          d          —.28                .05             .05             .28        —.09              .01          .01          d      .1622    .34       .43
                               (        1.0)   (       3.1)   (         .5)    (       2.7)   (        1.1)    (     .6)   (      .7)
 D     —4.04           6.3 —1.17                       .02              18             • 18            .02          .16        —.04      —.044       .1642              .30
       (20.5) (17.8) (                 4.7)    (       1.2)   (       2.2)     (       2.2)   (         .3)    (10.5)      (    2.6)     (32.7)

       —4.58           5.6         —.95                .02             .15             .09             .04          .14        —.01      —.042  .1497         .49       .30
       (18.0)      (   8.9)    (       3.3)    (       1.4)   (        1.6)    (        .9)   (         .5)    (11.3)      (     1.1)    (14.6)

             d          d      —1.01                   .06        —.01                 .31        —.01              .27        —.07           d      .18
                               (       3.8)    (       3.5)   (         .1)    (       3.2)   (         .1)    (17.5)      (    4.2)
             d          d      —1.34                   .03             .05             .25            .05    .11    —.05                      d      .15
                               (       5.0)    (       2.2)   (         .6)    (       2.6)   (        .7) ( 7 .3) ( 3.5)

Sample: 51 states, quarterly, from 1976:4 to 1982:2                                                          1173 observations

Dependent Variables and Notes: Same as those in Table 2.
                              DATA APPENDIX
                                                             recruits each
(1)   .CPfltLacts — The number of contracts signed by Army

month from October 1975 to September 1982 were provided by Philip
                                                       of contracts
Knorr of the Defense Manpower Data Center. The number
                                                       non—prior
was crosstabulated by state, race, sex, prior service,
service, whether high school graduate, and mental category. To
                                        research, non—prior service males
maintain comparability with previous

were studied in this paper.

                                                 state by age is
(2)  popu'atiOn — Data on resident population by
available from the u.s. Census Bureau for 1970 and 1980 based on
                                                    counts are
Census counts, and for intercensal years the Census
updated to take into account the estimated effect of births,
          and net migration. Data for April   1980 and July 1981-82
deaths,

were       from u.s. Census Bureau (1983, Tables 1—3), and for
       taken
                                                           Tables
April 1970 and July 1971—78 from U.S. Census Bureau (1980,
                               estimates for 1979 and 1980 were
2—3). Unpublished intercenSal

 provided by Ed Byerly of the Census Bureau.
                                                                 the
       1980 Census population totals exceeded those predicted by
 intercenSal updating of 1970 Census population by about 2 percent
 (U.S. Census Bureau, 1982,
                             Table A—l.) Thus, the official ioni
                                                             earlier
 estimates of population by age for 1971—79 have updated the
 estimates by assuming that this error in the intercensal estimates
 occurred gradually between the Censuses.     The analogous procedure was
                                                for 1971—79. As a
 applied to the intercenSal estimates
                                                  summed across states
 check, these updated intercensal estimates were
 and compared with the official national totals (U.S. Census Bureau,
                                    1
1982, Table 1). Monthly population estimates were then interpolated
from the resulting annual estimates. Values for August—September 1982
are extrapolations based on the 1981 and 1982 values.

       The estimates of population by state for non—Census years are

made in fairly broad age groups, with boundaries at ages 5, 14, 18,
21, 45 and 65.


(3)   High School raduates          —
                                        Number of graduates (of both private

and public high schools) by state by year are published by the
National Center for Educational Statistics. Tom Schneider kindly

provided 1980—81 data prior to publication, and 1981—82 values
were extrapolated from 1979—80 and 1980—81 values. Since
contracts can be signed by those still in school for active duty
to begin after graduation, the new graduates were assumed to be
available for signing contracts in the second quarter (i.e.,

April—June) of their graduation year. No allowance was made for

mid—year graduation.

(4)       mployment Rates — Unemployment rates from the Current

Population Survey were provided on tape by the Local Area Unemployment
Statistics Program of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. For the 10
largest states, these are official monthly unemployment rates. For
the remaining states they are not, and BLS is concerned that they be
taken as CpS tabulations rather than official BLS estimates. The
official monthly estimates combine CPS tabulations with other data,

primarily   establishment survey employment and unemployment of those
covered by unemployment insurance (Norwood, 1977). However, reliable
official estimates are not available prior to 1976, except for the 10

                                           2
largest states. For the period 1976—82 when both series are
available for all states, the unweighted correlation of iarterly

averages was .85.    (A weighted correlation would be higher, since

the two series are identical for the 10 largest states.) The
official rate had a larger standard deviation (3.3 vs 2.9), which
is surprising since the introduction of non—CPS information in
the official—rate calculation is intended to reduce sampling
variation.
       These tabulations were available for all states for 1976 and

later years, but for only 29 in 1974—75, 28 in 1973, and 16 in 1972.
The missing—data states were the smallest ones, weighted   least heavily
in    the weighted regressions. To provide estimates for these missing
data, equations were estimated separately for each state from 1976—
82. The logarithm of the unemployment rate was a function of the

logarithm of the national unemployment rate, the difference between

the logarithm of the state and national employment/population ratio,
and a time trend and month (seasonal) dummies. (The employment data
were from the BLS series on nonagricultural employment (establishment
survey)   and the population data were the series on population age 18
and older described in section (2).) The estimated coefficients were

then used to ttbackcastu the missing unemployment rates.
        To check the accuracy of these imputations, the same method was

applied to states which 1SI have CPS unemployment rates for 1972-75,
and the fit between these values and the predicted values was

evaluated.    For the 1972—75 period, the actual mean unemployment rate
in the states in question was 6.27, and the mean of the predicted
values was 6.11, and the correlation between the two was .77. Results
for 1975 alone were similar.
                                   3
(5)                fljflg —   Quarterly    earnings of private workers

covered by state unemployment insurance laws by state by two—

digit industry were provided on tape by Bernard Bell of the
Bureau of Labor Statistics.          In 1981, 90 percent of all civilian

employment was covered by the UI and UCFE programs, the principal

exclusions being railroad workers, most domestic workers,
agricultural workers, and some employees of small nonprofit
organizations (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1982a, p. 33).

The state by two—digit industry tape deleted "cells" with less
than three reporting establishments, leading to very minor
discrepancies from published totals, judging from a comparison
with published 1980—81 annual averages (U.S. Bureau of Labor

Statistics, 1982b, Table 4.)


(6)   Nonagricultural mpiment — Monthly total nonagricultural
employment by state were taken from the B.L.S.          Establishment

Survey file.


(7)   Cost      Living —   Indices   of the cost of living relative to the

national     average were taken from the B.L.S. Urban Family Budget
series,    which provide estimates of the cost of obtaining an

appropriate    market basket of goods in different areas over time.        The

market    basket varies geographically, reflecting differences such as
climate—related allowances for utilities and clothing, but does not

change over time. The lowest of the three budgets for a family of

four, representing expenditures of about $14000 in 1981, was used.
      Indices were published for 25 identified metropolitan areas

throughout the period studied and for the nonmetropolitan parts of

                                       4
the four Census regions. To convert these to state indices, an
unweighted average of the identified metropolitan indices was
calculated for each region, and the state index was equal to the
weighted average of metropolitan and nonmetropolitan indices for the
state's region, with the weights based on share of its 1980 population
in metropolitan areas. The latter was taken from u.s. Census Bureau
                                                         Hawaii and
(1981, Table 3). Honolulu and Anchorage were assigned to
Alaska directly, rather than to the West region.

        The Urban Family Budget program was discontinued after 1981.
Indices for 1982 were calculated by using changes in the Consumer

Price Index by region and size of place.
     The indices were originally based on data for "autumn" of each

year.     We associated autumn with the beginning of the fourth quarter
of   the calender year, and interpolated other quarters.


(8) ilitr                Benefits   —   Curtis   Gilroy provided the four

quarterly compensation series used in Dale and Gilroy (1983):

first-year regular military compensation, maximum monthly benefit
for a GI Bill beneficiary, maximum benefit for a Veterans

Educational Assistance Program (VEAP) beneficiary, and maximum
value of "kicker" payments offered to Army enlisteeS entering

critical specialties.
        These educational benefits are likely to be worth less than their

stated dollar value to potential recruits, particularly the post—GI—
Bill program. A VEAP participant must contribute to his VEAP account
(the government matches that contribution on a 2—for—l basis), and
most participants do not make the maximum contribution. The benefits

might never be used, if the individual decides against going to

                                        5
college after the Army or decides to stay in the Army. Finally, if
they are received, the benefits must be discounted. The average of
the high and low estimates of discounted valuations from Huck, Kusmin

and Shephard (1982, Table 4) were used to convert educational benefits
to current dollars, recognizing that these benefits are earned by

three years of service. To value the GI Bill, VEAP, and the Kicker, the
values for "Non Contributory Plan," "Contributory VEAP," and
"Contributory VEAP with supplemental payment" minus "Contributory
VEAP" were used.


(9) Recruiters      Advertising   Expenditures—— A file containing the
number of Army recruiters on production, the ratio of Army to Defense
Department recruiters, and local and national media advertising
expenditures was provided by Iarvin Trautwein of the U.S. Army
Recruiting Command. Quarterly data were available for fiscal years
1977—82. Number of Army recruiters was available quarterly for fiscal
1976, and annually for 1974—75.
     Except for national media advertising, the data were compiled by
recruiting districts which are aggregates of counties and often cross
state lines. Data by district were converted to data by state using
number of persons 18—20 years old in each county from the 1980 Census.


                              References
Dale, Charles and Gilroy, Curtis, "The Effect of the Business Cycle on
     the Size and Composition of the U.S. Army," Atlantic Econoxiiic

     Journal, vol. 11, no. 1, March 1983, pp. 42—53.
Huck, Daniel, Kusmin, Lorin, and Shephard, Edwin, "Improving
     Educational Benefits: Effects on Costs, Recruiting and

                                  6
     Retention," Congressional Budget Office, March 1982.
Norwood, Janet L., "Reshaping a Statistical Program to Meet
     Legislative Priorities,'1 onthjy Labor Review vol. 100, no. 11,

     November 1977, pp. 6—11.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Autumn Urban Family Budgets and

     Comparative   Indexes for Selected Urban Areas," mimeographed,
     various years.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, BJ HandbQj ..f Methods, Volume I
     (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1982a).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Annual Average Pay by State and
     Industry," mimeographed, December 12, l982b.
U.S. Census Bureau, "Estimates of the population of States, by Age:

     July 1, 1971 to 1979," Current pu1ation RepQJ±, Series P—25,
     no. 875, January 1980.
U.S. Census Bureau,19D Census Qf po.pu1tipn,    vol.   1, Characteristics

     of Population, 1981.
U.S. Census Bureau, "preliminary Estimates of the United States, by

     Age, Sex, and Race: 1970 to 1981," Current Population Reports,

     Series P—25, no. 917, July 1982.
U.S. Census Bureau, "Estimates of the Population of States by Age:

     July 1, 1981, and 1982," Current population Report, Series P—25,

     no. 930, 1pri1 1983.
U.S. National Center for Educational Statistics, Dgi Q

     .Educational Statistics (Washington: U.S. Government Printing
     Office, various years)




                                  7
