                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           BUBBLES AND SELF-ENFORCING DEBT

                                          Christian Hellwig
                                          Guido Lorenzoni

                                        Working Paper 12614
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12614


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




We thank Marios Angeletos, Andy Atkeson, V.V. Chari, Hal Cole, Nobu Kiyotaki, Narayana Kocherlakota,
John Moore, Fabrizio Perri, Balasz Szentes, Aleh Tsyvinski, Ivan Werning, and Mark Wright for useful
comments and seminar audiences at the Columbia, European University Institute (Florence), Mannheim,
Maryland, the Max Planck Institute (Bonn), NYU, Notre Dame, Penn State, Pompeu Fabra, Stanford,
Texas (Austin), UCLA, UCSB, the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Dallas and Minneapolis, the
2002 SED Meetings (New York), 2002 Stanford Summer Institute in Theoretical Economics, the
2003 Bundesbank/CFS/FIC conference on Liquidity and Financial Instability (Eltville, Germany) for
feedback. Lorenzoni thanks the Research Department of the Minneapolis FED for hospitality during
part of this research. Hellwig gratefully acknowledges financial support through the ESRC. All remaining
errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Christian Hellwig and Guido Lorenzoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Bubbles and Self-Enforcing Debt
Christian Hellwig and Guido Lorenzoni
NBER Working Paper No. 12614
October 2006
JEL No. D50,D52,D53,E40,F34,G10

                                               ABSTRACT

We characterize equilibria with endogenous debt constraints for a general equilibrium economy with
limited commitment in which the only consequence of default is losing the ability to borrow in future
periods. First, we show that equilibrium debt limits must satisfy a simple condition that allows agents
to exactly roll over existing debt period by period. Second, we provide an equivalence result, whereby
the resulting set of equilibrium allocations with self-enforcing private debt is equivalent to the allocations
that are sustained with unbacked public debt or rational bubbles; for the latter, there exist well known
existence and characterization results. In contrast to the classic result by Bulow and Rogoff (AER
1989), positive levels of debt are sustainable in our environment because the interest rate is sufficiently
low to provide repayment incentives.

Christian Hellwig
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
chris@econ.ucla.edu

Guido Lorenzoni
MIT Department of Economics
E52-251C
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
glorenzo@mit.edu
1        Introduction

This paper addresses the classic question whether debt can be sustained purely by a reputation
mechanism. Suppose that the only punishment imposed on a borrower who defaults on his oblig-
ations is that he will not be able to borrow again in the future. A seminal result in Bulow and
Rogoﬀ (1989a - henceforth BR) claims that, under this type of punishment, debt is unsustainable.
They analyze the case of a small open economy, borrowing at a given positive world interest rate.
In that environment, if the country ever borrows a positive amount, it will eventually reach a point
where it is strictly better oﬀ defaulting and financing all future consumption with positive asset
positions, out of a ‘savings’ account.1
        This result has sparked a rich literature on reputational mechanisms for sustaining debt. Some
of these contributions have augmented Bulow and Rogoﬀ’s (1989a) framework to sustain debt
by non-competitive mechanisms, such as reduction of trade, loss of trade credit, or other non-
financial sanctions (Bulow and Rogoﬀ 1989b), collusion among non-competitive lenders (Kletzer
and Wright 2000, Wright 2001), loss of reputation in other dimensions (Cole and Kehoe 1998), time
inconsistency in the borrower’s preferences (Gul and Pesendorfer 2003, Amador 2003), or reduced
access to state-contingent securities (Pesendorfer 1992, Thomas 1992, Grossman and Han 1999). A
separate branch of the literature has studied markets with stronger consequences of default, such as
outright exclusion from markets into autarky (Eaton and Gersovitz 1981, Kehoe and Levine 1993,
and Kocherlakota 1996), or loss of productive collateral (Lustig 2004). One appealing feature of
this latter class of models is the endogenous determination of debt limits in general equilibrium, so
as to provide proper incentives to honor existing outstanding debt (Alvarez and Jermann 2000).
        In this paper, we go back to the original Bulow and Rogoﬀ (1989a) setup, but frame the problem
in a general equilibrium model with endogenous debt limits. We consider a symmetric environment
in which all agents have limited commitment, and default is punished only by the exclusion from
future borrowing. We show that positive amounts of debt are sustainable in equilibrium.
        Key to our analysis is that, when all the agents have limited commitment, the equilibrium
interest rate adjusts endogenously so as to ensure that agents repay their debt. Reputational
    1
        Related results appear in Chari and Kehoe (1993) and in Krueger and Uhlig (2005). Chari and Kehoe consider
government debt in a model with distortive taxes and lack of commitment by the government, but not the households.
Krueger and Uhlig analyze competitive risk-sharing contracts with one-sided commitment by the insurers, and show
that such contracts never allow the insured to incur debt. Both papers have in common with each other and with
BR the assumption of one-sided commitment and access to savings at competitive market rates after a default.




                                                          2
incentives for debt repayments thus rely not only on the amount of credit to which agents have
access in future periods, but, perhaps more importantly, on the interest rate at which this credit is
made available.
   Our main argument can be split in two steps. First, we show that incentives for default disappear
if the interest rate is suﬃcient low. Second, we show that interest rates low enough to be consistent
with repayment can emerge in equilibrium in an economy where no agent can commit to repay.
   To illustrate these results, we first present a simple deterministic example where positive bor-
rowing is sustained in equilibrium. In the example, private debt is self-enforcing as long as the
equilibrium interest rate is smaller than or equal to the growth rate of debt limits, which equals
the growth rate of aggregate endowments in steady-state. In the rest of the paper, we give a full
characterization of the conditions under which private debt is sustainable.
   For the general analysis, we consider a stochastic endowment economy with sequential trade
in complete contingent securities markets. Agents may issue securities up to a state-contingent
limit. If they default, they are denied credit in all future periods. The equilibrium debt limits are
determined endogenously as the largest possible limits such that repayment is always individually
rational. Our first general result (Theorem 1) states that debt limits are self-enforcing if and only
if they allow all individuals to exactly finance outstanding obligations by issuing new claims. In a
deterministic environment, this is satisfied if and only if they grow at a rate equal to or larger than
the real rate of interest.
   Our second main result (Theorem 2) establishes conditions for the existence of an equilibrium
with self-enforcing debt and gives a characterization of sustainable equilibrium allocations, by means
of an equivalence result. Consider an alternative environment with no private debt, but where we
allow a government to issue state-contingent debt that is not backed by any fiscal revenue, i.e.,
where the government must finance all existing claims by issuing new debt. This unbacked public
debt has the feature of a rational bubble (Tirole 1982); in a deterministic environment, it can
be reinterpreted as fiat money. We show that any equilibrium allocation of the economy with
self-enforcing private debt can also be sustained as an equilibrium allocation of the economy with
unbacked public debt, and vice versa. Since there exist well known conditions for the sustainability
of positive levels of unbacked public debt, or the existence of rational bubbles or fiat money more
generally (see Santos and Woodford 1997 for a general analysis), these conditions also characterize
the sustainability of positive levels of private debt in a general equilibrium Bulow-Rogoﬀ economy.


   Related Literature: First and foremost, our paper presents an answer to the theoretical puzzle

                                                  3
posed by the no-lending result of BR. Contrary to much of the literature that sought to overturn
this result, we show that stronger enforcement power such as complete market exclusion, collateral,
or other non-competitive mechanisms, is not necessary to sustain debt, once interest rates can
adjust to account for the common lack of commitment.2 A key assumption in BR is that the net
present value of a borrower’s life-time endowments, when discounted at market prices, is finite, and
that this life-time endowment value gives an upper bound for the borrower’s outstanding debt. In
our model, endowments and consumption allocations are no longer finite valued at the resulting
equilibrium prices. In light of this result, BR’s partial equilibrium assumption seems unwarranted,
since it exactly rules out the debt contracts that emerge endogenously in equilibrium.3
       Our paper also builds on the literature on endogenous debt constraints (Kehoe and Levine 1993,
Alvarez and Jermann 2000) by developing a similar theory in a model in which borrowers face future
denial of credit as the only consequence of a default. It further draws a connection between models
of endogenous debt limits and rational asset pricing bubbles (Tirole 1982). That rational bubbles
may exist in models with borrowing constraints à la Bewley (1980) was recognized in Scheinkman
and Weiss (1986), Kocherlakota (1992) and Santos and Woodford (1997). By establishing an
equivalence result between trade in self-enforcing private debt in a Bulow-Rogoﬀ environment and
a specific form of a rational bubble (i.e., as unbacked public debt), we exploit existing results on the
sustainability of such bubbles to arrive at a characterization of when private debt is sustainable.
In fact, one interpretation of our equivalence result is that rational bubbles can be competitively
supplied by the market, in the form of circulating private debt.
       Finally, our results have implications for applications of intertemporal general equilibrium mod-
els to sovereign debt and international capital flows, risk-sharing and consumption smoothing or
to monetary theory, among others. We defer a detailed discussion of these applications and other
extensions to Section 5, after we have established our main results.
       In Section 2, we describe our general model and define competitive equilibria with self-enforcing
private debt and unbacked public debt. In Section 3, we illustrate our main results in a simple
deterministic example. In Section 4, we establish our two main theorems, and discuss the intuition
   2
       The idea that debt is sustainable once all agents have limited commitment also appears in Cole and Kehoe (1995).
However, they consider a game-theoretic environment in which interest rates are exogenous, and debt is sustained
by means of a trigger-strategy equilibrium, in which agents revert to a no-lending equilibrium after a default by any
market participant.
  3
    In the working-paper version of their paper, Bulow and Rogoﬀ (1988, p. 5) remark that this assumption rules out
“‘Ponzi’-type reputational contracts.” These are precisely the type of contracts that emerge in general equilibrium.
Mohr (1991) derives a similar Ponzi-type condition in a two-period overlapping generations model.



                                                            4
behind our characterization of self-enforcing debt constraints. Section 5 discusses extensions and
applications of our results. Proofs omitted from the text are in the appendix.


2    The Model

Uncertainty: Consider a discrete-time, infinite-horizon endowment economy. At each date t ∈
{0, 1, 2, ...}, there exists a finite set S t of publicly observable events st , which are partially ordered
                                                                          ¡ ¢
into an event tree S. Each event st has a unique predecessor σ st ∈ S t−1 , and is followed by
                                                                     ¡    ¢
a positive, finite number of events st+1 ∈ S t+1 , s.t. st = σ st+1 . There exists a unique initial
event dated by t = 0 and denoted s0 . Event st+τ is said to follow event st (denoted st+τ Â st ) if
      ¡    ¢                ¡ ¢ ©                  ª
σ (τ ) st+τ = st . The set S st = st+τ : st+τ Â st denotes the set of all events that follow st .
                                                                     ©         ª
      Let S ∞ denote the set of infinite sequences of events s∞ = s0 , s1 , ... s.t. st ∈ S t , and
         ¡   ¢
st = σ st+1 for all t. At date 0, nature draws s∞ ∈ S ∞ . At each date t > 0, st is publicly revealed
                          ¡ ¢
to all agents. We let π st denote the unconditional probability that event st is observed, and
                ¡ ¢                                        ¡       ¢     ¡     ¢ ¡ ¢
assume that π st > 0 for all st ∈ S. For all st+τ Â st , π st+τ |st = π st+τ /π st denotes the
conditional probability of st+τ , given st .

    Preferences and endowments: At each event st , there is a single non-storable consumption
good. There is a finite number J of consumer types, each represented by a unit measure of
agents, and indexed by j. Each consumer type is characterized by a sequence of endowments
                          © ¡ ¢ª
of the consumption good, y j st st ∈S ∈ R∞   + . Preferences over consumption sequences C ≡
© ¡ t ¢ª
 c s st ∈S ∈ R∞+ are represented by a lifetime utility functional U (C), which is defined as
                                               X            ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢
                                     U (C) =           β t π st u(c st )                                (1)
                                               st ∈S

where β ∈ (0, 1) and u(·) is strictly increasing, convex, and bounded above.

    Self-enforcing private debt: At each history st , agents may issue contingent claims, which
promise to pay one unit of consumption in period t+1, contingent on the occurrence of event st+1 Â
st , in exchange for current consumption goods. These claims are traded in complete sequential
Walrasian markets. If the promises are always fulfilled (as they will be in equilibrium), individual
promises issued by diﬀerent agents are perfect substitutes and are equivalent to a state-contingent
                              ¡       ¢
one-period bond. Denote by q st+1 |st the price of such a bond at event st , or, equivalently, the
price at st of consumption at event st+1 Â st . Using consumption at s0 as the numeraire and
         ¡ ¢              ¡ ¢                                                   ¡ ¢
setting p s0 = 1, we let p st denote the period 0 price of consumption at st . p st is recursively
             ¡ ¢    ¡     ¡ ¢¢ ¡ ¡ ¢¢
defined by p st = q st |σ st · p σ st , for all st ∈ S.

                                                        5
                                                                            ¡ ¢
       An agent’s asset profile is defined as a function aj : S →R, where aj st denotes the net
financial position at st of an agent of type j, that is, the amount of promises due to him in st , net
                                                                                                 ¡ ¢
of the amount of promises issued by him; this position is determined by trade at history σ st .
                                                                   ¡ ¢
If the agent does not default, his consumption at st , denoted cj st , must satisfy the flow budget
constraint                                               ¡      ¢
                                ¡ t¢   ¡ t¢   ¡ t¢  X p st+1        ¡     ¢
                               j     j      j
                              c s ≤y s +a s −                t
                                                                  aj st+1                                           (2)
                                                   t+1 t
                                                         p (s )
                                                                s   Âs

       If agents had the ability to fully commit to their promises, they would be able to smooth
all type-specific endowment fluctuations. In our model, agents lack this type of commitment: at
any date st , agents can simply refuse to honor their past promises and default. Agents will then
fulfill their obligations only if it is in their best interest to do so, and the incentives for repayment
depend on the consequences of default. We assume that, if an agent defaults, this fact becomes
common knowledge and the agent looses the ability to issue claims in all future periods. Creditors
can seize any financial assets he might hold at the moment of default (i.e., his holdings of other
agents’ claims). However, creditors are unable to seize any of his current or future endowments
© j ¡ t+τ ¢ª
 y s        st+τ ∈S(st )∪{st }
                               , nor are they able to seize the financial claims he will accumulate in future
periods. In summary, after a default, an agent retains his ability to purchase claims but he looses
his privilege to issue claims, and he starts with a net financial position of 0.4
    The amount of claims that an agent issues are publicly observable. To provide repayment
                                                                  ¡    ¢
incentives, at each event st , each agent faces an upper bound −φj st+1 on the amount of claims
he can issue for each continuation st+1 of st , or equivalently, a lower bound
                                                   ¡    ¢    ¡     ¢
                                                 aj st+1 ≥ φj st+1                                                  (3)

on his net financial position at st+1 . These debt limits are endogenously determined to make the
debt self-enforcing, i.e., to give the agents the right repayment incentives. Formally, the sequence of
                  © ¡ ¢ª
debt limits Φj ≡ φj st st ∈S is set in such a way that, if an agent’s net financial position reaches
  ¡ ¢        ¡ ¢
aj st = φj st , then at st he is exactly indiﬀerent between repayment and default. If an agent’s
                                               ¡ ¢
net financial position were to fall below φj st at st , the agent would have an incentive to default
                                                                       ¡ ¢
on his promises, whereas if his net asset position remains above φj st , he prefers to repay rather
than default. In equilibrium, all other market participants anticipate this, and are hence willing to
   4
       The assumption that any positive holdings of other agents’ claims are confiscated in case of default is made only
for analytic and expositional purposes; it implies that agents can default only on their net financial position. We will
discuss later how it can be relaxed; it turns out to have no impact on our results. Therefore, the only disciplining
element that may prevent agents from defaulting is losing the privilege to borrow in future periods.


                                                            6
                                                                                 ¡ ¢
extend credit up to the point where the agent’s net financial position reaches φj st , thus allowing
the agent to borrow any amount that he can credibly commit to repay.
                                                                                         ¡ ¢
     Equilibrium definition: For each type j, and history st , let V j (a, Φj st ; st ) denote the
                                                                                                     ¡ ¢
life-time utility of a consumer who starts from st with net assets a, faces debt limits Φj st =
© j ¡ t+τ ¢ª                                             ¡ ¢
  φ s       st+τ ∈S(st )
                         , and never defaults. V j (a, Φj st ; st ) is defined by the following optimization
problem (P1):
                      ¡ ¢                                            X                   ¡        ¢ ¡ ¡      ¢¢
            V j (a, Φj st ; st ) =           max                                    β τ π st+τ |st u cj st+τ      (4)
                                     {aj (sτ )}st+τ ∈S (st )
                                                               st+τ ∈S(st )∪{st }
                            ¡ ¢ © ª        ¡    ¢      © ¡       ¢ª
such that for all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st , cj st+τ and aj st+τ +1 st+τ +1 Âst+τ satisfy the budget
                                                   ¡    ¢                  ¡ ¢
constraint (2), the borrowing constraint (3) and cj st+τ ≥ 0, with given aj st = a.
                     ¡    ¢
   Likewise, let Dj a; st denote the life-time utility of a consumer who has defaulted in the
past and hence has to hold a non-negative financial position at all future periods. For any a ≥
        ¡   ¢
0, Dj a; st is defined by the optimization problem of maximizing (4) such that for all st+τ ∈
  ¡ ¢ © ª         ¡    ¢    © ¡       ¢ª
S st ∪ st , cj st+τ and aj st+τ +1 st+τ +1 Âst+τ satisfy the budget constraint (2), the borrowing
               ¡       ¢            ¡     ¢                     ¡ ¢                      ¡   ¢
constraint aj st+τ +1 ≥ 0, and cj st+τ ≥ 0, with given aj st = a; therefore, Dj a; st =
          ¡ ¢               ¡ ¢
V j (a, O st ; st ), where O st stands for the sequence of borrowing constraints equal to zero at
every continuation history of st .
             ¡ ¢              ¡     ¢
   V j (a, Φj st ; st ) and Dj a; st are both strictly increasing in a. Since, by assumption, an
agent who defaults starts from a net asset position of 0, an agent with net asset position a will
                                                  ¡ ¢            ¡     ¢
find it optimal not to default whenever V j (a, Φj st ; st ) ≥ Dj 0; st . We thus have the following
definition of self-enforcement:

Definition 1 The debt limits Φj : S →R are self-enforcing (SE), if and only if:
                                ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢            ¡     ¢
                         V j (φj st , Φj st ; st ) = Dj 0; st for all st ∈ S.                                     (5)

   This leads to the following definition of a competitive equilibrium with self-enforcing private
debt:

Definition 2 A competitive equilibrium with self-enforcing private debt {C j , aj , Φj ; p}j=1,...,J is
defined by a sequence of consumption allocations C j : S →R+ and net financial positions aj : S →R
for each consumer type j, a sequence of debt limits Φj : S →R− for each consumer type, and a
price sequence p : S →R+ , for which:
                                                                                            ¡ ¢
   (i) Optimality: for each j, C j and aj solve (P1) at s0 , given initial asset holdings aj s0 = 0.

                                                                7
   (ii) Self-enforcement: the debt limits Φj are self-enforcing.
                          P j ¡ t¢ P j ¡ t¢             P     ¡ ¢
   (iii) Market clearing:   jc s =        jy s     and j aj st = 0 for all st ∈ S.


   This equilibrium definition follows Alvarez and Jermann (2000) in that debt limits must be self-
enforcing, i.e., not give agents any incentive to default, but departs from them by assuming denial of
future credit instead of complete autarky as the consequence of a default. From the perspective of
the individual, the debt limits are treated much like prices in Walrasian markets in that individuals
optimize taking prices and debt limits as given, and these adjust to satify market-clearing and
self-enforcement.
   Furthermore, our definition of self-enforcement implies that debt limits adjust in equilibrium to
allow for the maximum amount of credit. This is akin to Alvarez and Jermann’s (2000) notion of
                                                                                         ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
debt limits being ‘not too tight.’ In principle, any set of debt limits for which V j (φj st , Φj st ; st ) ≥
     ¡   ¢
Dj 0; st for all st ∈ S gives agents no incentive to default. However, if it were the case that
       ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢             ¡     ¢                                                 ¡ ¢
V j (φj st , Φj st ; st ) > Dj 0; st , an agent facing a binding debt limit at φj st would be will-
ing to borrow at a rate slightly higher than the market interest rate and market participants would
not be willing to refuse him credit. Our debt limits are thus set so that (i) no borrower has an
incentive to default, (ii) no lender has an incentive to extend credit beyond a borrower’s debt limit,
and (iii) no lender has an incentive to refuse credit to a borrower below the borrower’s debt limit.

   Unbacked public debt: Finally, for our equivalence result, we consider an alternative economy,
in which agents are not allowed to borrow, but can smooth consumption using government-issued
securities that are not backed by taxation, i.e., the government must issue new securities to honor
current outstanding claims.
                                                                                        ¡    ¢
   As before, we suppose that at each event st , agents may purchase contingent claims a st+1 ,
which are traded in complete sequential Walrasian markets. However, unlike before, the agents can
no longer issue these claims themselves; instead they are provided by a government, which rolls over
                                 ¡ ¢
a fixed initial stock of claims d s0 period by period by issuing new securities. The government’s
                                          ¡ ¢    P          ¡       ¢ ¡     ¢
roll-over condition thus requires that d st ≤ st+1 Âst q st+1 |st d st+1 , i.e., that the amount
of resources raised by issuing new claims for st+1 at history st is suﬃcient to honor the previous
period’s commitments. We focus on environments where in each period, the government’s roll-over
condition is satisfied with equality, or
                                       ¡      ¢
                            ¡ t¢  X p st+1 ¡            ¢
                                                    t+1
                           d s =           t)
                                                d s       for all st ∈ S.                              (6)
                                 t+1 t
                                       p (s
                                     s     Âs
         ¡ ¢                                                                   P    ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢
   Let dj s0 ≥ 0 denote the initial allocation of claims to type j agents, with j dj s0 = d s0 .

                                                    8
For a given sequence of prices, the consumers’ problem is then defined as above by (P1), with
                              ¡ ¢
debt limits characterized by O s0 . Thus, a competitive equilibrium with unbacked public debt is
defined as follows:

                                                      ¡ ¢
Definition 3 A competitive equilibrium {C j , âj , dj s0 ; D, p}j=1,...,J with unbacked public debt is
defined by a sequence of consumption allocations C j : S →R+ and net financial positions aj :
                                                             ¡ ¢
S →R+ for each consumer type j, an initial debt allocation dj s0 for each consumer type, a price
sequence p : S →R+ , and a sequence of debt circulations D : S →R+ , for which:
                                                                                              ¡ ¢
   (i) Optimality: for each j, C j and aj solve (P1) at t = 0, given initial asset holdings aj s0 =
  ¡ ¢                         ¡ ¢
dj s0 ≥ 0 and debt limits O s0 .
                         P     ¡ ¢ P         ¡ ¢      P     ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢
   (ii) Market clearing: j cj st = j y j st and j aj st = d st for all st ∈ S.
        (iii) Government Budget constraint: (6) is satisfied for all st ∈ S.


3        A Simple Example

In this section, we illustrate the main results of our paper by means of a simple deterministic
example with alternating endowments.5 There are two types of consumers, odd and even, which
are characterized by diﬀerent endowment profiles: Odd consumers receive the endowment {yto } =
{θ0 e, θ1 e, θ2 e, ...} and even consumers the endowment {yte } = {θ0 e, θ1 e, θ 2 e, ...}. The consumers
have identical preferences over consumption sequences {ct }, represented by the utility function
P∞ t                                               t
  t=0 β log ct . The productivity parameter θ t = g grows exogenously at a rate g > 0, and we
assume that βe > e, which implies that endowment fluctuations are suﬃciently large.
        In the absence of enforcement frictions, the market equilibrium of this economy achieves a
Pareto-optimal allocation in which the consumption of all consumers grows at the rate g and the
one-period bond price is given by β/g. This setup goes back at least to Townsend (1980) and is
analyzed in detail by Woodford (1990) and Ljungqvist and Sargent (2000, Chap. 18) as an example
of an economy where private or public debt instruments are traded to smooth idiosyncratic income
fluctuations.

        Steady states with self-enforcing private debt: Suppose now that agents trade self-
enforcing private debt to smooth endowment fluctuations. Since the environment is deterministic,
they simply trade non-contingent debt. To derive the steady-state equilibria, we conjecture (and
verify) that individual debt limits for each type grow at a constant rate g, i.e., they take the form
    5
        To simplify notation, we replace the dependence on histories st by the time subscript t.



                                                             9
φjt = φj g t for j ∈ {o, e} with φj ≤ 0. Furthermore, we conjecture that the steady-state bond price
is qo in periods when odd types have high endowments, and qe in periods when even types have
high endowments. Finally, we conjecture that the equilibrium bond prices are greater or equal than
their frictionless level, i.e., qo , qe ≥ β/g.
    Consider first the behavior of a non-defaulting agent. Given our conjecture on prices and debt
limits, Lemma 1 derives optimal consumption and asset holdings that solve (P1) at date t, with
initial asset holdings at = φj .

Lemma 1 For j ∈ {o, e}, define
                                      1 £                                         ¤
                          cj =              e + (qj g) e − φj ((qo g) (qe g) − 1) ,               (7)
                                    1+β
                                    β/ (qj g) £                                      ¤
                          cj =                  e + (qj g) e − φj ((qo g) (qe g) − 1) ,           (8)
                                     1+β
                                    1/ (qj g) £                                        ¤
                          aj =                 βe − (qj g) e + φj (β + (qo g) (qe g)) .           (9)
                                     1+β
Consider a consumer of type j, who has a high endowment in period t and has net assets at = φj .
Suppose aj ≥ φj . If the consumer never defaults on or after date t, his optimal consumption is
cj g t+τ in high endowment periods and cj g t+τ in low endowment periods. Optimal asset holdings
are aj g t+τ in low endowment periods and −φj g t+τ in high endowment periods.

    To find a steady-state equilibrium, we impose market-clearing in the asset market:

                                                  −φ−j = aj ,                                    (10)

for j ∈ {o, e}. For given values of φo and φe , we can substitute (9) in (10) and obtain two equations
which give us the equilibrium prices qo and qe . Market clearing in the goods markets follows by
Walras’ Law. Using (10), we also have aj ≥ 0, which guarantees that the debt limit condition
aj ≥ φj in Lemma 1 is satisfied, and that it is never optimal to default in low-endowment periods.
    It remains to be determined under what conditions the debt limits φo and φe are self-enforcing.
Lemma 2 determines optimal consumption allocations and asset holdings for an agent who defaults
in the high endowment period.

Lemma 2 For j ∈ {o, e}, define
                                                   1
                                       cdj =            [e + (qj g) e] ,                         (11)
                                                 1+β
                                                 β/ (qj g)
                                       cdj =               [e + (qj g) e] ,                      (12)
                                                  1+β
                                                 1/ (qj g)
                                       adj =               [βe − (qj g) e] .
                                                  1+β

                                                       10
Consider a consumer of type j, who has a high endowment in period t. If the consumer defaults his
optimal consumption after default is cdj g t+τ in high endowment periods and cdj g t+τ in low endowment
periods. Optimal asset holdings are adj g t in low endowment periods, and 0 in high endowment
periods.

      If an agent defaults, his initial asset position after default is 0. From then on, the agent’s
optimal consumption path alternates between cdj and cdj . If he does not default, his consumption
alternates between cj and cj . By comparing (7)-(8) with (11)-(12), it immediately follows that
agents prefer no-default as long as either (qo g) (qe g) ≥ 1 or φj = 0. Since we are interested in
equilibria with positive amounts of borrowing, i.e., non autarkic equilibria, let us focus on the case
φj < 0. Moreover, agents are exactly indiﬀerent between default and no-default if and only if

                                           (qo g) (qe g) = 1.                                      (13)

      Since we seek to determine φo and φe in such a way that, whenever the agents are debt con-
strained, they are also indiﬀerent between repayment and default, we impose (13) as an equilibrium
condition. Going back to the asset market clearing condition, we find

                                               1/ (qj g)
                                 −φj − φ−j =             [βe − (qj g) e] ,                         (14)
                                                1+β

for j ∈ {o, e}. Therefore, in an equilibrium with self-enforcing private debt, the bond price qj has
to be the same in odd and even periods, and, by condition (13), has to be equal to qo = qe = 1/g.
Substituting this into equation (14), we then find the values for the debt limits φo and φe compatible
with a self-enforcing equilibrium. The assumption that βe > e guarantees that both limits can be set
at values smaller or equal than zero. However, apart from this restriction, any pair of φo , φe which
satisfies (14) is compatible with self-enforcement. These results are summarized in the following
proposition.

Proposition 1 Whenever βe > e, there exists a non-autarkic steady-state equilibrium with self-
enforcing private debt, in which qo g = qe g = 1. Borrowing constraints adjust so that

                                                    1
                                     φo + φe = −       [βe − e] ,                                  (15)
                                                   1+β

and are otherwise indeterminate. Consumption allocations are determinate and are given by c =
 1                                                 β
1+β   [e + e] in high endowment periods and c =   1+β   [e + e] in low endowment periods. In addition,
                                                                                                 βe
there always exists an autarkic equilibrium, in which φo = φe = 0, c = e, c = e, and qe , qo ≥   ge .



                                                   11
       This characterization illustrates the main point of our paper. Contrary to the zero-borrowing
result of BR, who consider a small open economy borrowing at given world interest rates, the
general equilibrium environment considered here leads to positive levels of borrowing and lending.
This is sustained in equilibrium by an interest rate equal to the growth rate of the economy’s
endowment. As debt limits grow at the same rate as the economy, this interest rate ensures that
the incentives for repayment are satisfied and debt is sustainable.6
       This general equilibrium result derives from the observation that an agent’s repayment incentives
depend not only on whether an agent is allowed to borrow or lend in the future, but also on the
the interest rate at which borrowing and lending will take place. The higher the interest rate, the
less appealing is the opportunity to borrow in the future, and the more appealing the option to be
a net lender after default.
       Self-enforcement imposes an upper bound on the interest rate, so as to reduce the returns to
savings in case of a default, and to reduce the cost of borrowing. In steady-state, this upper
bound exactly pins down the interest rate as equal to the steady-state growth rate. Debt limits
then adjust to make sure that this interest rate clears the market. This contrasts with a partial
equilibrium approach which takes interest rates as given and seeks to find sustainable debt limits.
This would require the debt limits to grow at the given real rate of interest. With positive interest
rates, the agents’ debt limits would then eventually exceed the present value of their life-time future
endowments, which would be inconsistent with market clearing in general equilibrium. This is why,
under the assumptions of BR, our form of self-enforcing debt could not arise.
                                                                        n o
   It is useful to stress one property of the self-enforcing debt limits φjt . Consider a borrower
who is constrained in periods t and t + 2. In a steady state with self-enforcing borrowing, this
borrower could just roll-over his current debt between periods t and t + 2. This roll-over does not
require any real resources from consumer j, since he can repay φj g t by issuing φj g t+1 at the price
qt = g −1 , and then repay φj g t+1 by issuing φj g t+2 in the same manner. This exact roll-over is not
necessarily optimal for the consumer. In fact, in the example considered it is not optimal along
the equilibrium path. However, the fact that this roll-over is feasible turns out to be an essential
property of self-enforcing borrowing limits, as we will show in the next section.7
   6
       In our environment, the consumers’ transversality condition limt→∞ β t u0 (ct )at = 0 does not imply the “no
bubble” condition limt→∞ pt at = 0. As discussed in Kocherlakota (1992) and in Santos and Woodford (1997), in the
presence of borrowing constraints the former can hold independently of the latter because the Euler equation does
not hold at all points in time as an equality.
   7
     Although our discussion above has not explicitly considered default incentives for periods in which the debt limit
is not binding, our characterization of debt limits is valid in those periods as well. This can be shown either by



                                                          12
    Finally, note that the equilibrium determines the aggregate amount of debt φo +φe , but not how
these borrowing privileges are split between the two types. Steady-state consumption allocations do
not depend on this distribution of borrowing privileges. In our model, the ability to borrow is a form
of private seignorage, which acts like a wealth transfer to the borrower and raises his consumption
in all periods. The sign and magnitude of this rent are directly proportional to (qo g) (qe g) − 1. In
equilibrium, competition amongst borrowers eliminates this rent, and drives interest rates up to
the point, where (qo g) (qe g) = 1. At this point the wealth transfer associated with the access to
credit is zero, so that steady-state consumption allocations are independent of an agent’s allowed
debt limit. As we will see below, this indeterminacy in the allocation of borrowing limits also holds
more generally.8

    Equivalence with fiat money economy: The equilibrium allocations characterized above
have the property that steady-state interest rates must equal the steady state growth rate, qg = 1.
This is not a coincidence. As is well known, the same steady-state property arises in models in
which agents only trade a fixed supply of fiat money. To formalize this, consider the alternative
environment described above (p. 8), with no borrowing and with unbacked public debt. With
deterministic endowments, unbacked public debt is identical to a fixed supply of fiat money.9 Let
the fixed money stock be denoted by M . Let Qt denote the period-t price of money in terms of
consumption goods, and 1/qt = Qt+1 /Qt the real return on holding one unit of money from t to
t + 1. Proposition 2 characterizes steady-state equilibria of the economy with fiat money.

Proposition 2 Whenever βe > e, there exists a non-autarkic steady-state, in which optimal con-
sumption equals cg t in periods of high endowment, cg t in periods of low endowment, and optimal
money holdings are 0 in high endowment periods and M in low endowment periods. Qt in turn
                                1
equals Qg t , where QM =       1+β   [βe − e]. c and c are defined as in Proposition 1. In addition, there
always exists an autarkic steady-state equilibrium, in which Qt = 0 and c = e, c = e for all t.

directly comparing the optimal default or non-default consumption plans starting in a low-endowment period, or by
relying on an arbitrage argument of the sort that we will use in the next section to establish more general results.
   8
     However, when one takes into account transitional dynamics, the eﬀects of this allocation on the consumption
allocation is no longer neutral. We discuss such transitional dynamics in section 5 and provide a formal analysis in
Appendix C.
  9
    Just think of the money stock as one-period government bonds with a zero nominal interest rate. The government
rolls over this stock of debt each period, thus keeping its supply constant. Allowing for a positive nominal interest
rate and positive money growth would not aﬀect our results, since the real interest rate would still be pinned down
in steady state.




                                                         13
         The steady-state consumption allocations and prices with fiat money are thus identical to the
ones characterized in Proposition 1. This illustrates our second result, that the set of equilibrium
allocations with self-enforcing private debt and limited market exclusion is equivalent to the set
of equilibrium allocations in the fiat money economy. We can therefore use equilibrium charac-
terizations that are well known for the fiat money environment to establish the existence of an
equilibrium with positive levels of self-enforcing private debt, as well as characterize the resulting
level of consumption-smoothing that takes place in equilibrium.
         In the general stochastic environment, this equivalence result requires that the same set of state-
contingent securities is available to agents in the economy with private debt and in the economy
with unbacked public debt. This condition is met by generalizing the fiat money economy to an
economy with unbacked state-contingent public debt as described in Section 2.10


4         Main Results

In this section, we show that the results derived for our deterministic example extend to a general
environment with stochastic endowments. First, we provide a necessary and suﬃcient condition
for borrowing constraints to be self-enforcing, which requires that at each history agents must be
able to exactly finance their previous debt obligation by issuing new claims. We call this condition
“exact roll-over.” Then, we show that if debt limits satisfy the exact roll-over condition, equilibrium
allocations are equivalent to the ones in the economy with unbacked public debt. This result implies
that if the economy primitives are such that unbacked public debt is valued in equilibrium, then
there also exist equilibria with positive levels of self-enforcing private debt.


4.1         Self-enforcement and exact roll-over

Here, we show that debt limits are self-enforcing if and only if they allow for exact roll-over. Debt
limits are said to allow for exact roll-over, if, at each history st , an agent can finance the maximum
                                           ¡ ¢
amount of outstanding promises, −φj st , by issuing the maximum amount of new promises,
     ¡    ¢
−φj st+1 , for each st+1 following st .

Definition 4 The debt limits Φj : S →R allow for exact roll-over (ER), if and only if:
                                       ¡      ¢
                          ¡ t¢    X p st+1        ¡    ¢
                        j
                      φ s =                t
                                                φj st+1 for all st ∈ S.                                               (16)
                                 t+1 t
                                       p (s )
                                             s   Âs
    10
         Moreover, if unbacked public debt and self-enforcing private debt are allowed to co-exist, the set of steady-state
allocations remains the same. We will return to this point in Section 5.


                                                              14
   Our first main result is then stated as follows:

Theorem 1 The debt limits Φj : S →R are self-enforcing (SE), if and only if they also allow for
exact roll-over (ER).

   Theorem 1 shows that exact roll-over is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for debt limits to be
self-enforcing. It generalizes the condition from the deterministic case, in which debt limits must
grow at the real interest rate 1/qt , that is, the condition φjt = qt φjt+1 . In the remainder of this
subsection, we discuss the formal steps used to establish Theorem 1, and provide a simple heuristic
explanation of the relation between self-enforcement and exact roll-over for the deterministic case.


   Exact roll-over implies self-enforcement: As a first step, Proposition 3 shows that if debt
limits satisfy exact roll-over, they are also self-enforcing.

Proposition 3 Suppose that the debt limits Φj : S →R allow for exact roll-over. Then
                       ¡ ¢            ¡      ¡ ¢ ¢                                  ¡ ¢
             V j (a, Φj st ; st ) = Dj a − φj st ; st for all st ∈ S, for all a ≥ φj st .          (17)

Proof. We establish this result by comparing the set of feasible consumption plans without default
                                      ¡ ¢
and initial asset holdings a ≥ φj st and the set of feasible consumption plans with default and
                                 ¡ ¢
initial asset holdings a − φj st ≥ 0, and showing that these sets are identical, for all st ∈ S, and
                ¡ ¢                                           ¡ ¢            ¡     ¡ ¢ ¢
for all a ≥ φj st . This then immediately implies V j (a, Φj st ; st ) = Dj a − φj st ; st .
                                                     ¡ ¢      © ¡      ¢ª          © ¡      ¢ª
    Consider therefore an arbitrary event st , a ≥ φj st , and a st+τ st+τ Âst and d st+τ st+τ Âst ,
        ¡     ¢        ¡     ¢      ¡    ¢                                ¡     ¢
s.t. d st+τ = a st+τ − φj st+τ for all st+τ Â st . Clearly, d st+τ ≥ 0 if and only if
  ¡     ¢         ¡     ¢                © ¡     ¢ª
a st+τ ≥ φj st+τ and therefore a st+τ st+τ Âst is feasible without default, if and only if
© ¡ t+τ ¢ª
  d s       st+τ Âst
                     is feasible with a default.
                                                     © ¡     ¢ª             © ¡   ¢ª
    To complete the proof, we therefore show that a st+τ st+τ Âst and d st+τ st+τ Âst also lead
to the same consumption allocations. Using (16), we have that for all st+τ Â st ,
                                 ¡         ¢                                                 ¡         ¢
   ¡ t+τ ¢ ¡ t+τ ¢       X      p st+τ +1 ¡ t+τ +1 ¢       ¡ t+τ ¢ ¡ t+τ ¢      X           p st+τ +1 ¡ t+τ +1 ¢
 j                                                       j
y s       +a s     −                         a s     = y    s     +d s    −                              d s
                     t+τ +1 t+τ
                                 p (st+τ )                                  t+τ +1
                                                                                             p (st+τ )
                     s       Âs                                                 s   Âst+τ

Likewise, for st , we have
                     ¡      ¢                                ¡      ¢
         ¡ t¢   X p st+1 ¡           ¢     ¡ t¢   ¡ t¢  X p st+1 ¡           ¢
        j                        t+1     j      j
       y s +a−           t
                              a s      =y s +a−φ s −             t
                                                                      d st+1
               t+1 t
                     p (s )                            t+1 t
                                                             p (s )
                     s   Âs                                            s   Âs
                                                         © ¡    ¢ª
Therefore, using (2), a consumption allocation consisting c st+τ st+τ ∈S(st )∪{st } is feasible un-
               © ¡      ¢ª              ¡ ¢
der asset plan a st+τ st+τ Âst given a st = a, if and only if it is feasible under asset plan

                                                   15
                                                                                                    C
                    pt at
                                                                                                    D

                                                                                                        t
                                     t*
                                                                                                    B

                                                                                                    A



                                   ptφt


                                          Figure 1: Bulow and Rogoﬀ (1989a)

© ¡ t+τ ¢ª                   ¡ t¢        j
                                           ¡ t¢
 d s      st+τ Âst , given d  s   = a − φ   s , and hence the resulting consumption allocations are
identical.
                                                                                  ¡ ¢
       Condition (17) implies the self-enforcement condition (5) by setting a = φj st . It has the
additional implication that the assumption that agents default on net asset positions and start with
a net financial position of zero after default is not necessary for providing repayment incentives.
                                       ¡ ¢
Condition (17) states that if a ≥ φj st , an agent who defaults on his maximum gross amount
         ¯ ¡ ¢¯                                               ¡ ¢
of debt ¯φj st ¯, but keeps his own asset holdings a − φj st after a default is always exactly
indiﬀerent between defaulting and not defaulting. With exact roll-over, the assumption that agents
default on net asset positions can therefore be relaxed without weakening repayment incentives.

       A graphical illustration: We can illustrate this characterization of self-enforcing debt limits
and the relation to the roll-over condition with a series of figures. For this, we assume that endow-
ment fluctuations are deterministic, as in the example of Section 3, and bonds are uncontingent.11
The agents’ budget constraint can then be rewritten as
                                                         1
                                            ct = ytj +      (pt at − pt+1 at+1 ) .
                                                         pt
For a given sequence of prices {pt }, we can thus compare the consumption profiles resulting from
diﬀerent asset plans simply by comparing the period-by-period changes in the present value of
asset holdings, pt at − pt+1 at+1 . We use this observation to give a graphical illustration of an agent’s
incentives to default.
                                                                                                    P∞
       First, let us revisit the no lending result of BR. In BR, it is assumed that Ytj =                          j
                                                                                                        τ =0 pt+τ yt+τ /pt
is finite, and that φjt ≥ −Ytj , i.e., that a borrower is never allowed to borrow more than the present
  11
       As in section 3, we replace the dependence on st by a time subscript to simplify notation.


                                                             16
value of all his future endowments. Any sequence of debt limits that satisfies these assumptions
must also satisfy limt→∞ pt φjt = 0.
   In Figure 1 we present a graphic argument that shows that if the sequence of debt limits Φj
satisfies limt→∞ pt φjt = 0, and φjs < 0 for some date s, then the consumer will find it optimal to
default at some date t∗ ≥ s. Clearly, along any such sequence of debt limits pt φjt must reach a
minimum at some date t, and there exists t∗ , such that pt∗ φjt∗ < inf t>t∗ pt φjt , i.e., the borrower’s
debt limit is less tight in present value terms at t∗ than at any subsequent date t > t∗ . This
is illustrated in Figure 1, where the thick line labelled A plots a possible path for the present
value of the borrowing limit, pt φjt , which satisfies this requirement. The thin line labelled B then
plots an arbitrary asset profile that starts from at∗ = φjt∗ and is consistent with this debt limit.
Now, the short-dashed line labelled C, starting from an asset position of 0 at time t∗ , plots an
asset profile that represents a parallel upwards shift of B. From t∗ on, this profile implements
exactly the same consumption sequence as B, and since it only requires positive asset positions for
all t > t∗ , it is implementable after a default. Finally, the asset profile represented by the long-
dashed line labelled D is a parallel downward shift of C starting from t∗ + 1, which still maintains
non-negative asset positions in all periods. Profile D thus remains feasible after a default and
implements exactly the same consumption profile from date t + 1 on as B and C, but it delivers
strictly higher consumption in period t. Hence D must be preferred to both B and C. Since B was
chosen arbitrarily, we conclude that any non-default asset profile can be strictly improved upon by
default at time t∗ .
   This argument shows that a sequence of debt limits Φj that satisfies the two assumptions made
by BR can be self-enforcing if and only if φjt = 0 for all t, i.e., if no lending is allowed. In fact,
if φjt < 0 for some t, self-enforcement requires that limt→∞ pt φjt < 0, i.e., a consumer’s debt limit
must asymptotically grow at least at the rate of interest, contradicting either BR’s assumption that
Ytj < ∞, or that −Ytj bounds φjt from below.

   A similar argument can be used to illustrate Proposition 3. Figure 2 considers debt limits Φj ,
such that pt φjt ≤ pt+1 φjt+1 for all t. As an equality, this condition represents the deterministic
version of the exact roll-over condition. It implies that at each date t, a consumer must be able
to exactly roll-over his maximum outstanding debt φjt by issuing new claims which are valued at
(pt+1 /pt ) φjt+1 . In Figure 2, line A plots such debt limits, which are weakly expanding (and strictly
expanding at date t0 ). Line B then plots an asset profile that is feasible for an agent who defaults at
date t∗ . Line C represents a parallel downward shift of B, thus implementing the same consumption
profile, starting from an initial asset position of φjt∗ at date t∗ . Since C never violates the debt limit

                                                    17
               pt at

                                                                                     B
                                                                                         t
                                           t*                 t’

                                                                                     C

                                                                                     D
                              ptφt j
                                                                                     A



                                                 Figure 2: Expanding debt limits

               pt at

                                                                                    B
                         (
                       pt atj − φt j   )                                                 t
                                            t*
                                pt atj
                                                                                    C


                             ptφt j                                                 A




                Figure 3: Exact roll-over and the strong self-enforcement condition


A, it is feasible for an agent who does not default. Finally, profile D uses the fact that the debt limit
is strictly expanding in present value terms at t0 to increase consumption in that period. D remains
feasible without a default and is strictly preferred to B and C; since B was picked arbitrarily, we
conclude that no default is always at least as good as default, and it is strictly better than default,
if Φj is strictly expanding at some subsequent date.
   Finally, Figure 3 illustrates the knife-edge case where Φj satisfies the deterministic exact roll-
over condition with equality in every period. As before, the thick line A plots the debt limit,
pt φjt . B and C are two asset profiles which start, respectively, from asset positions of a − φjt∗ ≥ 0
and a ≥ φjt∗ at date t∗ , and are parallel to each other; hence they lead to the same consumption
sequences. When the exact roll-over condition holds with equality, C satisfies the debt limit, if and
only if B is feasible after a default. Since this applies to any such pair of asset profiles B and C, we
therefore conclude that the same consumption sequences can be implemented starting with assets


                                                               18
a − φjt∗ after a default, or starting with assets a ≥ φjt∗ , with no default. Therefore, the agent must
                                                            ³       ´
be just indiﬀerent between the two, or Vtj (a, Φjt ) = Dtj a − φjt , for a ≥ φjt and all t.
   Figures 2 and 3 thus provide a graphical illustration of the strong self-enforcement condition in
Proposition 3. The roll-over condition, expressed as an inequality, is suﬃcient to deter default. If
it holds as a strict inequality for some t0 > t, then the agent is strictly better oﬀ not defaulting. If,
instead, it holds as an equality in all periods then the agents is always indiﬀerent between defaulting
and not defaulting.

   Self-enforcement implies exact roll-over: To complete the proof of Theorem 1, we show
that the converse of Proposition 3 also holds.

Proposition 4 Suppose that the debt limits Φj : S →R are self-enforcing (SE). Then they allow
for exact roll-over (ER).


   The proof of this proposition combines arbitrage arguments with specific properties of the
agents’ optimization problem. We present the complete proof in Appendix B; here we sketch the
main steps.
    Suppose that the sequence of borrowing limits Φj : S →R is self-enforcing. Consider the problem
                                                                                ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢
of a type j agent who starts at an arbitrary event st with asset holdings a st = φj st , and
    © ¡       ¢ª
let a∗ st+τ st+τ Âst denote the resulting optimal asset profile. Now, construct the sequence of
                          ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢ © ª
“shadow debt limits” Φ̃j st : S st ∪ st → R, which satisfies the following recursive condition:
                       ⎧                   ¡     ¢     ¡   ¢       ¡     ¢
            ¡      ¢   ⎨                φj st+τ if a∗ st+τ = φj st+τ
          j
        φ̃ s   t+τ
                     =                             n ¡        ¢      ¡       ¢o            .    (18)
                       ⎩ P t+τ +1 t+τ p(s t+τ ) min φj st+τ +1 , φ̃j st+τ +1
                                         t+τ +1

                           s     Âs    p(s    )                                 otherwise
                                                                                         ¡ ¢ © ª
In the appendix, we show that this sequence is well-defined and finite, for each st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st .
                                       ¡ ¢
The sequence of shadow debt limits Φ̃j st is defined recursively as the sum over the continuation
histories’ shadow or actual debt limits, picking for each st+τ +1 Â st+τ the larger of the two, in
absolute value.
                           ¡    ¢    j¡   ¢                 ¡ ¢ © ª
   Next, we show that if φj st+τ < φ̃ st+τ for some st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st , then an arbitrage
argument shows that default is strictly better than no default at st+τ . Therefore, for all st+τ ∈
  ¡ ¢ © ª       ¡    ¢      j¡    ¢                       ¡ ¢                                  ¡ ¢
S st ∪ st , φj st+τ ≥ φ̃ st+τ , i.e., the sequence Φ̃j st provides a lower bound for Φj st .
                              ¡ ¢                                 ¡    ¢    ¡     ¢
Moreover, by construction, Φ̃j st can be strictly lower only if a∗ st+τ > φj st+τ , i.e., at events
where the borrowing constraint is non-binding.
                                                                                               ¡ ¢
   This implies that the value of the no-default problem P1 starting from asset holdings of a st =
  ¡ ¢                                                                                            ¡ ¢
φj st at st is the same under the original debt limits, Φj , as under the shadow debt limits, Φ̃j st .

                                                   19
Since the original debt limits are self-enforcing we obtain:
        ¡     ¢   ¡ ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢ ¢       ³ ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢ ´       ³ j¡ ¢      ¡ ¢ ´
       D 0; st = V φj st ; Φj st , st = V φj st ; Φ̃j st , st ≥ V φ̃ st ; Φ̃j st , st ,

                                                                                 ¡ ¢     j¡ ¢
where the last inequality follows from the monotonicity of V and the fact that φj st ≥ φ̃ st .
                                                      ¡ ¢ © ª                              ¡ ¢
On the other hand, we can show that for all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st , the shadow debt limits Φ̃j st
satisfy the exact roll-over condition as a weak inequality:
                                             ¡         ¢
             j ¡ t+τ ¢     P                p st+τ +1 j ¡ t+τ +1 ¢          ¡    ¢    ¡    ¢
           φ̃ s        ≥      st+τ +1 Âst+τ              φ̃ s          if a∗ st+τ = φj st+τ ,
                                             p (st+τ )
                                             ¡         ¢
             j ¡ t+τ ¢     P                p st+τ +1 j ¡ t+τ +1 ¢
           φ̃ s        =      st+τ +1 Âst+τ              φ̃ s          otherwise.
                                             p (st+τ )

The first line is established by arbitrage, and the second line follows from the characterization of
  j¡    ¢                          ¡       ¢     j¡      ¢
φ̃ st+τ , using the fact that φj st+τ +1 ≥ φ̃ st+τ +1 for all st+τ +1 Â st+τ . Along the same
lines as Proposition 3, an arbitrage argument then implies that starting from st with asset posi-
       j¡ ¢
tion φ̃ st , no-default must be weakly preferred to default at st , and the preference is strict, if
  j¡     ¢  P               ¡      ¢ ¡     ¢ j¡       ¢                     ¡ ¢ © ª
φ̃ st+τ > st+τ +1 Âst+τ p st+τ +1 /p st+τ φ̃ st+τ +1 for some st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st . In other
words, we also have
                                      ³ j¡ ¢           ´   ¡     ¢
                                     V φ̃ st ; Φ̃j , st ≥ D 0; st .
                                                                ¡ ¢     j¡ ¢
Therefore, both inequalities must hold with equality implying φj st = φ̃ st , i.e., that the current
actual debt limit equals the shadow debt limit, and that Φ̃j satisfies the exact roll-over condition
                                ¡ ¢ © ª
as an equality, for all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st .
     Using the definition of Φ̃j , this implies that for all st ∈ S,
                              ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ P                 ¡    ¢ ¡     ¢
                             p st φj st = st+τ ∈B(st ) p st+τ φj st+τ ,
           ¡ ¢
where B st is the set of histories st+τ Â st , at which the debt limit is binding for the first time
                                                               ¡ ¢
after st , for an agent who starts at st with asset position φj st . This can further be decomposed
as
             ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢     P                         ¡ t+τ ¢ j ¡ t+τ ¢
            p st φj st =  st+1 Âst :st+1 ∈B(st ) p s       φ s
                          P                         P                           ¡ t+τ ¢ j ¡ t+τ ¢
                         + st+1 Âst :st+1 ∈B(s
                                           /     t)   st+τ Âst+1 :st+τ ∈B(st ) p s     φ s
                         ¡ ¢
i.e., we divide the set B st at which the debt limit is binding, into immediate successors st+1 Â st ,
and into histories st+τ Â st , with τ > 1, which are not immediate successors of st . The latter set is
then divided into subsets of histories st+τ that are each successors of the same immediate successor


                                                     20
st+1 Â st . As a final step of our proof, we exploit the monotonicity properties of the optimal asset
plan to show that
              P                               ¡ t+τ ¢ j ¡ t+τ ¢ P                ¡    ¢ ¡      ¢
                 st+τ Âst+1 :st+τ ∈B(st ) p    s     φ s       = st+τ ∈B(st+1 ) p st+τ φj st+τ
                     ¡    ¢ ¡     ¢ P                ¡    ¢ ¡     ¢
Combining this with p st+1 φj st+1 = st+τ ∈B(st+1 ) p st+τ φj st+τ , it follows that Φj satisfies
the exact roll-over condition.


4.2     Allocational equivalence

We now turn to the question whether there exist equilibria with positive levels of self-enforcing debt,
and how they can be characterized. We answer this question in Theorem 2, which states that a given
consumption allocation and price vector constitute a competitive equilibrium with self-enforcing
private debt, if and only if the same allocation and prices are an equilibrium of the correspond-
ing economy with unbacked public debt. For the latter economy, there are known existence and
characterization results (e.g. Santos and Woodford 1997), which then extend immediately to the
economy with self-enforcing private debt.

Theorem 2 (i) If {C j , aj , Φj ; p}j=1,...,J is a non-autarkic competitive equilibrium with self-enforcing
                                    ¡ ¢
private debt, then {C j , âj , dj s0 ; D, p}j=1,...,J is a non-autarkic competitive equilibrium with un-
                                   ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢                       ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢
backed public debt, where âj st = aj st − φj st for all j, st ∈ S, dj s0 = −φj s0 for all j,
       ¡ ¢ P              ¯ ¡ ¢¯
and d st = Jj=1 ¯φj st ¯ for all st ∈ S.
                           ¡ ¢
    (ii) If {C j , âj , dj s0 ; D, p}j=1,...,J is a non-autarkic competitive equilibrium with unbacked pub-
lic debt, then {C j , ãj , Φ̃j ; p}j=1,...,J is a non-autarkic competitive equilibrium with self-enforcing
                           ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢       j¡ ¢        j¡ ¢      dj (s0 ) ¡ ¢
private debt, where ãj st = âj st + φ̃ st , and φ̃ st = − d(s0 ) d st for all j, st ∈ S.

Proof. (i) Fix a price sequence p, and suppose that Φj satisfies exact roll-over. Then, for j =
                                                       ¡      ¡ ¢ ¢                    ¡ ¢
1, ..., J, Proposition 3 implies V j (a, Φj ; s0 ) = Dj a − φj s0 ; s0 , for all a ≥ φj s0 . Therefore,
since {C j , aj } solves (P1) for given debt limits Φj , prices p and zero initial asset holdings, {C j , âj }
                                                                                       ¡ ¢             ¡ ¢
solves (P1), given zero debt limits, prices p, and initial asset holdings of dj s0 = a − φj s0 .
But then, for given prices p, {C j , âj } are optimal allocations in the economy with unbacked public
                                         ¡ ¢
debt given initial asset holdings dj s0 . Next, notice that if Φj allows for exact roll-over for all
          ¡ ¢      PJ ¯¯ j ¡ t ¢¯¯
j, then d st =         j=1φ s       satisfies the government budget constraint (6), for all st ∈ S.
Finally, to show that {C j , âj } clears markets in the public debt economy, notice that asset market
                                                     PJ     j
                                                              ¡ t¢
clearing in the private debt economy requires          j=1 a s     = 0, for all st ∈ S, which implies
PJ £ j ¡ t ¢       ¡ ¢¤             P       ¡ ¢ P         ¯ ¡ ¢¯       ¡ ¢
  j=1  â s + φj st = 0, or J âj st = J ¯φj st ¯ = d st , so {âj } clears asset markets
                                         j=1                j=1


                                                          21
in the public debt economy. Good markets clearing is immediate, since market clearing condition
                                  P       ¡ ¢ P             ¡ ¢
for goods markets equires that Jj=1 cj st = Jj=1 y j st for all st ∈ S, in both environments.
                                ¡ ¢
    (ii) First, notice that if d st satisfies (6), for all st ∈ S, then the sequence of debt limits Φ̃j
as constructed above allows for exact roll-over, for all j. Now, reversing the above argument, if
                                                                                     ¡ ¢
{C j , âj } is optimal in the public debt economy, given initial debt holdings of dj s0 , then {C j , ãj }
is optimal in the private debt economy, given borrowing limits Φ̃j and zero initial asset holdings.
                                                           P        ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢       P       j¡ ¢
Finally, asset market clearing implies that for all st ∈ S, Jj=1 âj st = d st = − Jj=1 φ̃ st or
PJ    h    ¡ t¢   j ¡ t¢
                        i   P        ¡ ¢
         j
   j=1 â s + φ̃ s        = Jj=1 ãj st = 0, which implies that {C j , ãj } also clears asset markets
in the private debt economy. That {C j , ãj } also clears goods markets is then immediate.

   Theorem 2 determines a mapping between the initial borrowing limits in the private debt
economy and the initial holdings of public debt in the public debt economy. It also determines a
mapping, for each st , between the aggregate private debt in circulation in the first economy and
the aggregate public debt in circulation in the second. Once the initial borrowing limits and asset
positions are aligned and the dynamics of aggregate debt are the same, then the same consumption
allocation and the same real rates of return emerge in the two economies.
   The argument of this theorem is established in three steps. First, for a given set of bond returns,
the strong self-enforcement condition (17) in Proposition 3 implies that once each agent’s initial
debt holdings are equated to his initial private debt limit, the set of feasible consumption allocations
coincide in the public and private debt economies. A given equilibrium consumption allocation is
then optimal in both economies.
    Second, starting from the debt limits Φj , construct debt levels for the public debt economy
     ¡ ¢ P         ¯ ¡ ¢¯
as d st = Jj=1 ¯φj st ¯. If Φj allows for exact roll-over, it must be the case that the sequence
© ¡ t ¢ª
 d s     satisfies the government budget constraint (6). The reverse is also true: for any sequence
of public debt levels that satisfy (6), we can construct debt limits for the private debt economy,
such that initial debt limits are equated to initial public debt holdings for each type, debt limits
                                ¡ ¢ P        ¯ ¡ ¢¯
allow for exact roll-over, and d st = Jj=1 ¯φj st ¯ for all histories. As in the example of Section
3, these debt limits are not uniquely determined for each individual, but the aggregate private debt
in circulation is.
   Finally, we check that the resulting allocations and asset holdings clear the markets in the
private debt economy, if and only if they clear markets in the economy with unbacked public
debt. For goods markets, this is immediate since market-clearing requires in both cases that
PJ     j
         ¡ t ¢ PJ    j
                       ¡ t¢
  j=1 c s =     j=1 y s     for all st ∈ S.



                                                    22
    The equivalence result is not restricted to steady-states, but applies to any competitive equilib-
rium. To interpret this result consider the following. If we aggregate the total debt in circulation
in the private debt economy, and use the exact roll-over condition, we see that aggregate debt
satisfies the same aggregate law of motion as the unbacked public debt issued by the government.
The public debt economy is an economy where the government cannot use taxation to finance the
repayment of its claims, and must instead roll them over indefinitely. On the other hand, in the
private debt economy agents have extremely limited power to enforce private debt, to the extent
that agents can only issue claims that can be repaid by issuing new claims, whereas any contract
that required a net transfer of resources from some date forward would not be sustainable. The
lack of taxation power on the government side matches exactly the lack of commitment on the
agents’ side. The equivalence thus arises when both the public sector and the private sector have
very limited power to collect payments from market participants.
    We conclude this section with a brief comment about the preference assumptions. Time-additive
separability, strict concavity and boundedness of the life-time utility function enter only in Proposi-
tion 4. Since Proposition 3 and Theorem 2 relied purely on arbitrage arguments, they only require
strict monotonicity of U w.r.t. C, and therefore hold much more generally, if (for Theorem 2) one
restricts attention to debt limits that allow for exact roll-over as one particular class of equilibria
with self-enforcing private debt.


5    Extensions

In this section, we discuss some extensions of the results derived and some related applications in
the context of monetary models and in international finance.

    Out-of-steady-state dynamics: As noticed above, Theorem 2 applies to all equilibria, not
only to steady-states. To elaborate on that observation, one can go back to the example in Section
3 and look at (i) transitional dynamics and (ii) non-stationary equilibria.
    In an economy with fiat money, it is well known that the initial allocation of fiat money across
agents will determine the transition to steady-state consumption allocations. Theorem 2 implies
that, in the same way, the initial borrowing limits will determine the transition to steady-state in
the private debt economy. The analysis in Appendix C derives explicitly the transition path for the
model of Section 3, and shows the mapping between the private debt and the fiat money economy.
    Likewise, it is well known that in models with fiat money there are non-stationary equilibria
with hyperinflation, where the real value of money collapses over time. By Theorem 2, there must


                                                  23
also exist equilibria of the private debt economy with similar features, i.e., non-stationary equilibria
in which the real value of private debt is collapsing over time. In Appendix C we analyze these
equilibria formally. The logic of these equilibria is the following: if agents anticipate that there will
be a tightening of borrowing constraints in the future, this reduces repayment incentives today.
This means that there are equilibrium sequences of debt limits that go to zero over time, with the
equilibrium allocation converging to autarky.

       Co-existence of public and private debt and implications for monetary theory: It
is straightforward to extend our model to allow for the co-existence of unbacked public debt and
self-enforcing private debt. This does not change the set of equilibrium consumption allocations
but introduces a source of indeterminacy regarding the real value of public and private debt in
circulation. If we go back to the example of Section 3, it is possible to show that the same steady
state allocation described in Propositions 1 and 2 can be supported in an equilibrium where money
and private debt co-exist. In this equilibrium the price of money Q and the debt limits φo , φe must
satisfy:
                                                                1
                                      QM + [−φo − φe ] =           [βe − e] .
                                                               1+β
If both are positively valued, they must be perfect substitutes, and their rates of return must be
identical. This is reminiscent of the indeterminacy result of Kareken and Wallace (1981) regarding
the co-existence of multiple fiat currencies.
       In the absence of aggregate shocks, unbacked public debt may be interpreted as fiat money, while
self-enforcing private debt may be interpreted as a form of inside money, such as bank deposits.
Within our environment, one is sustainable if and only if the other is, and they lead to identical real
allocations. When both are available, this merely leads to a further indeterminacy in how much
each is used in transactions. We view this as a useful benchmark result. The existing monetary
literature discusses the circulation of fiat and inside money largely in separation from each other.
The circulation of fiat money requires that an intrinsically useless asset is traded at a positive
price, which connects the analysis to the possibility of rational bubbles. The circulation of inside
money (demandable debt) instead relies on having the proper reputational mechanisms in place
to guarantee that outstanding claims are honored; for this, the Bulow-Rogoﬀ puzzle is directly
relevant. Although on the surface these seem distinct conceptual problems, our analysis shows that
the sustainability of fiat and inside money are actually closely related.12
  12
       See Cavalcanti, Erosa and Temzelides (1999) and Berentsen, Camera and Waller (2005) for matching models of
private debt circulation under limited commitment. Cavalcanti et al. study a monetary matching model, in which a
fixed subset of agents is allowed to issue notes, which are sustained by the loss of a non-competitive note-issuing rent


                                                          24
    The case where both public and private debt co-exist can also be used to clarify the informational
and enforcement frictions under which the BR assumption that agents after a default are only
denied credit, but cannot be prevented from savings emerges as the equilibrium punishment. This
assumption requires the public monitoring of negative asset holdings, to enforce the borrowing
limits, but, at the same time, this assumption rules out the monitoring and confiscation of positive
asset holdings after the default episode. This assumption arises if some debt contracts take the
form of bearer bonds, i.e., bonds whose ownership is not monitored. This is a particularly natural
assumption for government-issued fiat money. In an environment with government-issued fiat
money, the BR assumption then emerges naturally as the strongest possible punishment, since after
a default, agents are able to use fiat money anonymously for savings, even if they are completely
excluded from private debt transactions.

    Sovereign debt and international capital flows: The original motivation of Bulow and
Rogoﬀ’s was to study the sustainability of sovereign debt by reputation. Our analysis suggests
that such debt may indeed be sustainable, provided that prices and debt ceilings adjust accord-
ingly. Whereas much of the existing literature following BR has treated the no-lending result as a
theoretical puzzle, our results suggest that debt sustainability should first be addressed as a quan-
titative question. In particular, the relevant issue is to examine whether or not debt limits and
international rates of return are consistent with repayment incentives. A quantitative evaluation
of this issue would require us to enrich our model to allow for a number of features of actual inter-
national capital flows, in particular the presence of gross positions on diﬀerent types of public and
private instruments. This evaluation is outside the scope of this paper. However, several observers
have recently noticed that the largest world debtor, the US, does indeed pay a low rate of return
on its external liabilities.13 Under our approach, this low rate of return provides the US with a
broad form of “seignorage,” reflected in the fact that a positive financial flow is associated to the
net debtor position. The threat of losing this seignorage provides a simple discipline device that
gives the proper incentives to the sovereign debt issuer.14
if outstanding notes are not redeemed on demand. Related to our results, Berentsen et al. study a matching model
with money and competitive supply of bank credit, and show among other things that with lack of commitment, such
credit is sustainable only if the inflation rate is non-negative.
  13
     See e.g. Gourinchas and Rey (2005).
  14
     This net flow of resources is due to (1) the fact that the debt of the US grows over time, and (2) the fact that
the US receives a higher return on its gross asset positions than what it pays on his gross liabilities. To capture the
second element would require a model with an explicit treatment of gross financial positions.




                                                          25
      Our theoretical analysis is related also to the model of private international capital flows ana-
lyzed by Jeske (2006) and Wright (2006). In their model, individuals can borrow either with full
commitment in a domestic capital market, or with limited commitment in an international mar-
ket; after a default on a borrower’s outstanding international debt, the borrower is excluded from
the international, but not the domestic capital market. With perfect domestic commitment, all
agents in a country are either simultaneously constrained or unconstrained in international markets
(otherwise the unconstrained agents could profitably intermediate the constrained agents’ access to
international markets), and if the country is unconstrained, domestic rates of return are the same
as international rates of return. Therefore, with perfect access to domestic credit markets, agents
are able to save at international rates of return, with these savings being intermediated by the
agents’ compatriots, but they lose access to credit at international rates and they actually prefer
not to borrow at the domestic rates. The allocations that can be supported by private international
capital flows then replicate exactly the general equilibrium allocations of our Bulow-Rogoﬀ econ-
omy, and our equivalence with rational bubbles can also be used to show existence and characterize
equilibria in the Jeske-Wright model.15

      Other extensions: Our analysis has focused on an endowment economy. Extending our results
to the case of production economies presents a number of challanges, which are well known from the
literature on rational bubbles. Namely, allowing for capital accumulation restricts the sustainability
of rational bubbles, or of positively priced fiat money, if capital is freely tradeable. Generalizing
our equivalance result to production economies with capital accumulation then implies that these
same factors also restrict the sustainability of private debt. One way around this problem is to
assume that capital accumulation and capital transfers are subject to real or financial frictions.
This avenue is pursued, for example, in Woodford (1990) and Ventura (2004), who show that if the
financial friction is suﬃently strong, bubbles can still arise in equilibrium.
      It may also be interesting to explore.the implications of our model for income and consumption
inequality and risk-sharing. Krueger and Perri (2006), for example, ask whether a limited com-
mitment model can account for the trends of increasing income and consumption inequality over
the last 25 years. A key insight from their analysis is that an increase in income volatility may
generate only a much smaller increase, or possibly a decrease, in consumption inequality, because
the increasing income volatility makes a default less appealing, which improves the opportunities
for risk-sharing. The magnitude of this eﬀect depends primarily on the extent to which agents can
smooth consumption after a default, and it may therefore be worthwhile to study the risk-sharing
 15
      See Wright (2006), Section 5, for a formal discussion.


                                                           26
implications of alternative consequences of default.
         To account for consumption and income volatility and risk sharing, it may also be useful to
extend our model to allow for unobserved idiosyncratic shocks and incomplete markets. This
extension is important also from a theoretical perspective: early versions of the Bewley-style fiat
money model assume explicitly that agents face unobserved idiosyncratic endowment shocks. A
generalization of our results to incomplete market economies would then further reinforce the
equivalence between self-enforcing private and unbacked public securities.16


6         Conclusion

In this paper, we have studied a general equilibrium economy with self-enforcing private debt, in
which, after a default, borrowers are excluded from future credit, but retain the ability to save
in the market. For a partial equilibrium version of this model, in which a small open economy
borrows internationally at fixed, positive interest rates, Bulow and Rogoﬀ (1989a) have shown that
debt cannot be sustainable by reputational mechanisms only: eventually, the country always has
an incentive to default. In contrast, we show that positive levels of debt can be sustained in general
equilibrium. The key to our result is that interest rates adjust downwards to provide the right
repayment incentives.
         More generally, we have established two results. First, we show that with future exclusion from
credit as the only consequence fo default, debt limits are self-enforcing if and only if they allow
agents to exactly honor their outstanding payment obligations by issuing new debt (exact roll-over).
Second, if debt limits satisfy exact roll-over, the resulting equilibrium allocations are equilibrium
allocations of an economy, in which a government issues unbacked public securities and rolls them
over period by period. For the latter environment, there exist well known existence results for
non-autarkic equilibria with positive levels of debt.
         We believe that our characterization results may be useful for a variety of applications. In the
context of sovereign debt, to which this model was originally applied, our analysis suggests that the
sustainability of debt should be viewed not so much as a theoretical puzzle, but as a quantitative
issue. We leave an exploration of these and other applications to future work.


    16
         One complication of such a generalization is the possibility that agents may actually use default explicitly to
obtain better insurance against idiosyncratic risk; i.e to “complete the market”, in a sense.




                                                             27
References

 [1] F. Alvarez and U. Jermann (2000), “Eﬃciency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing with Risk of
    Default,” Econometrica, 68, 4, p. 775-797.

 [2] M. Amador (2003), “A Political Model of Sovereign Debt Repayment,” working paper, Stanford
    University.

 [3] A. Berentsen, G. Camera and C. Waller (2005), “Money, Credit and Banking,” Journal of
    Economic Theory, forthcoming.

 [4] T. Bewley (1980), “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in J. H. Kareken and N. Wallace, eds.
    Models of Monetary Economies. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank.

 [5] J. Bulow and K. Rogoﬀ (1988), “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?” working paper #
    2623, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

 [6] J. Bulow and K. Rogoﬀ (1989a), “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?” American Eco-
    nomic Review 79, 1, p. 43-50.

 [7] J. Bulow and K. Rogoﬀ (1989b), “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,” Journal
    of Political Economy 79, 1, p. 43-50.

 [8] R. Cavalcanti, A. Erosa, and T. Temzelides (1999), “Private Money and Reserve Management
    in a Matching Model,” Journal of Political Economy 107, 5, p. 929-945.

 [9] V. V. Chari and P. Kehoe (1993), “Sustainable Plans and Debt,” Journal of Economic Theory
    61, 2, p. 230-261.

[10] H. Cole and P. Kehoe (1995), “The Role of Institutions in Reputation Models of Sovereign
    Debt,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 35, 1, p. 45-64.

[11] H. Cole and P. Kehoe (1998), “Models of Sovereign Debt: Partial versus General Reputations,”
    International Economic Review, 39, 1, p. 55-70.

[12] J. Eaton and M. Gersovitz (1981), “Debt with Potential Repudiation - Theoretical and Em-
    pirical Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies 48, 2, p. 289-309.

[13] P. Gourinchas and H. Rey (2005), “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: US
    External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege,” in R. Clarida, ed. G7 Current Account
    Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

                                                 28
[14] H. Grossman and T. Han (1999), “Sovereign Debt and Consumption Smoothing,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics 44, 1, p. 149-158.

[15] F. Gul and W. Pesendorfer (2004), “Self-Control and the Theory of Consumption” Economet-
    rica 72, 1, p. 119-158.

[16] K. Jeske (2006), “Private International Debt with Risk of Repudiation,” Journal of Political
    Economy 114, 3, p. 576-593.

[17] J. Kareken and N. Wallace (1981), “On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium Exchange Rates,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 96, 2, p. 207-222.

[18] T. Kehoe and D. Levine (1993), “Debt-Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of Economic
    Studies 60, 4, p. 865-888.

[19] N. Kocherlakota (1992), “Bubbles and Constraints on Debt Accumulation,” Journal of Eco-
    nomic Theory 57, 1, p. 245-256.

[20] N. Kocherlakota (1996), “Implications of Eﬃcient Risk-Sharing without Commitment,” Review
    of Economic Studies 63, 4, p. 595-609.

[21] K. Kletzer and B. Wright (2000), “Sovereign Debt as Intertemporal Barter”, American Eco-
    nomic Review 90, 3, p. 621-639.

[22] D. Krueger and F. Perri (2006), “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality?
    Evidence and Theory”, Review of Economic Studies 73, 1, p. 163-193.

[23] D. Krueger and H. Uhlig (2005), “Competitive Risk-Sharing Contracts with One-Sided Com-
    mitment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

[24] L. Ljungqvist and T. J. Sargent (2000), Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, Cambridge, MA:
    MIT Press.

[25] H. Lustig (2004), “The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth Distribution,” working
    paper, UCLA.

[26] E. Mohr (1991), Economic Theory and Sovereign International Debt, London: Academic Press.

[27] W. Pesendorfer (1992), “Sovereign Debt: Foregiving and Forgetting reconsidered,” working
    paper, Kellogg MEDS.


                                               29
[28] M. Santos and M. Woodford (1997), “Rational Asset Pricing Bubbles,” Econometrica 65, 1,
     p. 19-57.

[29] J. Scheinkman and L. Weiss (1986), “Borrowing Constraints and Aggregate Economic Activ-
     ity”, Econometrica 54, 1, p. 23-46.

[30] J. Thomas (1992), “Sovereign Debt: Ignorance can be Bliss,” Journal of Development Eco-
     nomics 39, 2, p. 389-396.

[31] J. Tirole (1982), “On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational Expectations,” Economet-
     rica, 50, 5, 1163-1181.

[32] R. Townsend (1980), “Models of Money with Spatially Separated Agents,” in J. H. Kareken
     and N. Wallace, eds. Models of Monetary Economies. Minneapolis: The Federal Reserve Bank.

[33] J. Ventura (2004), “Bubbles and Capital Flows,” working paper, CREI, Universitat Pompeu
     Fabra.

[34] M. Woodford (1990), “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review 80, 2,
     p. 382-388.

[35] M. Wright (2002), “Reputations and Sovereing Debt,” working paper, Stanford University.

[36] M. Wright (2006), “Private Capital Flows, Capital Controls and Default Risk,” Journal of
     International Economics 69, 1, p. 120-149.




7    Appendix A: Proofs
                                                                              n            o∞
Proof of Lemma 1.         For j ∈ {o, e}, a consumption and asset profile      cjt , ajt+1    is a solution
                                                                                         t=0
to (P1), if and only if it satisfies the sequence of flow budget constraints, the sequence of Euler
equations qt   1    β
                     ≥   for all t, which must hold with equality if ajt+1 > φjt+1 , and the transversality
               cjt
                 cjt+1
condition limt→∞ β t 1j ajt+1 = 0. We check that our proposed solution satisfies these conditions for
                      ct
an agent starting with an asset profile ajt = φjt in a high endowment period.




                                                    30
   Therefore need to check that the solution satisfies

                                  cjt+τ       j
                                           = yt+τ + ajt+τ − qt+τ ajt+τ +1 ,

                                cjt+τ +1 = yt+τ
                                            j         j                 j
                                                +1 + at+τ +1 − qt+τ +1 at+τ +2 ,

                                  cjt+τ    = cjt+τ +1 · qt+τ /β,         ajt+τ +1 ≥ φjt+τ +1 ,

                               cjt+τ +1 ≤ cjt+τ +2 · qt+τ +1 /β,           ajt+τ +1 = φjt+τ +2 ,
                                1
                        lim β t j ajt+1 = 0.
                       t→∞     ct
for each τ = 2 · k.
   Substituting ytj = eg t and yt+1
                                j
                                    = eg t+1 , our conjectures for bond prices qt = qj , qt+1 = q−j ,
debt limits φjt = φj g t and φjt+2 = φj g t+2 , consumption profiles cjt = cj g t and cjt+1 = cj g t+1 , and
asset holdings ajt+1 = aj g t+1 , we can solve the first three conditions for cj , cj and aj and find (7)-(9)
                        cj
as a solution. Since    cj   = gq−j /β and q−j , qj ≥ β/g, we obtain the following chain of inequalities
                                   cj
                                      = β/ (gq−j ) ≤ 1 ≤ gqj /β,
                                   cj
                                                                ¯     ¯
                                                                ¯     ¯
so the Euler inequality for t + 1 is also satisfied. Moreover, ¯ajt+1 ¯ /cjt ≤               1
                                                                                            cj g max {a, φ}, so the
transversality condition is satisfied as well. Finally, the inequality                ajt+1 ≥ φjt+1 is satisfied by
hypothesis.

Proof of Lemma 2.             We again check that the proposed allocation satisfies the consumer’s flow
budget constraints, the Euler equations and the transversality condition, starting from a period t
with high endowments, in which ajt = 0. This is immediate, since the problem is the same as that
in Lemma 1, after setting φj = 0. In this case, we can check that the condition adj ≥ 0 always
holds, because βe ≥ qj ge follows from the fact that e ≥ e and qj ≤ β/g.

Proof of Proposition 1.            Apart from the autarkic case, the proof is in the text. Suppose that
φo = φe = 0. Then, market clearing requires that ajt = 0 for all j, t. Given our solution to (P2),
it is easy to check that ajt = 0 for all t is optimal if and only if βe ≤ (qj g) e. Thus, whenever
           βe
(qj g) ≥    e   for j ∈ {o, e}, the autarkic allocation is indeed optimal, and the bond market clears
without any trade actually occuring.

Proof of Proposition 2. For a given sequence of prices Qt > 0, the household’s problem is
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                      V (M0 ) =           β t u (ct )
                                                      t=0
                                          s.t. ct ≤   ytj + Qt (Mt      − Mt+1 )
                                          Mt+1 ≥ 0

                                                         31
Defining at = Qt Mt and qt = Qt /Qt+1 , this problem is identical to (P1), with zero debt limits and
initial asset holdings of a0 = Q0 M0 . Therefore, conjecturing that qt = q is constant in steady-state,
the optimal steady-state allocations are characterized from Lemma 1, as cg t in high endowment
periods, and cg t in low endowment periods, where

                                1                       β/ (qg)
                         c=        [e + (qg) e] and c =         [e + (qg) e]
                               1+β                       1+β

These allocations clear the market, if and only if e + e = c + c, or

                               1                       β/ (qg)
                          e−       [e + (qg) e] =              [e + (qg) e] − e
                             1+β                        1+β
                             1                         1/ (qg)
                         or      [βe − (qg) e] =               [βe − (qg) e]
                            1+β                         1+β

    Thus, markets clear if and only if qg = 1, which corresponds to the non-autarkic equilibrium.
In addition, there exists an autarkic equilibrium, in which Qt = 0 and cjt = ytj for all t, j.



8    Appendix B: Proof of Proposition 4

Here, we discuss the proof of Proposition 4. Since this result is significantly more involved than
the others, we discuss its proof separately from the other results, and have divided it into seven
lemmas. Lemma 3 establishes useful properties of the solution to the household problem (P1).
Lemmas 4-7 then establish the existence and characterization of the shadow debt limits Φ̃. Lemma
8 establishes the exact roll-over condition for Φ̃, and Lemma 9 uses this to show that ER also holds
for Φ. To simplify notation, we omit the superscript j throughout the proof.
                         ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¢          ¡    ¢                     ¡ ¢
     Suppose that V φ st , Φ st ; st = D 0; st for all st ∈ S. If φ st = 0 for all st ∈ S, the
                                                       ¡ ¢                       © ¡     ¢ª
proposition holds trivially. Suppose therefore that φ st < 0 for some st . Let a∗ st+τ st+τ ∈S(st )
                                   © ¡     ¢ª
be the optimal asset profile and c∗ st+τ st+τ ∈S(st )∪{st } the associated optimal consumption pro-
                                       ¡ ¢
file, starting from asset holdings of φ st at history st . Lemma 3 establishes some useful properties
                                                            ¡   ¡ ¢ ¢
for the solution to problem (P1), the value functions V a, Φ st ; st and the optimal asset plan
© ∗ ¡ t+τ ¢ª
  a s         st+τ Âst
                       .
                   ¡    ¡ ¢ ¢
Lemma 3 (i) V a, Φ st ; st is strictly increasing, diﬀerentiable and strictly concave in a, for
       ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢ P             p(st+1 ) ¡    ¢
a ≥ a st ≡ −y st + st+1 Âst p(st ) φ st+1 .
           ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
    (ii) φ st > a st .
            © ¡      ¢ª                                                              ¡    ¢
    (iii) if ã st+k st+k ∈S(st+τ ) is optimal starting from initial asset holdings φ st+τ at history
              ¡    ¢     ¡    ¢            ¡   ¢      ¡    ¢                 ¡     ¢
st+τ , and a∗ st+τ > φ st+τ , then a∗ st+k ≥ ã st+k for all st+k ∈ S st+τ .

                                                  32
Proof. Part (i) follows immediately from the properties of problem (P1). To characterize a notice
that the budget constraint at st can be rewritten as
                                               ¡      ¢
                          ¡ t¢ ¡ t¢ ¡ t¢  X p st+1 ¡           ¢
                         c s ≤y s +a s −           t
                                                        a st+1
                                         t+1 t
                                               p (s )
                                                   s      Âs
         ¡ ¢                            ¡   ¢    ¡    ¢
Since c st must be non-negative, and a st+1 ≥ φ st+1 , the budget set:
 ⎧                           ⎡                          ¡       ¢        ⎤                     ⎫
 ⎨ ¡ ¢ © ¡       ¢ª    ¡   ¢      ¡   ¢   ¡   ¢  X p st+1 ¡             ¢    ¡     ¢   ¡     ¢ ⎬
       t
   c s , a s t+1         t   ⎣      t
                    : c s ∈ 0, y s + a s −  t
                                                                  a st+1 ⎦
                                                                           ;a st+1
                                                                                     ≥φ st+1
 ⎩                                              t+1 t
                                                        p (st )                                ⎭
                                                      s   Âs

                        ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢ P           p(st+1 ) ¡    ¢                   ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
is non-empty only if y st + a st − st+1 Âst p(st ) φ st+1 ≥ 0, or equivalently a st ≥ a st .
                    ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢                                                     ¡ ¢
    Part (ii): if a st = a st , the only feasible allocation without default yields c st = 0,
       ¡     ¢      ¡     ¢
and a st+1 = φ st+1 for all st+1 Â st . This yields a life-time expected utility of u (0) +
  P            ¡      ¢ ¡ ¡        ¢ ¡       ¢     ¢                                     ¡    ¢
β st+1 Âst π st+1 |st V φ st+1 , Φ st+1 , st+1 . If instead the agent defaults and sets d st+1 =
                                                           ¡ ¡ ¢¢   P         ¡       ¢ ¡       ¢
0 for all st+1 Â st , his life-time expected utility is u y st + β st+1 Âst π st+1 |st D 0, st+1 .
         ¡       ¢     ¡ ¡       ¢ ¡      ¢      ¢                                         ¡ ¢
Since D 0, st+1 = V φ st+1 , Φ st+1 , st+1 for all st+1 , it follows immediately that at a st =
  ¡ ¢                                                           ¡ ¢   ¡ ¢
a st default is strictly preferred to no default, and hence φ st > a st .
                                                              ¡ ¢   © ¡    ¢ª
    Part (iii): For given a, the first-order conditions for c st and a st+1 are
                                            ¡ ¡ ¢¢        ¡ ¢
                                          u0 c st   = λ st
                                                                 ¡      ¢
              ¡ t+1 t ¢ ¡ ¡ t+1 ¢ ¡ t+1 ¢ t+1 ¢           ¡ t ¢ p st+1       ¡     ¢
            βπ s |s Va a s         ,Φ s      ,s     = λ s            t
                                                                          + µ st+1
                                                                 p (s )
       ¡ ¢      ¡    ¢
where λ st and µ st+1 are, respectively, the Lagrange multipliers on the budget constraint at st
and the debt limit for st+1 . We can rewrite these conditions as
                  ¡ ¢    ¡ ¡ ¢¢       ¡     ¢       © ¡ ¡ ¢             ¢ ¡    ¢ª
                c st = γ λ st and a st+1 = max ψ λ st ; st+1 ; φ st+1
                                               µ                      ¶
                0 −1
                             ¡ t+1 ¢        −1   p(st+1 )     1
where γ (·) = (u ) (·), and ψ ·; s   = (Va )    λ p(st ) βπ(st+1 |st ) . The budget constaint can
then be rewritten as
                             ¡       ¢
              ¡ ¡ t ¢¢  X p st+1           © ¡ ¡ t ¢ t+1 ¢ ¡ t+1 ¢ª     ¡ t¢
             γ λ s +                   max  ψ λ s   ; s   ; φ s     = y  s +a
                       t+1 t
                             p (st )
                          s   Âs
                                                          ¡       ¢
Since u is concave in c and V is concave in a, γ (·) and ψ ·; st+1 are decreasing in λ, and therefore
                                   ¡     ¢                                                   ¡   ¢
there exists a unique value of λ a; st which solves the budget constraint; moreover λ ·; st is
                                                        ¡ ¢      © ¡     ¢ª
strictly decreasing in a. Therefore, at the optimum, c st and a st+1 are all non-decreasing in
  ¡ ¢
a st . But then, the proposition follows immediately.


                                                 33
                          ¡ ¢ © ª
   Starting from st and N0 st ≡ st , we now define the following sets of events:
               ¡ ¢   ©             ¡      ¢ ¡    ¢     ¡    ¢       ¡ ¢ª
             Nτ st = st+τ Â st : a∗ st+τ > φ st+τ and σ st+τ ∈ Nτ −1 st
               ¡ ¢   ©             ¡      ¢ ¡    ¢     ¡    ¢       ¡ ¢ª
             Bτ st = st+τ Â st : a∗ st+τ = φ st+τ and σ st+τ ∈ Nτ −1 st
               ¡ ¢   S∞       ¡ t¢   ¡ t ¢ S∞     ¡ t¢
             N st =    τ =1 Nτ s , B s = τ =1 Bτ s .

    ¡ ¢
Nτ st denotes the set of histories st+τ along which the debt limit was never binding between event
                     ¡ ¢                                    ¡ ¢
st and st+τ , and N st the union of all such sets. Bτ st denotes the set of histories st+τ at which
                                                                ¡ ¢
the debt limit is binding for the first time after st , and B st the union of all such sets. If the debt
                             ¡ ¢
limit never binds, then B st is empty.
                                                                               ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢ © ª
    Next, we recursively define the following ‘auxiliary’ debt limits Φ̃ st : S st ∪ st → R:
               ⎧                                 n ¡        ¢ ¡           ¢o       ¡    ¢   ¡     ¢
                 P               p(st+τ +1 )
    ¡ t+τ ¢ ⎨       st+τ +1 Âst+τ p(st+τ ) min φ s
                                                      t+τ +1 , φ̃ st+τ +1     if a∗ st+τ > φ st+τ
  φ̃ s     =                                  ¡    ¢      ¡      ¢     ¡     ¢                      (19)
               ⎩                             φ st+τ if a∗ st+τ = φ st+τ
                                               ¡ ¢                     ¡ ¢
   It is immediate to check that a solution Φ̃ st to (19) exists, if Φ̃ st is allowed to take on
                                                                                  ¡ ¢
the value of −∞. Our next task is to establish that a finite-valued solution Φ̃ st exists, and
                                                                     ¡    ¢      ¡    ¢
to characterize this solution; this is immediate for all st+τ s.t. a∗ st+τ = φ st+τ , but not
otherwise. We complete this in four steps, that are formulated by the next four lemmas. The
                                                      ¡ ¢ © ª
first three characterize the solution for all st+τ ∈ N st ∪ st . The fourth lemma extends this
                            ¡ ¢
characterization to all of S st .

                         ¡ ¢ © ª                   ¡      ¢          ¡     ¢
Lemma 4 For all st+τ ∈ N st ∪ st , define φ̂ st+τ and Y st+τ by
                                                     ¡         ¢
               ¡ t+τ ¢              X              p st+τ +k ³ t+τ +k ´
             φ̂ s      =                                         φ s
                           t+τ +k     t      t+τ
                                                     p (st+τ )
                          s       ∈B(s )∩S(s     )
                                                                   ¡         ¢
               ¡ t+τ ¢      ¡ t+τ ¢                X              p st+τ +k ³ t+τ +k ´
            Y s        ≡ y s         +                                         y s
                                        t+τ +k       t      t+τ
                                                                   p (st+τ )
                                           s     ∈N (s )∩S(s   )

       ¡    ¢         ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢    ¡    ¢
Then, Y st+τ < ∞ and φ st+τ + Y st+τ ≥ φ̂ st+τ > −∞.

                                                                          ¡ ¢    ¡    ¢
Proof. Summing the agent’s budget constraint over st+τ and all st+τ +k ∈ N st ∩ S st+τ , we




                                                  34
get
                 X                 ³       ´ ³        ´   ¡    ¢ ¡      ¢
                                  p st+τ +k c∗ st+τ +k + p st+τ c∗ st+τ
      st+τ +k ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
     ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢                          X                  ³       ´ ³       ´   ¡    ¢ ¡      ¢
  = p st+τ y st+τ +                                           p st+τ +k y st+τ +k + p st+τ a∗ st+τ
                                  st+τ +k ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                   X                  ³       ´ ³       ´                                 X                  ¡       ¢ ¡         ¢
      −                              p st+τ +k φ st+τ +k − lim                                              p st+τ +K a∗ st+τ +K
                                                                         K→∞
          st+τ +k ∈B(st )∩S(st+τ )                                              st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
     ¡    ¢h ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢     ¡    ¢i
  = p st+τ a∗ st+τ + Y st+τ − φ̂ st+τ
                 X         ¡       ¢ ¡         ¢
    − lim                 p st+τ +K a∗ st+τ +K
          K→∞
                 st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                      ¡ ¢       ¡    ¢
For all st+τ +k ∈ N st ∩ S st+τ , the first-order condition holds with equality, implying
           ³         ´ ³           ´       ¡    ¢     ¡ t+τ +k ¢ ³ ³        ´´ ³           ´
              t+τ +k    ∗   t+τ +k       p st+τ    kπ s          0 ∗ t+τ +k    ∗    t+τ +k
          p s          c s           = 0 ∗ t+τ β                u c s         c s
                                       u (c (s ))     π (st+τ )
                                                                       ¡ ¡         ¢¢ ¡      ¢
Substituting this into the LHS of the budget constraint and using u0 c∗ st+τ +k c∗ st+τ +k ≤
¡ ¡ ∗ ¡ t+τ +k ¢¢         ¢
 u c s            − u (0) ≤ U , we find
                          X            ³       ´ ³         ´
                                      p st+τ +k c∗ st+τ +k
                  st+τ +k ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                       ¡     ¢                                   ¡ t+τ +k ¢ ³ ³             ´´ ³             ´
                     p st+τ                X                   π   s
                                                             k               0  ∗    t+τ +k      ∗    t+τ +k
             =                                             β                u  c   s           c    s
                  u0 (c∗ (st+τ )) t+τ +k                         π (st+τ )
                                 s       ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                       ¡     ¢                                   ¡ t+τ +k ¢           ¡     ¢
                     p st+τ                X                                       p st+τ
                                                             kπ s                                  1
             ≤                                             β                U ≤ 0 ∗ t+τ                 U
                  u0 (c∗ (st+τ )) t+τ +k      t      t+τ
                                                                 π (s t+τ )      u (c   (s    )) 1 −  β
                                      s       ∈N (s )∩S(s       )

For the RHS, the agents’ transversality condition implies that
                                                 ¡ t+τ +K ¢
                              X               π   s            ¡ ¡ t+τ +K ¢¢ ∗ ¡ t+τ +K ¢
          0 = lim                         βK                u 0 ∗
                                                                c s          a s
                 K→∞                            π (st+τ )
                        st+τ +K ∈S(st+τ )
                                                        ¡ t+τ +K ¢
                                  X                                   ¡ ¡       ¢¢ ¡        ¢
                                                    Kπ s
             = lim                                β         t+τ
                                                                   u0 c∗ st+τ +K a∗ st+τ +K
                 K→∞                                   π (s )
                        st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                    ¡ ¡        ¢¢
                  u0 c∗ st+τ                        X               ¡      ¢ ¡         ¢
             =           t+τ
                                    lim                          p st+τ +K a∗ st+τ +K
                     p (s ) K→∞ t+τ +K                 t     t+τ
                                                   s          ∈N (s )∩S(s   )
                                                                                        ¡    ¢      ¡ ¢
where the first equality makes use of the transversality conditions for all st+τ +K ∈ SK st+τ ÂNτ +K st ,
and the second equality again uses the agents’ first-order condition. Hence, we have
                                                X                    ¡       ¢ ¡        ¢
                             lim                                    p st+τ +K a∗ st+τ +K = 0.
                            K→∞
                                     st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )


                                                                    35
                                        ¡      ¢        ¡     ¢
But then, it follows immediately that Y st+τ < ∞ and φ̂ st+τ > −∞. Moreover, by Lemma 3
                ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢ P         p(st+1 ) ¡   ¢
(ii), we have y st + φ st − st+1 Âst p(st ) φ st+1 ≥ 0 for all st ∈ S. Summing this inequality
                             ¡ ¢     ¡     ¢
over st+τ and all st+τ +k ∈ N st ∩ S st+τ , we find
         ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢                                  X                ³       ´ ³       ´
        p st+τ Y st+τ + p st+τ φ st+τ −                                                 p st+τ +k φ st+τ +k ≥ 0
                                                             st+τ +k ∈B(st )∩S(st+τ )

    ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢    ¡    ¢
or Y st+τ + φ st+τ − φ̃ st+τ ≥ 0.
                                                                                      ¡ ¢ © ª
    The second lemma establishes the existence of a solution to (19), for all st+τ ∈ N st ∪ st :

                                   ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢ © ª
Lemma 5 There exists a solution Φ̃ st : N st ∪ st → R to (19). Moreover, for all st+τ ∈
  ¡ ¢ © ª                   ¡    ¢ h ¡     ¢   ¡    ¢ i
Nτ st ∪ st , Φ̃ satisfies φ̃ st+τ ∈ φ̂ st+τ − Y st+τ , 0 , as well as the limit property
                                                 X                  ¡       ¢ ¡        ¢
                               lim                                 p st+τ +K φ̃ st+τ +K = 0.
                              K→∞
                                       st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )

              n     ¡   ¢o                                     ¡    ¢    ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢
Proof. Let φ(0) st+τ        t+τ      t    t
                                             be defined by φ(0) st+τ = φ̂ st+τ − Y st+τ , and define
n                          s    ∈N (s )∪{s }
   (K)
       ¡ t+τ ¢o
 φ      s       t+τ   t      t
                               recursively by
                  s     ∈N (s )∪{s }
                                                     ¡         ¢     n ¡
                  (K)
                        ¡ t+τ ¢          X          p st+τ +1             t+τ +1
                                                                                 ¢ (K−1) ¡ t+τ +1 ¢o
              φ          s      =                                min  φ  s        ,φ      s          .
                                                     p (st+τ )
                                    st+τ +1 Âst+τ

    Using the preceding lemma, we have
                                                             ¡         ¢
                       ¡ t+τ ¢                 X           p st+τ +1 ¡ t+τ +1 ¢
                 (1)
             φ          s      =                                         φ s
                                  t+τ +1     t       t+τ
                                                             p (st+τ )
                                 s       ∈B(s )∩S(s      )
                                                                ¡          ¢
                                              X                p st+τ +1 h ¡ t+τ +1 ¢            ¡ t+τ +1 ¢i
                                 +                                             φ̂  s        − Y   s
                                                                p (st+τ )
                                    st+τ +1 ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                                                                             ¡         ¢
                                   ¡ t+τ ¢                 X               p st+τ +1      ¡        ¢
                               = φ̂ s        −                                    t+τ
                                                                                         Y st+τ +1
                                                                            p (s )
                                               st+τ +1 ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                                   ¡      ¢        ¡       ¢     ¡       ¢           ¡    ¢
                               = φ̂ st+τ − Y st+τ + y st+τ ≥ φ(0) st+τ
                    ¡ ¢ © ª                              n      ¡   ¢o
for all st+τ ∈ Nτ st ∪ st . But then, since φ(K) st+τ                   t+τ     t     t
                                                                                          is non-decreasing in
n         ¡    ¢ o                                                 n s ¡ ∈N (s¢ o)∪{s }
  φ(K−1) st+τ                         , the sequence of sequences φ(K) st+τ                   is non-decreasing.
                  st+τ ∈N (st )∪{st }                       n          o            K=0,1,...
                 ¡      ¢                                         ¡   ¢
Moreover, φ(K) st+τ ≤ 0, for all K and all st+τ , φ(K) st+τ                         must converge to a finite
                                               h              i           K=0,1,...
        ¡    ¢                       ¡      ¢       ¡     ¢
limit φ̃ st+τ = limK→∞ φ(K) st+τ ∈ φ(0) st+τ , 0 , which satisfies equation (19).



                                                                   36
  For the limit property, we have
                   X            ¡       ¢ ¡        ¢                            X                  ¡       ¢    ¡        ¢
0 ≥ lim                        p st+τ +K φ̃ st+τ +K ≥ lim                                         p st+τ +K φ(0) st+τ +K
       K→∞                                                      K→∞
              st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )                               st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                        X                  ¡       ¢£ ¡      ¢   ¡        ¢¤
   =    lim                               p st+τ +K φ st+τ +K − Y st+τ +K
       K→∞
              st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
   = 0
                  P                      ¡         ¢ ¡         ¢                        ¡   ¢
where limK→∞ st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ ) p st+τ +K Y st+τ +K = 0 follows from Y st+τ < ∞, and
          P                       ¡        ¢ ¡          ¢
limK→∞ st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ ) p st+τ +K φ st+τ +K = 0 is established from the household’s transver-
                                                      ¡     ¢      ¡    ¢     ¡      ¢
sality condition, after redefining (P1) terms of δ st+τ = a st+τ − φ st+τ , with debt limits
  ¡     ¢
δ st+τ ≥ 0, and using the same argument as in the preceding lemma.
                                                                  ¡ ¢
    Our next lemma shows that the auxiliary debt limits Φ̃ st provide a lower bound for the
                                   ¡ ¢                                                 ¡   ¢     ¡     ¢
actual sequence of debt limits Φ st . From this, it follows immediately that φ̃ st+τ = φ̂ st+τ
                          ¡    ¢                    ¡     ¢
for all st+τ , and that φ̃ st+τ (or equivalently φ̂ st+τ ) satisfies the exact roll-over property for all
           ¡ ¢ © ª
st+τ ∈ N st ∪ st .
                             ¡ ¢ © ª ¡         ¢   ¡   ¢     ¡    ¢
Lemma 6 (i) For all st+τ ∈ N st ∪ st , φ st+τ ≥ φ̃ st+τ = φ̂ st+τ .
                       ¡ ¢ © ª ¡        ¢ ¡     ¢ P            ¡       ¢ ¡        ¢
  (ii) For all st+τ ∈ N st ∪ st , p st+τ φ̃ st+τ = s+τ +1Âs+τ p st+τ +1 φ̃ st+τ +1 .
                                        ¡    ¢      ¡     ¢                       ¡ ¢ © ª
Proof. Part (i): Suppose that φ st+τ < φ̃ st+τ for some st+τ ∈ N st ∪ st , and let
© ¡ t+τ +k ¢ª
 ã s        st+τ +k ∈S(st )
                             denote the optimal asset profile without default starting from a position
    ¡ t+τ ¢                       © ¡       ¢ª
of φ s      at event st+τ , and c̃ st+τ +k st+τ +k ∈S(st )∪{st } the corresponding consumption profile.
                                        ¡      ¢      ¡         ¢                      ¡ ¢     ¡     ¢
From Lemma 3(iii), we have that ã st+τ +k = φ st+τ +k , whenever st+τ +k ∈ B st ∩ S st+τ .
Suppose now that the agent defaults and sets
 ³       ´    ³       ´      n ³        ´ ³        ´o                  £ ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢¤ ¡     ¢
d st+τ +k = ã st+τ +k −min φ st+τ +k , φ̃ st+τ +k    for all st+τ +k ∈ N st ∪ B st ∩S st+τ ,
       © ¡        ¢ª
and let cd st+τ +k st+τ +k ∈S(st )∪{st } be the corresponding consumption profile. Clearly, this asset
profile is feasible; we show that this profile also leads to strictly higher utility, and hence default
                                                                                    ¡       ¢
must be optimal - a contradiction to the hypothesis that the debt limit of φ st+τ is self-enforcing.
                  ¡ ¢     ¡     ¢
For st+τ +k ∈ N st ∩ S st+τ ,
           ³        ´       ³         ´         n ³           ´ ³         ´o
        cd st+τ +k     = c̃ st+τ +k − min φ st+τ +k , φ̃ st+τ +k
                                                 ¡            ¢     n ³           ´ ³               ´o
                                    X           p st+τ +k+1              t+τ +k+1          t+τ +k+1
                           +                                    min   φ s          , φ̃   s
                                                 p (st+τ +k )
                             st+τ +k+1 Âst+τ +k
                            ³         ´         n ³           ´ ³         ´o      ³          ´
                       = c̃ st+τ +k − min φ st+τ +k , φ̃ st+τ +k              + φ̃ st+τ +k
                            ³         ´         n ³           ´     ³      ´ o          ³        ´
                       = c̃ st+τ +k − min φ st+τ +k − φ̃ st+τ +k , 0 ≥ c̃ st+τ +k

                                                       37
                         ¡ ¢          ¡   ¢ ¡         ¢
For any st+τ +k ∈ Bτ +k st ∩ S (k) st+τ , d st+τ +k = 0 after a                         default, which yields a life-time
                                     ¡        ¢
expected discounted utility of D 0; st+τ +k . Without default,                          the asset position at st+τ +k is
  ¡      ¢                                                                              ¡ ¡ t+τ +k ¢ ¡ t+τ +k ¢ t+τ +k ¢
φ st+τ +k , which yields a life-time expected discounted utility of V                    φ s        ,Φ s       ,s        =
   ¡        ¢
D 0; st+τ +k .
   Finally, for st+τ ,
                                                             ¡         ¢     n ¡
        ¡   ¢    ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢                               X
                                                            p st+τ +1                    ¢ ¡ t+τ +1 ¢o
      c st+τ = c̃ st+τ − φ st+τ +
          d
                                                                         min  φ  st+τ +1
                                                                                          , φ̃ s
                                               t+τ +1   t+τ
                                                             p (st+τ )
                                              s       Âs
                          ¡ t+τ ¢   ¡ t+τ ¢     ¡ t+τ ¢      ¡     ¢
                      = c̃ s      −φ s      + φ̃ s       > c̃ st+τ

We conclude that the expected life-time utility for an agent is strictly larger if he defaults at st+τ .
                    ¡   ¢   ¡      ¢                              ¡     ¢
Therefore, using φ st+τ ≥ φ̃ st+τ , we can solve forward for φ̃ st+τ :
                                  ¡        ¢                                    ¡         ¢
  ¡ t+τ ¢             X         p st+τ +1 ¡ t+τ +1 ¢             X            p st+τ +1 ¡ t+τ +1 ¢
φ̃ s      =                                  φ s       +                                    φ̃ s
               t+τ +1  t   t+τ
                                 p (st+τ )                t+τ +1    t     t+τ
                                                                                p (st+τ )
                  s      ∈B(s )∩S(s     )                                  s       ∈N (s )∩S(s     )
                  K                                  ¡             ¢ ³       ´                                 ¡         ¢
                  X             X                p       st+τ +k                            X                 p st+τ +K ¡ t+τ +K ¢
              =                                                     φ st+τ +k +                                            φ̃ s
                                                     p (st+τ )                                                 p (st+τ )
                  k=1 st+τ +k ∈B(st )∩S(st+τ )                                    st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                                                                       ¡       ¢
                  ¡    ¢                             X                p st+τ +K ¡ t+τ +K ¢     ¡    ¢
              = φ̂ st+τ + lim                                              t+τ
                                                                                 φ̃ s      = φ̂ st+τ .
                               K→∞                                     p (s )
                                      st+τ +K ∈N (st )∩S(st+τ )
                                                            ¡     ¢                   ¡      ¢
Part (ii) then follows immediately from the definition of φ̃ st+τ and noting that φ st+τ +1 =
  ¡       ¢                   ¡ ¢    ¡    ¢      ¡       ¢      ¡       ¢                  ¡ ¢
φ̃ st+τ +1 for all st+τ +1 ∈ B st ∩ S st+τ and φ st+τ +1 ≥ φ̃ st+τ +1 for all st+τ +1 ∈ N st ∩
  ¡     ¢
S st+τ .
                                                                    ¡ ¢               ¡ ¢ © ª
    Our next lemma extends the existence and characterization of Φ̃ st to all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st .
Moreover, it shows that this solution must establish a version of the roll-over property as a weak
                                                               ¡ ¢
inequality, i.e., if the borrowing constraints were given by Φ̃ st , an agent would always be able
to roll over existing claims by issuing new claims, without necessarily always exhausting his debt
limits.
                                                             ¡ ¢ © ª
Lemma 7 (i) A finite solution to (19) exists for all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st .
                       ¡ ¢ © ª ¡          ¢ ¡      ¢ P             ¡    ¢ ¡       ¢
  (ii) For all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st , p st+τ φ̃ st+τ ≥ s+τ +1Âs+τ p st+τ +1 φ̃ st+τ +1 .
                             ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
Proof. Part (i): Define B(1) st = B st and
    ¡ ¢ S        n              ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢     ¡    ¢   ³    0
                                                                    ´           0        ¡ ¢o
B(k) st = ∞ τ =k s
                   t+τ
                       Â st : a∗ st+τ = φ st+τ and σ st+τ ∈ N st+τ for some st+τ ∈ B(k−1) st
      ¡ ¢                              ¡ ¢
B(k) st is the subset of histories in S st , at which the debt limit is binding for the kth time after
                © ¡      ¢ª
st . Recall that a∗ st+τ st+τ Âst defines the solution to (P1), starting from st with asset position

                                                                    38
  ¡ ¢             ¡      ¢     ¡     ¢                 S         ¡ ¢ © ¡          ¢ª
φ st . Since a∗ st+τ = φ st+τ for all st+τ ∈ ∞          k=1 B
                                                              (k) st , a∗ st+τ +k
                                                                                    st+τ +k ∈S(st+τ )
                                                                                                      also
                                        S          ¡  ¢                     ¡     ¢
solves (P1), starting from any st+τ ∈ ∞   k=1 B
                                                (k) st with asset position φ st+τ . Since our analysis
                                                                                      S           ¡ ¢
holds for arbitrary st , we can replicate the same arguments as above for all st+τ ∈ ∞  k=1 B
                                                                                               (k) st ,...
                            ¡ ¢                          ¡ ¢
to construct a solution Φ̃ st to (19) for all st+τ ∈ S st .
   Part (ii): From Lemma 6(ii), it follows that the exact roll-over condition holds with equality,
              ¡     ¢     ¡     ¢            S           ¡ ¢                     S∞        ¡ ¢
whenever a∗ st+τ > φ st+τ , or st+τ ∈      / ∞ k=1 B
                                                      (k) st . If instead st+τ ∈
                                                                                  k=1 B
                                                                                        (k) st , the same
                                                                                       ¡     ¢ ¡      ¢
arbitrage argument as in the proof of Lemma 6(i) establishes that whenever p st+τ φ st+τ <
P               ¡ t+τ +1 ¢ ¡ t+τ +1 ¢
  s+τ +1Âs+τ p s          φ̃ s       , a default is strictly better than no default.
                                     ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢                     ¡ ¢
   In Lemma 8, we show that φ st = φ̃ st = φ̂ st . For any st ∈ S, φ st must be equal to
                                                                                          ¡ ¢
the sum of the present discounted values of the debt limits at all events st+τ ∈ B st , where the
                                                                              ¡ ¢
debt limit is binding for the first time after st . This also implies that Φ̃ st must satisfy (ER) with
                            ¡ ¢
equality, for all st+τ ∈ S st .
                         ¡ ¢ P               ¡    ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡      ¢
Lemma 8 For all st ∈ S, φ st = st+τ ∈B(st ) p st+τ /p st φ st+τ .
                                                                         ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢ © ª
Proof. Starting from any st ∈ S, construct the sequence of debt limits Φ̃ st : S st ∪ st → R as
characterized by Lemmas (5)-(7). Consider the problem (P1), but with the borrowing constraints
             ¡ ¢         ¡    ¢     ¡    ¢                    ¡ ¢ © ª        ³ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ´
equal to Φ̃ st . Since φ st+τ ≥ φ̃ st+τ for all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st , V φ st , Φ̃ st , st ≥
   ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¢                                                              ¡    ¢    ¡    ¢
V φ st , Φ st , st . However, since the objective is strictly concave, and φ st+τ > φ̃ st+τ only
     ¡     ¢     ¡    ¢               © ¡       ¢ª
if a∗ st+τ > φ st+τ , it follows that a∗ st+τ st+τ Âst also satisfies the optimality conditions
                                                      ¡ ¢                    ³ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ´
for the relaxed problem with borrowing constraints Φ̃ st , and therefore, V φ st , Φ̃ st , st =
   ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¢
V φ st , Φ st , st . Combining with the self-enforcement hypothesis, and using the fact that
   ³    ¡ ¢ ´                          ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢
V a, Φ̃ st , st is monotone in a and φ st ≥ φ̃ st , we find
         ¡     ¢   ¡ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¢          ³ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ´           ³ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ´
        D 0, st = V φ st , Φ st , st = V φ st , Φ̃ st , st ≥ V φ̃ st , Φ̃ st , st .
                                ¡     ¢ ¡      ¢ P                 ¡       ¢ ¡       ¢            ¡    ¢
     On the other hand, since φ̃ st+τ p st+τ = st+τ +1 Âst+τ p st+τ +1 φ̃ st+τ +1 , whenever a∗ st+τ >
  ¡     ¢        ¡    ¢ ¡      ¢ P                  ¡      ¢ ¡         ¢             ¡    ¢   ¡     ¢
φ st+τ , and φ̃ st+τ p st+τ ≥ st+τ +1 Âst+τ p st+τ +1 φ̃ st+τ +1 , whenever a∗ st+τ = φ st+τ ,
                                                                         ³ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ´          ¡     ¢
it follows from a direct extension of the proof in Proposition 3 that V φ̃ st , Φ̃ st , st ≥ D 0, st ,
        ³ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ´              ¡     ¢              ¡    ¢ ¡      ¢ P                ¡     ¢ ¡       ¢
and V φ̃ st , Φ̃ st , st > D 0, st , whenever φ̃ st+τ p st+τ > st+τ +1 Âst+τ p st+τ +1 φ̃ st+τ +1
                    ¡ ¢
for some st+τ ∈ S st . Combining we have the following equalities and inequalities:
                                      ³ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ´               ¡    ¢
                                   V φ̃ st , Φ̃ st , st ≥ D 0, st
                                                                                   ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
    Together these inequalities can hold only as equalities - which requires that φ st = φ̃ st , and
  ¡    ¢ ¡     ¢    P               ¡      ¢ ¡        ¢                   ¡ ¢ © ª
φ̃ st+τ p st+τ = st+τ +1 Âst+τ p st+τ +1 φ̃ st+τ +1 for all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st . The latter in

                                                   39
turn requires that
                                                     ¡       ¢
      ¡    ¢    ¡    ¢                X             p st+τ +k ³ t+τ +k ´               S          ¡ t¢
     φ st+τ = φ̃ st+τ =                                  t+τ
                                                               φ s       for all st+τ ∈ ∞
                                                                                        k=1 B
                                                                                              (k)
                                                                                                   s .
                                                     p (s )
                                st+τ +k ∈B(st+τ )



                                                                                  ¡ ¢
   Lemma 9 completes the proof by establishing the exact roll-over condition for Φ st .

                         ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ P            ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢
Lemma 9 For all st ∈ S, φ st p st = st+1 Âst p st+1 φ st+1 .

Proof. >From the previous lemma,
             ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢                  X           ¡    ¢ ¡     ¢
            φ st p st =                          p st+τ φ st+τ
                                  st+τ ∈B(st )
                                      X             ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢         X             ¡    ¢ ¡     ¢
                            =                      p st+1 φ st+1 +                     p st+1 φ̂ st+1 .
                                  st+1 ∈B1 (st )                      st+1 ∈N1 (st )

                                                  ¡ ¢ ¡       ¢    ¡    ¢
It therefore suﬃces to show that for all st+1 ∈ N1 st , φ st+1 = φ̂ st+1 , or equivalently
                         X                ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢            X             ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢
                                         p st+τ φ st+τ =                        p st+τ φ st+τ .
                 st+τ ∈B(st )∩S(st+1 )                         st+τ ∈B(st+1 )
  ¡    ¢
B st+1 denotes the set of histories st+τ , at which the borrowing constraint is binding for the first
                                                          ¡    ¢                     ¡ ¢      ¡     ¢
time for an agent who starts from an asset position of φ st+1 at history st+1 . B st ∩ S st+1
is the set of histories st+τ , at which the borrowing constraint is binding for the first time for an
                                                         ¡    ¢     ¡    ¢
agent who starts at st+1 with an asset position of a∗ st+1 > φ st+1 . Lemma 3(iii) then implies
         ¡     ¢      ¡ ¢      ¡     ¢ ¡     ¢ £ ¡ ¢          ¡ ¢¤     ¡    ¢       ¡ ¢      ¡    ¢
that N st+1 ⊆ N st ∩ S st+1 , B st+1 ⊆ B st ∪ N st ∩ S st+1 and B st ∩ S st+1 ⊆
S∞         ¡     ¢                        ¡ ¢      ¡     ¢
        (k) st+1 . Moreover, the set N st ∩ S st+1 is countable, and we can order the histories
  k=1 B
      ¡ ¢      ¡    ¢                                                   ¡ ¢    ¡    ¢
in N st ∩ S st+1 into a sequence {s (k)}∞    k=1 , so that any s
                                                                t+τ ∈ N st ∩ S st+1 is lower-ranked

                                      0    ¡ ¢       ¡     ¢
than all of its successor nodes st+τ ∈ N st ∩ S st+τ .
                                                         ©    ¡     ¢ª        ¡    ¢       ¡   ¢
    We then construct the following sequence of sets Mk st+1 : Let M0 st+1 = B st+1 , and
             ¡    ¢               ¡     ¢
define Mk st+1 from Mk−1 st+1 as follows: Let s (k) denote the k-th history in our ordering
                 ¡ ¢      ¡      ¢                   ¡     ¢         ¡   ¢         ¡     ¢
of events in N st ∩ S st+1 . If s (k) ∈    / Mk−1 st+1 , let Mk st+1 = Mk−1 st+1 . If s (k) ∈
      ¡     ¢
Bτ −1 st+1 , let
                                   ¡    ¢        ¡     ¢
                            Mk st+1 = Mk−1 st+1 ∪ B (s (k)) Â {s (k)}
                                 ¡ ¢    ¡    ¢                                ¡    ¢
That is, for each event s (k) ∈ N st ∩ S st+1 , we check whether it is in Mk−1 st+1 , and if it is,
we eliminate it, and replace it with the set of events B (s (k)) at which the debt limit is binding for
                                                                 ¡   ¢      ¡ ¢     ¡     ¢
the first time after event s (k). By construction, limk→∞ Mk st+1 = B st ∩ S st+1 . Moreover,

                                                          40
                                                                          P
since from the previous lemma, p (s (k)) φ (s (k)) =                          s∈B(s(k)) p (s) φ (s),      it follows immediately that
for all k,
             X          ¡    ¢ ¡    ¢                      X
                       p st+τ φ st+τ =                                 p (s) φ (s)
      st+τ ∈B(st+1 )                                  s∈Mk   (st+1 )
                                                                 X                                          X
                                                =     lim                        p (s) φ (s) =                              p (s) φ (s)
                                                      k→∞
                                                            s∈Mk       (st+1 )                      st+τ ∈B(st )∩S(st+1 )

which completes the proof.
                                                         ¡ ¢                             ¡ ¢
    Remark: None of the preceding arguments rely on B st being non-empty. If instead B st =
         ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢                                            ¡   ¢                ¡    ¢
∅, then N st = S st , and all the same steps above imply that φ̂ st+τ = 0 and hence φ st+τ =
  ¡    ¢                    ¡ ¢ © ª                    ¡ ¢                               ¡ ¢
φ̃ st+τ = 0 for all st+τ ∈ S st ∪ st . Therefore, if φ st < 0, it must be the case that B st is
                                                   ¡ ¢         ¡    ¢
non-empty, and that there exists a history st+τ ∈ B st , s.t. φ st+τ < 0.


9    Appendix C: Extensions

Transitional dynamics in the model of Section 3. Let the initial borrowing constraints
satisfy φo1 + φe1 =     1
                       1+β     [βe − e], so that there exists a steady-state with positive levels of debt. The
transition to steady-state is complete after one period and qt = 1 for t ≥ 1, optimal consumption
                                                                                      1                               β
allocations are given by the steady-state allocations c =                            1+β      [e + e] and c =        1+β    [e + e] starting
from period 1. In period 0, the even agent’s optimal consumption is determined by the initial
borrowing constraint, and is equal to ce0 = e + q0 φe1 . Odd types are unconstrained, and hence co0
and ao1 are determined from the Euler equation in period 0,
                                                                       q0
                                             co0 = e − q0 a01 =           [e + ao1 + φo1 ] ,
                                                                       β
                               1            1  o           1                q0   o
which yields ao1 =         q0 (1+β)   [βe − q0 e] −    o
                                         1+β φ1 and c0 = 1+β [e + q0 e] + 1+β φ1 . The market-clearing
condition in period 0 then requires co0 +ce0 = e+e. Substituting, we find q0 [e + φo1 + (1 + β) φe1 ] = βe,
or, after using the fact that φo1 + φe1 = 1+β1
                                               [βe − e],

                                                                          e
                                                    q0 =                                .
                                                           φe1   +    1
                                                                     1+β      (e + e)

Moreover, since φe1 ≤           1
                               1+β    [βe − e], it is easy to check that
                                                                                                       1
                                                   eφe1                                             e 1+β [βe − e]
               ce0     =     e + q0 φe1   =e+ e    1           ≤e+                           1                  1
                                             φ1 + 1+β  (e + e)                              1+β   [βe − e] +   1+β   (e + e)
                                  βe − e        1
                       = e+              = ce1 ≤ ce1
                                  1+β           β

                                                                     41
so that the even agent’s Euler equation in the initial period is also satisfied.
    Therefore, the lower is the borrowing capacity of the even agent who initially has low endow-
ments, the higher is the first-period bond price, the lower is the period 0 consumption by even
agents, and the higher is the period 0 consumption by odd agents. At one extreme, φe1 = 0 and
φo1 =    1
        1+β   [βe − e], i.e., even agents are unable to undertake any borrowing, in which case the pe-
riod zero consumption is equal to the endowment. At the other extreme, φe1 =                      1
                                                                                                 1+β   [βe − e] and
φo1 = 0. In that case, all the borrowing is undertaken by the even agents, q0 = 1, and first period
consumption allocations jump immediately to the steady-state.


    Private Debt Collapses: We return to the example of Section 3, and set g = 1, for simplicity.
We consider non-stationary equilibria, in which borrowing constraints are binding every other
period, i.e., ajt = −φjt , whenever ytj = e, and ajt > −φjt whenever ytj = e. By self-enforcement, we
have φjt = qt qt+1 φjt+2 . Given a sequence of bond prices {qt }∞
                                                                t=0 , optimal consumption allocations
                              ³           ´
                                        j
are then characterized by ct , ct+1 , at+1 , where ct and ct+1 denote consumption in period t and
t + 1, respectively, for an agent who has high endowment in period t and low endowment in period
t + 1, and ajt+1 denotes this agent’s asset holdings in period t + 1. These must satisfy the first-order
condition at date t, as well as the budget constraints at t and t + 1 with equality:
                   1       β 1
                     =             , ct = e − φjt − qt ajt+1 and ct+1 = e + ajt+1 + qt+1 φjt+2
                  ct       qt ct+1
           ³                  ´
Solving for ct , ct+1 , ajt+1 , the consumption allocations thus characterized by

                                       1                                β
                           ct =            [e + qt e] and ct+1 =              [e + qt e]
                                    1+β                            qt (1 + β)
                                         1
                         ajt+1 =               [e − (qt /β) e] − φjt+1
                                    qt (1 + β)

where we have used the fact that φjt = qt φjt+1 = qt qt+1 φjt+2 . Now, the market-clearing condition
requires that ajt+1 = φ−j          −j     j
                       t+1 and at+2 = φt+2 , or
                                      ½          ¾
                               β            qt
                                       e − e = φot+1 + φet+1 and for all t.
                          qt (1 + β)        β
                                ¡              ¢
Combining with φot + φet = qt φot+1 + φet+1 , we then have
                                         ½          ¾      ½          ¾
                                   β             qt    β        qt+1
                                           e− e =           e−       e
                              qt (1 + β)         β    1+β        β
which immediately yields                               ∙      ¸
                                                    βe     1
                                           qt+1   =     1−      +1                                             (20)
                                                    e      qt

                                                       42
                                Qt +1




                                                                    Qt
                                            1           βe
                                                        e



                                   Figure 4: Private Debt Collapses


Finally, notice that for all qt ∈ [1, βe/e], βe/e > qt+2 > qt+1 > qt , and hence 1/ct+2 ≤ 1/ct =
(β/qt ) /ct+1 ≤ 1/ct+1 . Thus, for qt ∈ [1, βe/e], the Euler Equations are also satisfied as an inequality
when agents are borrowing constrained.
   Condition (20) characterizes equilibrium dynamics and is plotted in figure 4. There exist two
stationary equilibria. In the first one, qt = 1, for all t, which corresponds to the steady-state with
                                                                                      eβ
positive levels of debt as characterized in Proposition 2. In the other one, qt =      e   > 1, borrowing
constraints are equal to zero, and agents are in autarky. Finally, for intermediate initial levels
of borrowing, there exist transition paths, in which there is a self-fulfilling collapse of the real
amount of debt in circulation: qt initially is larger than 1, and keeps increasing over time, while
the borrowing constraints φjt collapse to zero. In the limit, consumption allocations approach the
endowments, i.e., there is convergence to autarky. Moreover, these transition paths to autarky may
start arbitrarily closely to the steady-state with positive levels of debt.


   Coexistence of Private and Public Debt: It is possible also to allow for the coexistence of
self-enforcing private debt and unbacked public debt. If both types of securities are in circulation,
one can immediately establish the existence of equilibria in which only one form of debt is positively
valued, and either private debt limits are all equal to zero (replicating the equilibrium with only
public debt), or the real value of the public debt in circulation is zero (replicating the equilibrium
with only private debt).
   The question then arises whether there can be equilibria in which both types of securities are
positively valued, and what allocations can be sustained this way. For this, we notice first that
in such an equilibrium, both types of securities must be perfect substitutes, and hence oﬀer the


                                                   43
                                                                                 ¡ ¢
same real returns. We can therefore redefine an agent’s net financial position aj st as the sum of
the net holdings of private debt claims, and the holdings of unbacked public debt. As before, the
                                                             ¡ ¢
net financial position is bounded below by the debt limit, φj st , which must be self-enforcing. In
addition, the total amount of public debt in circulation still has to satisfy the government roll-over
condition, and markets must clear, i.e., the agents’ net financial positions add up to the government
debt in circulation. This leads to the following equilibrium definition:

Definition 5 A competitive equilibrium with self-enforcing private and unbacked public debt is
            ©                ¡ ¢       ª
defined as C j ; aj ; Φj ; dj s0 ; p; D s.t.
                                                  ¡ ¢ ©         ª
    (i) given Φj , p and initial asset holdings dj s0 , C j ; aj solve the consumer’s problem (P1),
    (ii) the borrowing constraints Φj are self-enforcing,
    (iii) the public debt sequence D satisfies (6), and
                             P j ¡ t¢     P      ¡ ¢    P ¡    ¢   ¡    ¢
    (iv) all markets clear:    jc s    = j y j st and j aj st+1 = d st+1 for st+1 Â st , for
all j and all st ∈ S.


    We then get the following generalization of Theorem 2:

                                                ¡ ¢
Proposition 5 (i) If {C j , aj , Φj , dj s0 ; D, p}j=1,...,J is a non-autarkic competitive equilibrium
                                                                                   ¡ ¢
with self-enforcing private and unbacked public debt, then {C j , âj , dˆj s0 ; D̂, p}j=1,...,J is a non-
                                                                                  ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢
autarkic competitive equilibrium with unbacked public debt, where âj st = aj st − φj st for all
               ¡ ¢           ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢                       ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢ P       ¯ ¡ ¢¯
j, st ∈ S, dˆj s0 = dj s0 − φj s0 for all j, and dˆ st = d st + Jj=1 ¯φj st ¯ for all st ∈ S.
                           ¡ ¢
    (ii) If {C j , âj , dj s0 ; D, p}j=1,...,J is a non-autarkic competitive equilibrium with unbacked pub-
                                     ¡ ¢
lic debt, then {C j , ãj , Φ̃j , d˜j s0 ; D̃, p}j=1,...,J , is a non-autarkic competitive equilibrium with self-
                                        ¡ ¢        ¡ ¢ j¡ ¢                              j¡ ¢        dj (s0 ) ¡ ¢
enforcing private debt, where ãj st = âj st +φ̃ st for all j, st ∈ S, (ii) φ̃ st = −k d(s0 ) d st
                                      ¡ ¢                ¡ ¢                  ¡ ¢             ¡ ¢
for all j, st ∈ S, and (iii) d˜j s0 = (1 − k) d s0 for all j and d˜ st = (1 − k) d st for all st ∈ S,
for any k ∈ [0, 1].

Proof. (i) Self-enforcement still requires that Φj satisfies exact roll-over. Proposition 3 then
                              ¡      ¡ ¢      ¢                   ¡ ¢
implies V j (a, Φj ; s0 ) = Dj a − φj s0 ; s0 , for all a ≥ φj s0 . Therefore, since {C j , aj } solves
                                                                           ¡ ¢
(P1) for given debt limits Φj , prices p and initial asset holdings of dj s0 , {C j , âj } solves (P1),
                                                                      ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢          ¡ ¢
given zero debt limits, prices p, and initial asset holdings of dˆj s0 = dj s0 − φj s0 . Next,
                                                               ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢ P      ¯ ¡ ¢¯
notice that if Φj allows for exact roll-over for all j, then dˆ st = d st + Jj=1 ¯φj st ¯ satisfies the
government budget constraint (6), for all st ∈ S. Finally, to show that {C j , âj } clears markets in
the public debt economy, notice that asset market clearing in the economy with public and private


                                                       44
               P       ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢                               P     £ ¡ ¢         ¡ ¢¤      ¡ ¢
debt requires Jj=1 aj st = d st , for all st ∈ S, which implies Jj=1 âj st + φj st = d st ,
  P         ¡ ¢    ¡ ¢
or Jj=1 âj st = dˆ st . Again, goods market-clearing is immediate.
             ¡ ¢
   (ii) If d st satisfies (6), for all st ∈ S, then the sequence of debt limits Φ̃j allows for exact
roll-over, for all j, and any k ∈ [0, 1] Now, if {C j , âj } is optimal in the public debt economy, given
                            ¡ ¢
initial debt holdings of dj s0 , then {C j , ãj } is optimal in the economy with public and private debt,
                                                                 ¡ ¢
given borrowing limits Φ̃j and initial asset holdings of d˜j s0 . Finally, asset market clearing implies
                        P       ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢         P       j¡ ¢      ¡ ¢     P     h ¡ ¢      j¡ ¢
                                                                                                      i
that for all st ∈ S, Jj=1 âj st = d st = Jj=1 φ̃ st + d˜ st or Jj=1 âj st + φ̃ st =
PJ        ¡ ¢        ¡ ¢
  j=1  ãj st = d˜ st , which implies that {C j , ãj } also clears asset markets in the private debt
economy.




                                                   45
