NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE REFORM AND FAMILY EXPENDITURES:
HOW ARE SINGLE MOTHERS ADAPTING TO THE NEW WELFARE AND WORK REGIME?
Neeraj Kaushal
Qin Gao
Jane Waldfogel
Working Paper 12624
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12624

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

We are grateful to Liz Washbrook and Geng Li for helpful advice. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2006 by Neeraj Kaushal, Qin Gao, and Jane Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Welfare Reform and Family Expenditures: How are Single Mothers Adapting to the New
Welfare and Work Regime?
Neeraj Kaushal, Qin Gao, and Jane Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 12624
October 2006
JEL No. I3,I31,I38
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of welfare reform, broadly defined to include social policy changes in the 1990s,
on the material well-being and expenditure patterns of poor single-mother families. Our research suggests
that welfare reform did not affect total expenditures in households headed by low-educated single
mothers. However, patterns of expenditure did change. We find strong evidence that the policy was
associated with an increase in spending on transportation and food away from home, and some evidence
of an increase in spending on adult clothing and footwear. In contrast, we find no statistically significant
changes in expenditures on childcare or learning and enrichment activities. This pattern of results
suggests that welfare reform has shifted family expenditures towards items that facilitate work outside
the home, but, at least so far, has not allowed families to catch up with more advantaged families in
terms of their expenditures on learning and enrichment items.
Neeraj Kaushal
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nk464@columbia.edu

Jane Waldfogel
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
jw205@columbia.edu

Qin Gao
Fordham University Graduate School of Social Services
113 West 60th Street
New York, New York-10023
aqigao@fordham.edu

Introduction
A decade long policy to “end welfare as we know it” has dramatically altered life
circumstances and opportunities faced by single mother headed families in the U.S. Approximately
69 percent of single mothers were employed in 2005, up from 61 percent a decade ago, and the
number on welfare continued to decline even during the 2001 recession after falling by half within the
first five years of the implementation of the 1996 welfare law (O’ Neill 2006, Parrott and Sherman
2006). How have these changes affected the material circumstances of families headed by single
mothers? A rich body of research has documented the effects of welfare reform on the employment
and incomes of low-educated single mothers (Blank 2002, Grogger et al. 2003). In this paper, we
provide evidence on how welfare reform affected their material well-being and patterns of
expenditure.
In their extensive research using expenditure data, Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2004, 2006)
find that while incomes of the poorest (bottom decile) single-mother families fell noticeably after
welfare reform, trends in expenditures indicate an improvement in the material circumstances of this
group. However, it is not clear from their analyses whether the improvement in expenditures is due to
changes in social policy or due to economic factors. From a policy perspective it is important to
separate the two effects and isolate the impact of social policy on the material well-being of loweducated single parent families. We use a difference-in-difference-in-difference research design,
described in detail below, that allows us to separate the effect of changes in social policy from that of
other secular trends.
The second contribution of our paper is to examine trends in expenditures on specific items,
such as those related to work or development and learning, so as to provide evidence of how single
mother families are adapting to their new life circumstances. For example, changed circumstances
may require families to spend more on work related activities such as transportation, food away from
home, or adult clothing. Realizing the significance of education in the labor market, families may
decide to spend more on development or learning activities. Working families may also purchase
more childcare (which may or may not benefit children, depending on factors such as the age of the
child and the quality of the care). Recent research from the UK suggests that focusing on detailed

3

items can yield important new insights into how policy changes affect the material well-being and
expenditure patterns of low-income families (Gregg, Waldfogel, and Washbrook, in press).
To preview our results, we find that while total expenditures in households headed by loweducated (education

high-school) single mothers rose after welfare reform, similar increases were

also experienced in households belonging to other demographic groups that were much less affected
by welfare reform (e.g. families headed by high-educated single mothers or low-educated marriedcouple families). Our research suggests that welfare reform per se did not have any statistically
significant effect on total expenditures in low-educated single mother households. However, patterns
of expenditure did change. There is strong evidence that the policy change was associated with an
increase in spending on transportation and food away from home, and some evidence of an increase in
spending on adult clothing and footwear. Welfare reform was also associated with an increase in
ownership of microwave ovens, phones, and cars. These increases were higher, in absolute as well as
relative terms, among families headed by very low educated (education < high-school) single mothers.
In contrast, we find no statistically significant changes in expenditures on childcare or learning and
enrichment activities, and, if anything, a relative decline in ownership of computers in low-educated
single mother households. This pattern of results suggests that welfare reform has shifted family
expenditures towards items that facilitate work outside the home, but, at least so far, has not allowed
families to catch up with more advantaged families in terms of their expenditures on learning and
enrichment items.

Policy Background and Previous Research
A spate of policy changes in the 1990s shifted the focus of US welfare policy from providing
cash benefits to low-income single mothers to providing work incentives and a range of supports for
the working poor. The 1996 federal law and state initiatives discouraged welfare dependence by
eliminating the entitlement to cash assistance and by imposing mandatory work requirements and
time-limits on welfare receipt. These changes were accompanied by expansions in a plethora of work
support programs for low-income families including federal and state Earned Income Tax Credits

4

(EITCs), childcare subsidies, child tax credits, and Medicaid and child health insurance programs that
radically altered the form of public assistance available to low-income single-mother families.1
These policy changes were implemented at a time when the US economy experienced
impressive growth that generated over 20 million jobs during 1992-2000 (Blank 2000). It may be
partly due to changes in incentives brought about by tax and transfer programs and partly on account
of economic growth that the employment rate of low-educated single mothers increased from 62
percent in 1995 to 73 percent in 2000, before declining in the recent recession to 69 percent in 2005
(Parrott and Sherman 2006). Indeed, the economic expansion of the 1990s made it relatively easy for
low-income single mothers to move from welfare to work. It is, however, not easy to determine what
proportion of the increase in employment (or incomes) is due to policy and what proportion due to
economic factors (Blank 2002). Moreover, multiple policy changes occurred during a short time
period, making it difficult to attribute changes in incomes or other aspects of material well-being to a
single aspect of welfare reform or work assistance programs. This task becomes even more
challenging if we allow for the possibility that certain policy changes may have a lagged effect.
According to the US Census Bureau, the poverty rate among children in single-mother
families declined from 54 percent in 1993 to 43 percent in 2005. Again, part of the decline in poverty
is due to the economic boom of the 1990s and part due to other factors including changes in tax and
transfer programs. Cancian et al. (1999) found that after adjusting for inflation, both earnings and
family incomes of welfare leavers increased over time (see also Haskins 2001). The scenario is less
rosy for the very poor. Haskins (2001) concluded that “there is a small to moderate-sized group of
mother-headed families that are worse off than they were before welfare reform” (p. 105). Primus et
al. (1999) found that the 1996 welfare reform caused disposable income for the bottom decile of the
population to decline (see also Meyer and Sullivan 2005). The picture is mixed as one looks at other
aspects of family well-being. Research suggests that welfare reform did not result in any deterioration
in food insecurity faced by low-income single-mother families (Winship and Jencks 2002). A number

1

These changes have been well-documented elsewhere and for space considerations we do not repeat them here
(see Blank 2002 and Grogger et al. 2002).

5

of studies have found that welfare reform affected the health insurance of single mothers and their
children (Kaushal and Kaestner 2005, Bitler et al 2005).
Expenditures are an important aspect of material well-being and were an under-studied topic
until recently. Several researchers have argued for the superiority of an expenditure measure of
poverty over an income measure (Meyer and Sullivan 2003, 2004, 2006; Rector 2004; see also
discussion in Haskins 2001). Meyer and Sullivan (2004, 2006) find that aggregate expenditures, in
particular, expenditures on housing and transportation, increased among the lowest decile of single
mothers, although it is not clear from their analysis whether these changes were on account of changes
in policy or due to economic factors. We try to answer this question by adopting a research
methodology that allows us to separate the two effects. This methodology has been used in one recent
study of the impact of welfare reforms on family expenditures in the UK (Gregg, Waldfogel, and
Washbrook, in press), but has not been applied in the US research to date.
Our study, as any study on expenditures, is limited by the fact that we examine only certain
aspects of material well-being, and not all aspects of individual well-being. For instance, tax
incentives and welfare reforms that increase the employment of mothers may affect the time mothers
spend with children, and may adversely affect the well-being of children in this sense, although it is
also possible that children gain when mothers are employed, due to improvements in maternal mental
health or family routines (Duncan and Chase-Lansdale 2004; Waldfogel 2006). Similarly,
employment may entail more or less physical labor than household work, and there may also be
differences in the amount of psychological stress between paid work and household work. Mother’s
self-esteem may be higher when employed and lower when on welfare. Our analysis does not factor
in these other aspects of individual well-being.

Data
We use micro-level data from the Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CES) from 1990-1995 for
the pre-reform period, and from 1998-2003 for the post-reform period. Since all states implemented
PRWORA during 1996-1997, we exclude 1996-1997 as this period can not be categorized as pre- or
post-reform. The CES consists of two different components: a quarterly Interview Survey (IS) and a

6

weekly Diary Survey (DS). Our analysis is based on the IS, which provides detailed information on
expenditures incurred by a sample of consumer units, defined as: all members of a housing unit
related by blood, marriage, adoption or some other legal arrangement; or two or more persons living
together who use their incomes to make joint expenditures; or a single person who is living with
others but is financially independent (BLS 2005). The IS sample is a rotated panel in which
approximately 7,500 units are interviewed every three months for five consecutive quarters, after
which these households are replaced by new units.2 Thus, by design 20 percent of the sample is
replaced every year. The first quarter is a contact interview, while in the second to fifth quarters
households are asked about their expenditures over the previous three months. Since the IS surveys
are based on recall data on expenditures in the past three months, they suffer from response recall
errors (Battistin, 2003).3
We restrict the analysis to families with children, where the mother is aged 18-54 years. The
samples are stratified into four groups by mother’s education level and marital status to identify those
most and least affected by welfare reform. These are: low-educated (mother’s education highschool) single-mother families, an exceedingly vulnerable group with a high probability of being on
welfare; low-educated married-couple families; high-educated (mother’s education>high-school)
single-mother families; and high-educated married-couple families. In supplemental analyses, we
also estimated models defining a very low education group to include only those with less than a highschool education. This very low education group would be expected to be most sharply affected by
welfare reform. Thus, seeing whether our results hold up, and indeed are stronger, for the very low
education group provides a useful robustness check on our results.
Since the CES provides data at the household level and not at the subfamily level, we are
unable to identify single mothers who reside in a household with parents or other family members. If
welfare reform resulted in a larger number of single mothers living with their parents, the results of
our analysis would be biased.4 Meyer and Sullivan (2003) computed the ratio of single-mother

2
The sample size was increased in 1999. During 1990-1998, in any single quarter the IS consisted of about 5000
units.
3
However, there is no reason to believe that these errors are correlated with welfare reform.
4
Note this was one of the conditions for teenage mothers to stay on welfare.

7

subfamilies to all single mothers using the Current Population Surveys and found that throughout the
1990s the ratio was around 0.2, suggesting that the bias on account of changes in the proportion of
single-mother subfamilies in the CES data would be modest.
The CES provides detailed information on each household unit including the respondent’s age
(and spouse’s age), education level (and spouse’s education level), marital status, race and ethnicity
(and spouse’s race and ethnicity), region of residence, family size, number of children and number of
elderly persons (aged 65 or above) in the family. This information is used to construct various
demographic groups or control variables.
We first classify quarterly expenditures into ten major categories -- housing and utility; food;
alcohol and tobacco; clothing and footwear; transportation; health; leisure; personal care; education
(including reading); and miscellaneous -- and study whether welfare reform affected expenditures on
these major categories. The CES also provides data on expenditures on more narrowly defined items
that can be assigned to work-related and learning or development related expenses. More specifically,
we use CES data to define the following specific expenditure categories: expenditure on food away
from home; adult’s clothing, footwear and accessories; childcare; and learning and enrichment
expenditures, defined as spending on books, magazines, newspapers, tuition (elementary, high school
and college) and school books, supplies and equipment, computers, calculators, and typewriters, toys,
games and sports.5 For comparison, we also study changes in expenditures on food at home and
children’s clothing, footwear, and accessories. Details on the measures of each expenditure category
are presented in Appendix Tables 1 (major categories) and 2 (detailed items).
We also study ownership of several consumer durables, to examine if welfare reform has
induced families to invest in durables to save time in household work (e.g. microwave ovens, washer
and dryer, and dishwasher) and to better connect with employers (as well as family and friends) (e.g.
phone and car); or whether they are investing in durables that may be used to enhance learning (e.g.
computer and VCR). CES provides information on ownership of all of these items, except phones.

5

In an earlier version of this paper, we examined trends in expenditures on each item that comprises our
composite variable on learning and enrichment activities. Since expenditure on many of these items is very
small, especially for the target group of families, we think it is more meaningful to use a composite variable.

8

Information on whether a family spent any money on phone services in the previous quarter is used as
a proxy for phone ownership.
To take account of differences in household size and composition, like Gregg, Waldfogel, and
Washbrook (in press), we adjust expenditures in the ten major categories for each household using an
equivalence scale, which assigns a weight of 0.67 to the first adult, 0.33 to all other persons in the
household age over 17, and 0.2 to children 17 or under. 6 More specific items (such as adult clothing,
footwear and accessories; children’s clothing, footwear and accessories; and baby-sitting and
childcare) are deflated by the number of adults or children in the family who are likely to use these
goods and services. Expenditures are expressed in January 2003 dollars using the Personal
Consumption Expenditure index of the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
A major limitation of the CES data is that it does not provide state identifiers for the entire
sample. For instance, in 2003, CES did not provide state codes for 15 states and suppressed state
codes for several respondents from 17 other states. Therefore, like Meyer and Sullivan (2004, 2006)
we are not able to control for time-varying state effects. We chiefly rely on the difference-indifference-in-difference methodology, described in detail below, to control for any time-varying state
effects.

Methodology
Our objective is to examine whether welfare reform (and other contemporaneous policy
changes) have made any difference to the material well-being and expenditure patterns of families
headed by low-educated single mothers, a group that faces a high risk of being on welfare and was the
primary target of state and federal welfare reform. One simple way to do this is by computing the
pre- and post-welfare reform changes in expenditures incurred by these families. Following Gregg,
Waldfogel, and Washbrook (in press), we can compute the change using levels or percentage methods
as specified below:

6
The specific scale we use is the one used by many analysts including the OECD (Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development). This scale rate assigns 0.33 to all other persons in the household 14 or over;
and 0.2 to children under 14. Since in the US all persons less than 18 are considered children, we modify the
OCED scale to meet with the US norms.

9

Levels method :

λls = E lspost − E lspre

Percentage method :

λls =

(1)

E lspost − E lspre
E lspre

where Elspre is the mean real equivalized expenditure of low-educated single-mother families on an
item in the pre-reform period, and Elspost is the corresponding expenditure in the post-reform period.
Under the levels method

λ ls

estimates the absolute change in mean quarterly expenditure; and under

the percentage method, it measures the percentage change in mean quarterly expenditure. If there
were no other factors that influenced household expenditures in the pre- versus post-welfare reform
periods,

λ ls

would provide the estimated effect of welfare reform on spending on this item by low-

educated single-mother families. However, there may be other factors, for instance, economic trends
that affected incomes and therefore expenditure levels, or changes in relative prices that affected
spending patterns.
The difference-in-difference-in-difference (D-in-D-in-D) methodology we adopt allows us to
control for time-varying factors correlated with welfare reform that may have affected expenditure
patterns (absolute as well as relative). The methodology is implemented in three steps. As a first
step, we compare the pre- versus post-policy change in expenditures on an item by low-educated
single-mother families with the pre- versus post-policy change in expenditures on this item by higheducated single-mother families. This allows us to control for secular trends in spending patterns that
had a similar effect on low- and high-educated single-mother families. The estimated difference-indifference can be specified as:
(2)

λ2s = λls − λhs

where

λhs is the change in equivalized expenditure on an item by high-educated single-mother

families after welfare reform. Since high-educated single-mother families are assumed to be
unaffected by welfare reform,
variable

λ2s

λhs captures the secular trends correlated with welfare reform.

The

thus estimates whether the pre-versus post- welfare reform trend in expenditures differed

10

for low-educated and high-educated single-mother households. If the estimated value of

λ2s is

positive, that would indicate that the relative gap between low and high-income single-mother
families narrowed. Equation (2) can be computed using either the level or percentage method
described in equation (1).
The identifying assumption in equation (2) is that time-varying factors correlated with welfare
reform have the same effect on the target and comparison groups. This may be a rather restrictive
assumption since the labor market opportunities for low-educated women differed from the
opportunities that high-educated women encountered during the 1990s. To control for these
differences, we move to step 2 of the difference-in-difference-in-differences procedure, and estimate
equation (2) for married-couple families, stratified by mother’s education, given by equation (2`).
(2`)

λ2m = λlm − λhm
Since married parents are at low risk of being on welfare,

λ2m , the second difference-in-

difference, captures the difference in the effect of factors other than welfare reform on the expenditure
patterns of low-educated married-couple families and high-educated married-couple families.
Assuming that the convergence (or divergence) in the spending patterns across groups with different
education levels was the same irrespective of mother’s marital status, in step 3 we examine whether
the gap between expenditures of families headed by less-educated single mothers and families headed
by more-educated single mothers closed more quickly than the gap between families headed by lesseducated married mothers and more-educated married mothers. This provides the D-in-D-in-D
estimate, given by equation (3):
(3)

λ3 = λ2s − λ2m

The D-in-D-in-D estimate in equation (3) can also be obtained in one step using the following
regression on a combined sample of single-mother and married-couple families:
(4)

E it = λ 0 + λ p Policy t + λ s Sm it + λ e Le it + λ es ( Sm it * Le it ) + λ sp ( Policy t * Sm it )
+ λ ep ( Policy t * Le it ) + λ esp ( Policy

jt

* Le ijt * Sm it ) + X it Γ + δ m + u it

11

In equation (4), E it , the quarterly equivalized expenditure incurred by family i in period t, is a
function of Policyt (equal to 1 if an observation is taken from the post welfare reform period,
otherwise 0); family characteristics ( X it ) namely mother’s age, race and ethnicity, education, whether
family lives in an urban area, family size, number of children under 18, and number of persons in the
family aged 64 or above; and
variable

δ m , which is a vector representing month of interview effects.

The

Smit is an indicator for whether the family is headed by a single mother and Le it is a

dummy variable indicating whether the mother is low-educated. The level first-difference, D-in-D
and D-in-D-in-D coefficients are given by λ p

+ λep + λsp + λesp , λep + λesp and λesp ,

respectively. Following Gregg, Waldfogel, and Washbrook (in press), the percentage estimates are
given by dividing the pre- versus post-policy changes in expenditures for a group by the mean
expenditure in the pre-policy period:
1st D =

λ p + λep + λsp + λesp
λ0 + λe + λs + λes

D-in-D =

λ p + λep + λsp + λesp λsp + λ p
−
λ0 + λe + λs + λes
λ0 + λs

D-in-D-in-D =

λ p + λep + λsp + λesp λ p + λep λsp + λ p λ p
−
−
+
λ0 + λe + λs + λes
λ0 + λe
λ0 + λs λ0

In the empirical analysis, base level expenditures adjust for family characteristics. We compute
Huber/White/sandwich standard errors that allow for arbitrary heteroscedasticity in the data. To
adjust for potential non-independence among observations belonging to the same family, standard
errors are computed by clustering at the family unit.
Ideally, we would have liked to have chosen comparison groups that were similar to loweducated single mothers, but unaffected by welfare reform. But it is difficult to get comparison
groups that meet both the criteria. In our sample, a small proportion of low-educated married mothers
(about 5 percent) received welfare in 1994. Similarly, a small proportion of high-educated single
mothers also received welfare. In addition, several other social policy changes (e.g. changes in EITC)
affected low-educated married-mother families as well as single-mother families. Therefore, the

12

coefficient estimated through equation (3) could be downward biased.7 At the very least, however,
the D-in-D-in-D approach we employ identifies whether any observed effects of welfare reform on
expenditure patterns are group-specific, and whether the effects are primarily found for the group of
interest—the low-educated single-mother target group. We realize the limitations of our research
methodology, and therefore present the estimated first-difference, D-in-D, and D-in-D-in-D
coefficients.

Results
Major Expenditure Categories: Descriptive Analysis
Figure 1 presents total quarterly equivalized real expenditures for low- and high-educated
single-mother and married-couple families before and after welfare reform. Expenditure figures are
adjusted for mothers’ age, race and ethnicity, education, whether the family lives in an urban area,
family size, number of children under 18, number of persons in the family aged 65 or above, and
month effects. Total equivalized household expenditures for all four demographic groups increased
between 1990-1995 and 1998-2003, reflecting the 1990s economic boom that benefited all education
groups. The increase seems to be slightly higher for single-mother families, and among them, the
high-educated appear to have gained more than the low-educated. However, it is difficult to comment
on proportional changes in household expenditures relative to the base. We return to this point shortly
when we present the results of the multivariate analyses.
In the pre-welfare reform period, low-educated single-mother families spent approximately
62 percent of their household budget on two items of consumption: food and housing. In contrast,
high-educated single- mother families spent 54 percent of their total expenditures on food and
housing, and were therefore left with a higher proportion of their larger budgets (relative to the loweducated single-mother target group) for other consumption. The proportion of household budget

7

If welfare reform influenced marriage our selection of the target and comparison groups on the basis of marital
status may yield biased results. However, previous results suggests that welfare reform did not have any effect
on marital status (Kaushal and Kaestner 2001; Schoeni and Blank 2002). A related issue is that if welfare
reform affected cohabitation, this may bias the results of the analysis. CES, the dataset we use, does not provide
information on cohabitation. To some extent, we address this issue by including controls for number of family
members and number of children in the family.

13

spent on these two basic items in married-couple families was even lower - between 46 and 48
percent. In the pre-reform period, low-educated single-mother families spent a much smaller share of
their budgets on items of enrichment such as education and leisure than the other three groups. Did
households reallocate their budgets in the face of changes in life circumstances brought about by
welfare reform? Next, we apply multivariate regression models to examine this issue.

Major Expenditure Categories: Multivariate Analysis
Table 1a presents a summary of estimates of the association between welfare reform and
major categories of expenditures based on models outlined in equations (1) and (4) for low-educated
(education

high-school) single-mother families. The columns labeled I and II show the adjusted

mean real equivalized expenditures per quarter (adjusted for mothers’ age, race or ethnicity,
education, whether she lives in an urban area, family size, number of children under 18 and number of
persons in the family aged 65 or above, and month effects) in the five years before welfare reform
(1990-1995) (column I) and the five years after the policy change (1998-2003) (column II). The
column labeled III shows the difference in levels between the mean expenditures in the pre- and post
welfare reform period (II-I) and the column labeled VI contains the same expressed in percentage
terms. The columns labeled IV and V show the results of the levels analysis based on equation (4),
and in columns VII and VIII the same are presented in percentage terms (using the percentage
method). Heteroskodasticity adjusted standard errors clustered at the consumer unit are in
parentheses.
Estimates in the first row suggest that between 1990-1995 and 1998-2003, total real
equivalized quarterly expenditures in low-educated single-mother families increased by a statistically
significant $605 or 13.9 percent. On an annualized basis, this represents a gain of $2420. As
observed in Figure 1, total equivalized expenditure among the comparison group of high-educated
single-mother families increased by a higher level than the increase experienced by the low-educated
single-mother target group. The D-in-D estimate for the target group of families, with high-educated
single-mother families as the comparison, is a statistically insignificant $292 decline per quarter.
Relative to the pre-reform base level expenditures incurred by the target and comparison groups

14

(using the percentage method), the D-in-D estimate indicates a marginal one percent increase in total
expenditure for the target group, and this effect is also statistically insignificant.
The D-in-D estimate may be biased if time-varying factors such as business cycle effects
influenced incomes and therefore expenditures in low- and high-educated families differently. To
control for these factors, we estimate the D-in-D-in-D coefficient and find that welfare reform had no
statistically significant effect on the total expenditures of the target group. The statistically
insignificant results indicate that welfare reform lowered the total expenditures of the target group by
$77, by the level method. Using the percentage method, the change in total equivalized expenditure,
relative to pre-reform base spending, also was modest: a statistically insignificant 1.1 percent
increase.
The pre- to post-welfare reform increase in expenditures among the target group of loweducated single-mother families was largely on account of increases in expenditures in three major
categories: housing, transportation, and, to a lesser extent, leisure.8 Between 1990-1995 and 19982003, the target group’s quarterly expenditures on housing increased by $254 or 15 percent; on
transportation by $252 or 42 percent; and on items of leisure by $39 or 24 percent. These changes
may be on account of several factors including changes in tastes, relative prices, economy-wide
trends, or policy. To purge the effects of factors, other than the policy change, that had the same
effect on spending patterns of the target and comparison groups, we compute the D-in-D estimates.
We find that the first difference gain in expenditure on housing is completely wiped out. In fact, the
D-in-D estimate is a statistically significant decline of $183. With the percentage method, the D-in-D
coefficient indicates a modest and statistically insignificant 1.8 percent decline. The increase in
expenditures on transportation, however, continues to be large (in percentage terms) even at the D-inD level, and suggests that the target group spent a statistically significant 20 percent more on
transportation after welfare reform. The only other statistically significant D-in-D increase in
expenditures is on clothing.9 The D-in-D estimate suggests that expenditures on clothing in loweducated single-mother families increased by $57 or 11 percent. However, as the results in the first

8
9

There was also a small but statistically significant increase in expenditures in the miscellaneous category.
There is a statistically significant D-in-D decline in expenditures in the miscellaneous category.

15

difference analysis make clear, the D-in-D estimates of the effect on clothing are entirely due to the
decline in expenditures on clothing in high-educated single-mother families.
The D-in-D estimates do not control for factors that may have a different effect on low- and
high-educated families. The D-in-D-in-D estimates that adjust for these factors suggest that welfare
reform increased the target group’s expenditures on transportation by $65 or 19 percent, with the
effect in percentage terms being statistically significant. The increase in expenditures on
transportation is consistent with the idea that increased employment among low-educated single
mothers that is associated with welfare reform is likely to have increased expenditures on workrelated expenses, of which transportation is a big component.
The estimated effects of welfare reform on all other categories of expenditures are statistically
insignificant. Some of the statistically insignificant D-in-D-in-D results are large, but imprecisely
estimated due to large standard errors. For example, welfare reform was associated with a statistically
insignificant 3.6 percent decline in expenditures on housing, an 8.4 percent decline in expenditures on
alcohol and tobacco, a 10 percent decline in expenditures on health, and a 16.4 percent decline in
expenditures on education for the target group. Welfare reform was also associated with statistically
insignificant increases in spending on the following items: a 1.6 percent increase in expenditures on
food, a nine percent increase in spending on clothing, a 12.1 percent increase in spending on leisurerelated items, and a 2.4 percent increase in spending on personal expenses.
Among the members of the target group, those with fewer resources were more likely to be on
welfare, and therefore more likely to be affected by the policy change. To see how the less privileged
among the target group were affected by the policy change, we repeat the analysis by restricting the
low-educated group to those with less than a high school degree. As before, the high-educated group
consists of those with more than a high school education. (Thus those with exactly 12 years of
schooling are not included in this particular analysis). The results are presented in Table 1b.
Estimates in Table 1b are quite similar to those in Table 1a. Real equivalized expenditures in
households headed by single mothers without a high school degree increased by $529 or a statistically
significant 15.5 percent between 1990-1995 and 1998-2003, but most of the increase was accounted
for by increases in expenditures on transportation, housing, and, to a lesser extent, leisure. Relative to

16

baseline spending, the largest increase was on transportation (an 80 percent increase), followed by
leisure (33 percent) and housing (12 percent). Changes in other expenditure categories were relatively
small and statistically insignificant.
As in the earlier analysis (for families headed by single mothers with a high-school or lower
education in Table 1a), the D-in-D and D-in-D-in-D estimates of the association between welfare
reform and total spending are modest and statistically insignificant. Among major expenditure items,
the D-in-D estimates are positive and statistically significant for two items: expenditures on clothing
(significant increases in both levels and percentage) and transportation (a significant increase in
percentage terms only). Similarly, as in the earlier analysis, the D-in-D-in-D estimates indicate that
welfare reform did not lead to significantly increased spending on any item other than transportation.
The increase in expenditures on transportation for the very low educated (with less than a high school
degree) is much higher both in absolute (level) and relative (percentage) terms than the estimated
increase for the low educated (with a high school or lower education; see Table 1a). Results for the
very low educated (in Table 1b) show that welfare reform was associated with a $180 increase in
expenditure on transportation by the level method, and a statistically significant 59 percent increase
by the percentage method. The increase in expenditures on transportation for the very low-educated
single mothers was coupled with a cut in spending on housing of $203 (in money value) or eight
percent, with the percentage effect being statistically insignificant.
To sum up, the results presented in Tables 1a-b suggest that welfare reform did not have any
statistically significant effect on total expenditures in households headed by low-educated single
mothers. The composition of household expenditures, however, changed, with households headed by
low-educated single mothers spending a larger proportion of their budget on transportation and a
somewhat smaller proportion on housing.

Detailed Expenditure Categories: Descriptive Analysis
Next, we explore how welfare reform affected expenditures on specific items related to work,
learning, and enrichment. We begin this analysis by first studying the pattern of spending on these

17

items by the target and comparison groups in the pre-welfare reform period, and then investigate
whether there were changes in expenditures that were associated with welfare reform.
Figure 2 presents the proportion of expenditures on food away from home (for comparison we
also look at food at home), adult clothing and footwear (and children’s clothing and footwear, for
comparison), childcare and baby-sitting, and learning and enrichment activities incurred by the four
groups of families defined by family type and mother’s education during 1990-1995. In the prereform period, low-educated single-mother families spent 19 percent of their budget (equivalized total
expenditure) on food at home and three percent on food away from home. The other three groups
spent a smaller proportion of their budget on food, which is expected since the overall size of their
budget is bigger. However, they allocated a higher proportion of the budget (between three to four
percent) on food away from home.
In this pre-reform period, low-educated single-mother families spent two percent of their
budget (equivalized total expenditure) on children’s clothing and footwear and about the same
proportion on adult clothing and footwear. The comparison group of families headed by single
mothers with more than a high-school degree spent 1.5 percent of their budget on children’s clothing
and footwear, and 2.7 percent of their budget on adult clothing and footwear. Married-couple
families, in contrast, spent a relatively lower proportion of their budget on clothing and footwear: a
little over one percent on children’s clothing and footwear and between 1.5 to 1.7 percent on adult
clothing and footwear. Single-mother families also spent a larger proportion of their budgets on
childcare and baby-sitting than did married-couple families with similar education levels. Finally,
households with less educated mothers spent a smaller proportion of their budgets on items or
activities relating to learning and enrichment (e.g. books/magazines, tuition, books and school
supplies, games, toys, sports and other enrichment activities); and among these households those
headed by single mothers spent an even smaller proportion on these items. Given their smaller
budgets, the gap in spending on learning and enrichment activities between low- and high-educated
families is even larger in money terms.
How did welfare reform affect expenditures on these work- and development-related items?
Did it lower the gap in spending on learning and enrichment activities between rich and poor

18

households? To answer these questions, we turn to regression analysis, as outlined in equations (1)
and (4).

Detailed Expenditure Categories: Multivariate Analysis
Table 2a presents a summary of the estimated associations between welfare reform and
expenditures on detailed items, based on models outlined in equations (1) and (4), for low-educated
(education

high-school) single-mother families. It has the same layout as Table 1a, and the

regression models have the same controls as the analysis on major expenditure categories.
The top two rows in Table 2a present quarterly expenditures on food at home and food away
from home. Between 1990-1995 and 1998-2003, low-educated single-mother families lowered their
equivalized quarterly expenditures on food at home by a statistically significant $23 or three percent
and raised expenditures on food away from home (in restaurants, cafeterias, fast food places) by a
statistically significant $28 or 21 percent. During the same period, high-educated single-mother
families increased expenditures on food, both at home and away from home. The D-in-D estimates,
therefore, suggest that in the post reform period low-educated single-mother families lowered
expenditures on food at home and away from home by a statistically significant $82 and $109
respectively. In percentage terms, relative to the base level spending on food for the target and
comparison groups, the D-in-D estimates reflect a statistically insignificant two percent decrease in
expenditures on food at home and a statistically significant 17 percent increase in expenditures on
food away from home. The D-in-D may be biased if factors contemporaneous with welfare reform
affected food expenditures, at home and away from home, for the low- and high-educated singlemother families differently. The D-in-D-in-D estimates that are assumed to control for these
unobserved factors suggest that welfare reform was associated with a statistically insignificant $8 or
1.1 percent decline in expenditure on food at home and an $11 or 16 percent increase in spending on
food away from home. The estimated coefficient on food away from home using the percentage
method is statistically significant.
Equivalized expenditures on children’s clothing and footwear for the target group of loweducated single-mother families remained almost unchanged between 1990-1995 and 1998-2003,

19

while equivalized expenditures on adult’s clothing and footwear declined by a non-significant $ 7 or
seven percent. The D-in-D estimate, however, indicates a significant $36 or 15 percent increase in
expenditures on adult clothing and footwear for the target group and no change in spending on
children’s clothing and footwear. The D-in-D-in-D estimate suggests that welfare reform lowered
expenditures on children’s clothing and footwear by a statistically insignificant 1.8 percent and raised
expenditures on adult clothing by a statistically significant 13.8 percent.
Next, we examine whether welfare reform was associated with changes in expenditures on
learning and enrichment activities defined as the sum of expenditures on: books/magazines;
tuition/school books/supplies; computers, typewriters and calculators; toys, games and sports and
other enrichment activities. We find that families headed by low-educated single mothers increased
their equivalized expenditures on this set of learning and enrichment items by a statistically
significant $20 or 15 percent after welfare reform. Families headed by high-educated single mothers
increased their spending on learning and enrichment items by an even higher amount, resulting in a Din-D estimate of a statistically significant decrease of $280 (using the level method) or 8.4 percent
(using the percentage method). The D-in-D-in-D estimate that adjusts for factors correlated with
welfare reform that may be affecting high- and low-educated families differently indicates that the
policy change increased overall equivalized spending on learning and enrichment by a statistically
insignificant $4. But using the percentage method, we find that relative to base level spending,
expenditure on learning and enrichment activities fell by a statistically insignificant 8.3 percent.
Finally, as the last row in Table 2a shows, in the post-reform period low-educated singlemothers increased spending on childcare and baby-sitting by a statistically insignificant $11 or 18
percent. The comparison group of high-educated single-mother families also increased spending on
childcare and baby-sitting in this period, resulting in D-in-D estimates of a decline of $97 (in money
terms), but an increase of 10.6 percent (by percentage method). The D-in-D-in-D estimates suggest
that welfare reform was associated with a modest and statistically insignificant $3 or 4.3 percent
increase in spending on childcare and baby-sitting by low-educated single-mother families.
Table 2b provides a similar summary of the associations between welfare reform and detailed
expenditures with the group of very low-educated families restricted to mothers with less than a high

20

school degree (the high-educated comparison group again consists of mothers with more than a high
school education). The results are somewhat similar to those in Table 2a. While welfare reform had
no statistically significant association with expenditures on food at home, expenditures on food away
from home increased by 33 percent in the very low-educated single-mother families. Similarly while
expenditures on children’s clothing in the target group of very low-educated single-mother families
fell by a statistically insignificant 9.7 percent, expenditures on adults’ clothing for this group
increased in the D-in-D-in-D estimates by an insignificant $21 in money terms or a statistically
significant 26 percent. The percent gains in expenditures on food away from home and adult clothing
appear to be larger than the gains when the target group included mothers with a high-school degree
(Table 2a). This may be because the least educated experienced a relatively higher increase in
employment due to welfare reform, resulting in a greater increase in work related expenses for this
group (Kaushal and Kaestner 2001).
The target group consisting of families headed by single mothers without a high-school
degree did not experience any statistically significant change in spending on learning and enrichment
activities. The D-in-D-in-D estimates, however, suggest that welfare reform increased spending on
learning and enrichment activities by a statistically insignificant $14 or 1.8 percent. The D-in-D-in-D
estimates also suggest a statistically insignificant 47 percent decline in spending on childcare and
babysitting. The decline in childcare and babysitting expenditures is somewhat surprising, as we
might expect those costs to have increased along with increased employment. Notice that most of the
change in the D-in-D-in-D estimates is driven by increases in childcare expenditures in high-educated
families. It may be that increases in childcare subsidies were effectively targeted to the lowestincome groups and may have slowed their growth in childcare costs as compared to other families. It
may also indicate that many single mothers who joined work increased reliance on family members
for free child care.
To sum up, the above analysis suggests that welfare reform was associated with an increase in
spending on items that may be related to work expenses such as spending on food away from home
and adults’ clothing and footwear in families headed by low-educated single mothers. The increase,
both in absolute and percentage terms, was higher for the very low-educated group than the low-

21

educated group. There was no corresponding increase in spending on children’s clothing or footwear.
If anything, the negative although statistically insignificant estimates for children’s clothing and
footwear provide some suggestion that expenditures on children’s clothing and footwear may have
declined after welfare reform, particularly for the very low-educated single-mother group. There was
no statistically significant rise in overall expenditures on learning and enrichment related activities,
however, the statistically insignificant results suggest some increase in spending on these items by the
target group of single-mother families with less than high-school education. Finally, the results for
childcare and babysitting suggest that for the very low-educated single-mother group, spending on
childcare fell (non-significantly) in money terms and percentage terms, relative to the changes in
spending for the comparison groups. This latter result suggests that the expansions in childcare
subsidies in the 1990s may have been well-targeted to the most needy families or that low-educated
single mother families increased reliance on kin for childcare.

Ownership of Consumer Durables
Figure 3 presents ownership of seven consumer durables in the pre-reform period and depicts
differences across demographic groups. Low-educated single-mother families are the most deprived
group in terms of ownership of these items followed by low-educated married-couple families, who
closely precede high-educated, single-mother families, with high-educated married-couple families
being the most privileged group. Thirty seven percent of low-educated single mother families did not
own a microwave oven during 1990-1995; 42 percent did not own a washer/dryer; and 75 percent did
not have a dishwasher. Further, 41 percent of our target group did not possess a VCR, 45 percent did
not own a car, and 92 percent did not have a computer. About 12 percent did not pay for any phone
service in the previous quarter, an outcome we use to proxy for families lacking phone ownership.
To study how welfare reform affected ownership of consumer durables, next we discuss the
results of the multivariate analysis presented in Tables 3a and 3b. The analysis in Table 3a shows that
in the post welfare reform period, low-educated single-mother families increased ownership of
microwave ovens and dishwashers, items that may reduce time on housework and thus facilitate work
outside the home, but there was no change in their ownership of washers/dryers. The D-in-D

22

estimates suggest that the comparison group consisting of high-educated single-mother families also
increased ownership of these items, with the increase in ownership of washer/dryers and dishwashers
being relatively higher for this group as compared to the target group. The D-in-D estimates could be
driven by welfare reform or by differences in economic prosperity or tastes experienced by lowversus high-educated single-mother families. The D-in-D-in-D, employed to control for unobserved
effects correlated with policy, suggests that welfare reform induced low-educated single-mother
families to increase their ownership of microwave ovens by a statistically significant 3.7 percentage
points, while reducing their ownership of washer/dryers by a statistically insignificant 3.8 percentage
points and their ownership of dishwashers by a statistically insignificant 3.1 percentage points.
In the post-reform period, ownership of computers and VCRs, items that may be used for
learning and enrichment, increased in low-educated single-mother families by 20 to 21 percentage
points. The ownership of these items also increased for the comparison group of high-educated
single-mother families. The D-in-D-in-D estimates suggest that welfare reform was associated with a
statistically significant 15 percentage points decline in computer ownership in the low-educated
single-mother families, along with a statistically significant five percentage point increase in their
VCR ownership.
Turning to the results for phone and car ownership, the first difference estimates show that in
the post-welfare reform period, phone ownership (i.e. the proportion of families that spent any amount
on phone services) and car ownership among low-educated single-mother families increased by
approximately nine percentage points. Phone ownership among high-educated single mother families
also increased resulting in a D-in-D estimate of a statistically insignificant 0.9 percentage point
increase. These families also increased their car ownership but by a relatively lower level, resulting in
a D-in-D estimate of a 5.9 percentage point increase. Finally, the D-in-D-in-D estimates suggest
welfare reform was associated with low-educated single-mother families increasing their ownership of
a car by a statistically significant 6.7 percentage points and their ownership of a phone by a
statistically significant 4.1 percentage points.
Table 3b has the results of the analysis on ownership of durables in the very low-educated
(<high school) single-mother families. These results are quite similar to those in Table 3a with three

23

differences. The estimated association between welfare reform and microwave ownership, although
positive, is relatively modest and statistically insignificant. The estimated D-in-D-in-D coefficients
for phone and car ownership are larger, but the estimated negative coefficient for computer ownership
is considerably smaller (in absolute terms).
To sum up, our analysis suggests that in the post-reform period low-educated single-mother
families increased their ownership of several consumer durables. There also appears to be a secular
increase in ownership of these consumer durables among other groups that were unaffected by
welfare reform. After purging out these secular trends in ownership of durables, estimates suggest
that welfare reform was associated with increased ownership of microwave ovens, phones, and cars
among low-educated single-mother families, alongside a decline in ownership of computers.

Conclusion
In this paper, we investigate the effect of welfare reform, broadly defined to include social
policy changes in the 1990s, on the material well-being and expenditure patterns of low-educated
single-mother families. We use the Consumer Expenditure Surveys for 1990-1995 and 1998-2003,
and apply a difference-in-difference-in-difference research design to control for factors correlated
with welfare reform that may have affected the material well-being of single-mother families.
We find that welfare reform did not have any statistically significant effect on total
expenditures in households headed by low-educated single mothers. The composition of household
expenditures, however, changed somewhat, with households headed by low-educated single mothers
spending a larger proportion of their budget on work-related expenses, and a somewhat smaller
proportion on housing. We find strong evidence that welfare reform was associated with an increase
in spending on transportation and food away from home and some evidence of an increase in
spending on adult clothing and footwear among the target group of families headed by low-educated
single mothers, with the increase (both in absolute terms and relative to the base level expenditures)
being higher among households headed by the least-educated (education < high-school) single
mothers. This finding conforms with previous research that suggests that the increase in labor force
participation among single mothers with less than a high-school degree was higher than the increase

24

experienced by single mothers with a high-school degree, suggesting that the least educated group
perhaps adapted the most in the new welfare and work regime (Kaushal and Kaestner 2001).
We find that welfare reform was not associated with any statistically significant increase in
spending on children’s clothing or footwear. If anything, the negative although statistically
insignificant estimates for children’s clothing and footwear provide some evidence that expenditures
on children’s clothing and footwear may have declined after welfare reform, particularly for the very
low-educated single-mother group. Our analysis suggests that there was no statistically significant
rise in expenditures on learning and enrichment related activities, although the statistically
insignificant results suggest some increase in spending on these items by very low-educated singlemother families with less than high-school education. These estimates suggest that social policy
changes in the 1990s did not trigger any overall reduction in inequality of expenditures on learning
and enrichment in low- versus high-income families. Finally, we find that for the very low-educated
single mother group, spending on childcare fell (non-significantly) in money terms and percentage
terms, relative to the changes in spending for the comparison groups. This result is somewhat
surprising and suggests that the expansions in childcare subsidies in the 1990s may have been welltargeted to the most needy families or that low-educated single mother families increased reliance on
kin for childcare.
We also study whether welfare reform was associated with increases in ownership of
consumer durables that can support employment or enhance learning and development. Our estimates
suggest that the policy change was associated with increased ownership of microwave ovens, phones,
and cars in low-educated single-mother families, but also a decline in ownership of computers. These
last results are quite similar to results from a recent study of the effects of welfare reforms on the
expenditures of low-income families with children in the UK (Gregg, Waldfogel and Washbrook, in
press). That study too found that families affected by welfare reform increased their ownership of
cars and telephones, but lost ground in spending on computers.
However, in contrast to our study, the UK study found significant shifts in spending toward
children’s items, such as children’s clothing and footwear. We can only speculate as to why these
results differ across countries. It may be that the UK reforms led to more spending on children

25

because they included benefit increases specifically tied to children. For example, the UK reforms
included increases in the value of universal child benefits, as well as child-related allowances
provided through welfare programs. The labeling of these benefits as child benefits may have
increased parents’ propensity to spend the additional money on children’s items such as clothing and
footwear. A second point of difference is that the UK reforms did not mandate employment for single
mothers, although as in the US the reforms were intended to increase incentives to work. As a result,
parents affected by the reforms in the UK may not have been as likely as parents in the US to increase
their spending on items related to employment such as food away from home and adult clothing and
footwear.
Another point of difference is that the UK study found that the reforms there led to reduced
spending on alcohol and tobacco, while this study for the US does not. Here again we can only
speculate as to the reason for this difference. There is some evidence in the UK study that the reforms
increased families’ spending on leisure (as well as their social connections through phone and car
ownership) and it is perhaps this mechanism that led to the reduced spending on alcohol and tobacco.
However, it is not clear why this mechanism would not operate similarly in the US. Taken together,
the cross-country differences in results are intriguing and suggest that further analysis of these effects
within countries, and across countries, would be a good topic for further research.

26

References
Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Hilary W. Hoynes. 2005. "Welfare Reform and Health."
Journal of Human Resources 40(2): 309-334.
Blank, Rebecca. 2002. “Evaluating welfare reform in the United States.” Journal of Economic
Literature 40(4):1-43.
Blank, Rebecca. 2000. “Fighting Poverty: Lessons from Recent US History.” Distinguished lecture on
economics in government, delivered to a joint session of the Society of Government Economists and
the American Economic Association at the annual meetings of the ASSA, Boston, MA.
Battistin, Erich. 2003. “Errors in Survey Reports of Consumer Expenditures”, The Institute for Fiscal
Studies, WP03/07.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2005. “2003 Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey Public Use
Microdata Documentation.” http://www.bls.gov/cex/csxintvw.pdf
Cancian, Maria, Robert Haveman, T. Kaplan, Dan Meyer, and Barbara Wolfe. 1999. “Work,
Earnings, and Well-Being after Welfare: What Do We Know?” In Sheldon H. Danziger (Ed.),
Economic Conditions and WelfareRreform (pp. 161-186). Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.
Duncan, Greg and Lindsay Chase-Lansdale. (eds) 2004. For Better and For Worse: Welfare Reform
and the Well-Being of children and Families. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Gregg, Paul, Jane Waldfogel, and Elizabeth Washbrook (in press). “Tackling Child Poverty in the
UK: Are Low-Income Families with Children Starting to Catch Up?” Forthcoming in Labour
Economics.
Grogger, Jeff, Lynn Karoly, and Jacob Klerman. 2002. “Consequences of Welfare Reform: A
Research Synthesis.” DRU-2676-Depatment of Health and Human Services.
Haskins, Ron. 2001. “Effects of Welfare Reform on Family Income and Poverty.” In Rebecca Blank
and Ron Haskins (eds). The New World of Welfare. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Kaushal, Neeraj and Robert Kaestner. 2005. “Welfare Reform and Health Insurance of Immigrants.”
Health Services Research Volume 40, Number 3, June 2005, pp. 697-722(26)
Kaushal, Neeraj and Robert Kaestner. 2001. “From Welfare to Work: Has Welfare Reform Worked?”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 20(4), 699-719.
Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2003. "Measuring the Well-being of Poor using Income and
Consumption.” Journal of Human Resources 38(S):1180-1220..
Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2004. "The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material
Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s" Journal of Public Economics 88: 1387-1420.
Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2006. “Consumption, Income and Material Well-being after
Welfare Reform.” NBER Working paper 11976. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge:
MA.
Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2005. “The Well-Being of Single-Mother Families After
Welfare Reform” Welfare Reform and Beyond Brief #33, The Brookings Institution. August.

27

O’Neill, June. 2006. “Testimony Before the House Committee on Ways and Means”, July 19,
http://waysandmeans.house.gov/hearings.asp?formmode=view&id=5149
Primus, Wendell, L. Rawlings, K. Larin, and K. Porter. “The Initial Impact of Welfare Reform on the
Economic Well-being of Single Mother Families.” Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities, August 1999.
Rector, Robert. 2004. “Understanding Poverty and Economic Inequality in the United States.”
Backgrounder No. 1756. Washington, DC: The Heritage Foundation.
Schoeni, R. F. and Blank, R.M. 2000. "What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on welfare
participation, employment, income, poverty and family structure." National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper No. 7627. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Sherman, Arloc, and Sharon Parrott. 2006. “TANF AT 10: Program Results are More Mixed Than
Often Understood.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, Washington DC. August,
http://www.cbpp.org/8-17-06tanf.htm
Waldfogel, Jane (2006). What Children Need. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Winship, Scott and Christopher Jencks. 2002. “Changes in Food Security and Welfare Reform: Can
We Identify a Policy Effect?” Unpublished document, Harvard University.

28

Figure 1 Total Quarterly Equivalized Expenditure in Families with Children
(Adjusted for demographic characteristics, at January 2003 prices)
12000

10000

8000

6000

4000

2000

0
1990-1995

1998-2003

Single-mother families, mother's
education <=12 years

1990-1995

1998-2003

1990-1995

1998-2003

1990-1995

1998-2003

Single-mother families, mother's Married-couple families, mother's Married-couple families, mother's
education>12 years
education <=12 years
education>12 years

29

Figure 2 Share of Quarterly Equivalized Expenditures in Families with Children during 1990-1995
(Adjusted for demographic characteristics, at January 2003 prices)
20.00%
18.00%
16.00%
14.00%
12.00%
10.00%
8.00%
6.00%
4.00%
2.00%
0.00%
Food, at home

Food, away from
home

Children’s clothing &
footware

Single-mother families, mother's education <=12 years
Married-couple families, mother's education<=12 years

Adult's clothing &
footwear

Childcare & Babysitting

Learning and
enrichment

Single-mother families, mother's education>12 years
Married-couple families, mother's education>12 years

30

Figure 3 Ownership of Consumer Durables in Families with Children during 1990-1995
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Microwave oven

Washer/dryer

Dishwasher

Computer

Single-mother families, edu <=12 years
Married-couple families, edu<=12 years

VCR

Phone

Car

Single-mother families, edu>12 years
Married-couple families, edu>12 years

31

Total

Table 1a Estimates of Major Quarterly Expenditures in Households headed by
Low-Educated (education 12 years), Single Mothers
Mean Adjusted
Level Difference in Means
Percentage Difference in Means
Expenditure (in $s)
(in $s)
(in %)
1990-1995
1998-2003
1st D
DD
DDD
1st D
DD
DDD
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
4347
4951
605***
-292
-77
13.9***
1.0
1.1
(100)
(209)
(248)
(2.3)
(3.4)
(3.7)

Housing

1721

1976

254***
(38)

-183*
(85)

-124
(101)

14.8***
(2.2)

-1.8
(3.5)

-3.6
(4.0)

Food

986

998

12
(17)

17
(13)

12
(33)

1.2
(1.7)

1.5
(2.6)

1.6
(2.8)

Alcohol &
Tobacco

86

86

0.5
(4)

-8
(7)

-7
(8)

0.5
(5.2)

-8.7
(8.2)

-8.4
(8.8)

Clothing

267

259

-8
(9)

57**
(21)

11
(23)

-2.8
(3.4)

11.4**
(5.4)

8.9
(5.9)

Transport

607

860

252***
(54)

7
(91)

65
(105)

41.7***
(8.9)

20.4**
(10.8)

19.1*
(11.2)

Health

142

146

4
(13)

-30
(22)

-33
(25)

2.6
(9.2)

-7.9
(10.5)

-10.3
(10.9)

Leisure

167

207

39***
(9)

-26
(20)

26
(17)

23.5***
(5.2)

4.2
(7.2)

12.1
(8.3)

Personal

45

45

0
(2)

2
(4)

-1
(4)

0.1
(4.7)

2.7
(6.3)

2.4
(6.7)

Education
(incl.
reading)
Misc.

40

36

-4
(4)

-28
(18)

9
(22)

-10.3
(11.0)

-22.5
(15.5)

-16.4
(16.9)

285

339

54***
(17)

-119***
(44)

-30
(56)

18.9**
(6.1)

-8.5
(8.6)

-5.0
(9.0)

Note: Figures in columns labeled I and II are mean equivalized expenditures, adjusted for mothers’ age, race and
ethnicity, education, whether she lives in an urban area, family size, number of children under 18 and number of
persons in the family aged 65 or above, and month effects. Expenditures are expressed in January 2003 dollars
using the Personal Consumption Expenditure index of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Heteroskodasticity
adjusted standard errors clustered at consumer unit are in parenthesis. The comparison group in the DD analysis
consists of households headed by high-educated (education > 12 years) single mothers. The DDD estimates are
derived by subtracting the DD estimates for low-educated married-couple families (with high educated marriedcouple families as comparison) from the DD estimates for low-educated single-mother families presented in
columns labeled IV and VII. The sample of analysis consists of 8610 observations of low-educated single mothers,
7187 observations of high-educated single mothers, 32547 observations of low-educated married mothers and 43463
observations of high-educated married mothers. * 0.05<p=<0.1, ** 0.01<p=<0.05, ***p=<0.01.

32

Table 1b Estimates of Major Quarterly Expenditures in Households headed by
Very Low-Educated (education < 12 years), Single Mothers

Total

Mean Adjusted
Expenditure (in $s)
1990-1995
1998-2003
I
II
3426
3955

Level Difference in Means
(in $s)
1st D
DD
DDD
III
IV
V
529***
-421*
-52
(124)
(231)
(284)

Percentage Difference in Means
(in %)
1st D
DD
DDD
VI
VII
VIII
15.5***
0.05
1.8
(3.6)
(4.8)
(5.4)

Housing

1460

1633

173***
(52)

-296***
(95)

-203*
(115)

11.9***
(3.6)

-7.3
(4.8)

-7.8
(5.5)

Food

947

928

-19
(26)

-25
(36)

-16
(42)

-2.0
(2.7)

-3.1
(3.4)

-1.4
(3.8)

Alcohol &
tobacco

76

83

7
(7)

1
(7)

-2
(11)

9.0
(9.5)

-6.6
(11.3)

-2.8
(12.5)

Clothing

215

234

19
(14)

84***
(23)

2
(26)

8.6
(6.3)

22.8***
(7.6)

10.3
(8.4)

Transport

322

581

259***
(59)

18
(93)

180
(119)

80.4***
(18.4)

57.0***
(19.2)

59.2***
(20.3)

Health

84

83

-0.5
(12.3)

-33
(22)

-22
(26)

-0.5
(14.7)

-11.7
(16.3)

-8.8
(17.2)

Leisure

118

157

39***
(10)

-30
(21)

30
(28)

32.9***
(8.4)

8.1
(11.3)

19.1
(12.7)

Personal

35

37

2
(3)

4
(5)

-2
(5)

6.6
(9.2)

8.4
(9.9)

5.4
(10.5)

Education
(incl.
reading)
Misc.

23

19

-4
(4)

-24
(19)

21
(24)

-17.5
(17.6)

-29
(34)

-12
(36)

146

200

54***
(17)

-114***
(47)

-31
(61)

37.0***
(11.6)

-7.4
(18.2)

-3.5
(18.8)

Note: Figures in columns labeled I and II are mean equivalized expenditures, adjusted for mothers’ age, race and
ethnicity, education, whether she lives in an urban area, family size, number of children under 18 and number of
persons in the family aged 65 or above, and month effects. The figures are expressed in January 2003 dollars using
the Personal Consumption Expenditure index of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Heteroskodasticity adjusted
standard errors clustered at consumer unit are in parenthesis. The comparison group in the DD analysis consists of
households headed by high-educated (education > 12 years) single mothers. The DDD estimates are derived by
subtracting the DD estimates for very low-educated married-couple families (with high-educated married-couple
families as comparison) from the DD estimates for very low-educated single-mother families presented in columns
labeled IV and VII. The sample of analysis consists of 3067 observations of unmarried very low-educated mothers,
7187 observations of unmarried, high-educated mothers, 8092 observations of married, very low-educated mothers
and 43463 observations of married, high-educated mothers. * 0.05<p=<0.1, ** 0.01<p=<0.05, ***p=<0.01.

33

Table 2a Estimates of Detailed Quarterly Expenditures for Children and Adults in Households
Headed by Low-Educated (education 12 years) Single Mothers

Food at home

Mean Adjusted
Expenditure
(in $s)
199019981995
2003
I
II
830
807

Level Difference in Means
(in $s)
1st D

DD

DDD

Percentage Difference in Means
(in %)
1st D

DD

DDD

III
-23*
(14)

IV
-82***
(28)

V
-8
(25)

VI
-2.8*
(1.7)

VII
-1.6
(2.6)

VIII
-1.1
(2.7)

Food away from home

130

158

28***
(6)

-109***
(21)

11
(17)

21.3***
(4.7)

17**
(7)

16**
(7)

Children’s clothing
/footwear

87

86

-1
(4)

0.1
(6)

-4
(7)

-1.2
(4.0)

-0.8
(6.0)

-1.8
(6.6)

Adult’s clothing
/footwear

96

89

-7
(4)

36***
(11)

17
(11)

-7.1
(5.4)

14.7**
(7.3)

13.8*
(7.8)

Learning and enrichment

136

156

20***
(7)

-280***
(39)

4
(32)

14.9***
(4.9)

-8.4
(9.5)

-8.3
(11.0)

Childcare & baby-sitting

59

70

11
(7)

-97***
(19)

3
(16)

18.2
(12.0)

10.6
(15.1)

4.3
16.9)

Note: Figures in columns labeled I and II are mean equivalized expenditures, adjusted for mothers’ age, race and
ethnicity, education, whether she lives in an urban area, family size, number of children under 18 and number of
persons in the family aged 65 or above, and month effects. The figures are expressed in January 2003 dollars using
the Personal Consumption Expenditure index of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Heteroskodasticity adjusted
standard errors clustered at consumer unit are in parenthesis. The comparison group in the DD analysis consists of
households headed by high-educated (education > 12 years) mothers. The DDD estimates are derived by subtracting
the DD estimates for low-educated married-couple families (with high-educated married-couple families as
comparison) from the DD estimates for low-educated single-mother families presented in columns labeled IV and
VII. See notes to Table 1a for sample size. * 0.05<p=<0.1, ** 0.01<p=<0.05, ***p=<0.01.

34

Table 2b Estimates of Detailed Quarterly Expenditures for Children and Adults in Households
Headed by Very Low-Educated (education < 12 years) Single Mothers

Food at home

Mean Adjusted
Expenditure
(in $s)
199019981995
2003
I
II
846
777

Level Difference in Means
(in $s)
1st D

DD

DDD

Percentage Difference in Means
(in %)
1st D

DD

DDD

III
-69***
(23)

IV
-114***
(39)

V
-46
(33)

VI
-8.2***
(2.7)

VII
-7.8**
(3.3)

VIII
-5.6
(3.6)

Food away from home

87

121

34***
(10)

-142***
(27)

21
(20)

39.3***
(11.7)

29.8**
(12.4)

33.2**
(13.7)

Children’s clothing
/footwear

76

74

-1
(5)

1
(7)

-10
(8)

-1.7
(6.9)

-0.4
(8.3)

-9.7
(9.6)

Adult’s clothing
/footwear

66

71

5
(8)

51***
(12)

21
(13)

7.3
(11.5)

32.5***
(12.0)

26.3**
(13.0)

Learning and enrichment

64

73

9
(7)

-328***
(44)

14
(35)

14.5
(11.0)

-10.2
(21.4)

1.8
(24.8)

Childcare & baby-sitting

31

34

3
(7)

-124***
(21)

-15
(18)

8.2
(23.0)

-9.6
(28.8)

-47.1
(34.4)

Note: Figures in columns labeled I and II are mean equivalized expenditures, adjusted for mothers’ age, race and
ethnicity, education, whether she lives in an urban area, family size, number of children under 18 and number of
persons in the family aged 65 or above, and month effects. The figures are expressed in January 2003 dollars using
the Personal Consumption Expenditure index of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Heteroskodasticity adjusted
standard errors clustered at consumer unit are in parenthesis. The comparison group in the DD analysis consists of
households headed by high-educated (education > 12 years) mothers. The DDD estimates are derived by subtracting
the DD estimates for very low-educated married-couple families (with high-educated married-couple families as
comparison) from the DD estimates for low-educated single-mother families presented in columns labeled IV and
VII. See notes to Table 1 b for sample size. * 0.05<p=<0.1, ** 0.01<p=<0.05, ***p=<0.01.

35

Table 3a Summary Estimates of Ownership of Durables in Households Headed by
Low-Educated (education 12 years) Single Mothers

Microwave oven

Adjusted Probability of
Ownership (%)
1990-1995
1998-2003
I
II
63
83

Percentage Difference in Means
(% points)
1st D
DD
DDD
III
IV
V
20***
-0.3
3.7*
(1.5)
(2.5)
(2.3)

Washer/dryer

58

58

-0.1
(1.7)

-7.1**
(2.7)

-3.8
(2.6)

Dishwasher

25

29

4.4***
(1.6)

-24.6***
(3.2)

-3.1
(2.8)

Computer

8

28

20.2***
(1.3)

-35.3***
(3.0)

-14.7***
(2.6)

VCR

59

81

21.3***
(1.6)

-0.3
(2.5)

5.4**
(2.3)

Phone

82

90

8.8***
(1.1)

0.9
(1.4)

4.1**
(1.4)

Car

55

65

9.3***
(1.6)

5.9**
(2.4)

6.7***
(2.3)

Note: Figures in columns labeled I and II adjust for mothers’ age, race and ethnicity, education, whether she lives in
an urban area, family size, number of children under 18 and number of persons in the family aged 65 or above, and
month effects. Heteroskodasticity adjusted standard errors clustered at consumer unit are in parenthesis. The
comparison group in the DD analysis consists of households headed by high educated (education > 12 years), single
mothers. The DDD estimates are derived by subtracting the DD estimates for low-educated married-couple families
(with high-educated married-couple families as comparison) from the DD estimates for low-educated single-mother
families presented in column labeled IV. The sample of analysis consists of 8610 observations of unmarried loweducated mothers, 7187 observations of unmarried, high-educated mothers, 32547 observations of married, loweducated mothers and 43463 observations of married, high-educated mothers. * 0.05<p=<0.1, ** 0.01<p=<0.05,
***p=<0.01.

36

Table 3b Estimates of Ownership of Durables in Households Headed by
Very Low-Educated (education <12 years) Single Mothers

Microwave oven

Adjusted Probability of
Ownership (%)
1990-1995
1998-2003
I
II
52
77

Percentage Difference in Means
(% points)
1st D
DD
DDD
III
IV
V
24.8***
-12.8***
1.7
(2.8)
(4.1)
(3.5)

Washer/dryer

50

51

1.0
(3.0)

-13.2***
(4.3)

-2.2
(3.8)

Dishwasher

16

19

2.7
(2.3)

-40.2***
(4.4)

-4.8
(3.6)

Computer

5

19

13.8***
(2.0)

-35.6***
(3.8)

-8.1**
(3.2)

VCR

51

71

20.4***
(2.9)

-15.1***
(4.2)

1.0
(3.6)

Phone

74

88

13.4***
(2.0)

-4.4
(2.7)

5.0**
(2.3)

Car

41

52

10.3***
(2.7)

3.3
(3.6)

7.6**
(3.4)

Note: Figures in columns labeled I and II adjust for mothers’ age, race and ethnicity, education, whether she lives in
an urban area, family size, number of children under 18 and number of persons in the family aged 65 or above, and
month effects. Heteroskodasticity adjusted standard errors clustered at consumer unit are in parenthesis. The
comparison group in the DD analysis consists of households headed by high educated (education > 12 years), single
mothers. The DDD estimates are derived by subtracting the DD estimates for low-educated married-couple families
(with high-educated married-couple families as comparison) from the DD estimates for very low-educated singlemother families presented in column labeled IV. The sample of analysis consists of 3067 observations of unmarried
very low-educated mothers, 7187 observations of unmarried, high-educated mothers, 8092 observations of married,
very low-educated mothers and 43463 observations of married, high-educated mothers.
* 0.05<p=<0.1, ** 0.01<p=<0.05, ***p=<0.01.

37

Appendix Table 1: Major Expenditure Categories:
Category
Description
Housing and
Housing expenditures include the following four categories:
utility
1. Shelter cost, including owned dwelling (mortgage interest, property taxes, and
maintenance, repairs, insurance, and other expenses), rent, and other lodging cost;
2. Utility cost, including natural gas, electricity, fuel oil and other fuels, telephone
services, water and other public services
3. Household operations, including domestic services (babysitting and child day care
included) and other household expenses
4. House furnishings and equipment, including household textiles, furniture, floor
coverings, major appliances (such as built-in dishwasher, garbage disposal, purchase
and installation of refrigerator or home freezer, clothes washer or dryer, cooking
stove, range or oven, microwave, portable dishwasher, window air conditioner,
electric floor cleaning equipment, and sewing machines), small appliances (such as
dinnerware, flatware, glassware, non-electric cookware, small electrical kitchen
appliances, portable heating and cooling equipment), and other miscellaneous
household equipment.
Food
Food at home and away from home (including meals as, and not as, pay).
Alcohol &
Alcoholic beverages and tobacco and smoking supplies.
tobacco
Clothing
Clothing and footwear for men, women, boys and girls, and other apparel products
and services.
Transportation
Cars and trucks (new and used), other vehicles, gasoline and motor oil, vehicle
finance charges, maintenance and repairs, vehicle insurance, rental, leases, licenses,
and other charges, and public transportations, both local and on trips.
Health
Health insurance, medical services, prescription drugs, and medical supplies.
Leisure
Fees and admissions to entertainment activities, televisions, radios, and sound
equipments, pets, toys, and playground equipments, and other entertainment.
Personal care
Wigs, hairpieces, or toupees, electric personal care appliances, and personal care
services for males and females, including haircuts.
Education
Tuition, school books, supplies, and equipment for college, elementary and high
(including
school, day care center, nursery school, and other schools, rentals of books and
reading)
equipment, and other school-related expenses; newspapers and magazines
(subscriptions and non-subscriptions), books (through and not through book clubs),
and encyclopedia and other sets of reference books.
Misc.
Including miscellaneous expenditures (membership fees for credit card memberships
and shopping clubs, lotteries and pari-mutuel losses, legal fees (excluding real estate
closing costs), funeral, burial or cremation expenses, including limousine and
flowers, safe deposit boxes, charges for checking accounts and other banking
services, purchase and upkeep of cemetery lots or vaults, accounting fees, interest on
line of credit home equity loan (properties other than owned homes), and
occupational expenses), and cash contributions (alimony and child support
expenditures, support for college students, gifts to non-cu members of stocks, bonds,
mutual funds, and cash contributions to charities, churches or religious
organizations, educational institutions, political organizations, and other
organizations, and other cash gifts), life and other personal insurance, and
retirement, pensions, Social Security contributions.
Total
Total of above.

38

Appendix Table 2: Detailed Expenditures for Children and Adults:
Category
Description
Children’s clothing
Children’s clothing, footwear, and accessories
Adult’s clothing
Adult’s clothing, footwear, and accessories
Learning and enrichment
Books/ magazines/ newspaper
Books (through or not through book clubs), and newspapers and
magazines (subscriptions or non-subscriptions).
Tuition, school books, supplies,
and equipments

Tuition for college, elementary and high school, and other schools
other than day care centers and nursery schools; school books,
supplies, and equipment for college, elementary and high school,
day care centers, nursery schools, and other schools; encyclopedia
and other sets of reference books, rentals of books and equipment,
and other school-related expenses.

Computers, calculators,
typewriters

Computers, computer systems, and related hardware, computer
software and accessories, and repair of computers, computer
systems, and related equipment for non-business use, computer
information services, calculators, and typewriters and other office
machines for non-business use.
TV computers games and computer game software, toys, games,
hobbies, tricycles, and battery powered riders, and playground
equipment.

Toys, games, hobbies, playground
equipments

Sports equipments

Ping-Pong, pool tables, other similar recreation room items,
general sports equipment, and health and exercise equipment;
bicycles; camping, hunting and fishing, winter sports, water
sports, and other sports equipments.

Enrichment activities

Musical instruments, supplies, and accessories; membership fees
for country clubs, health clubs, swimming pools, tennis clubs,
social or other recreational organizations, civic, service, or
fraternal organizations; fees for participant sports, such as golf,
tennis, and bowling; management fees for recreational facilities,
such as tennis courts and swimming pools in condos and coops;
admission fees for entertainment activities, including movie,
theater, concert, opera or other musical series (single admissions
and season tickets); admission fees to sporting events (single
admissions and season tickets); fees for recreational lessons or
other instructions; rental and repair of musical instruments,
supplies, and accessories; and rental and repair of sports,
recreation, and exercise equipment.

Childcare & baby-sitting

Babysitting or other child care in own home or someone else’s
home; tuition and other expenses (other than school books,
supplies, and equipments) for day care centers and nursery
schools.

39

