                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 CRAMMING: THE EFFECTS OF SCHOOL ACCOUNTABILITY ON COLLEGE-BOUND
                             STUDENTS

                                          Colleen Donovan
                                           David N. Figlio
                                            Mark Rush

                                        Working Paper 12628
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12628


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




The authors are grateful to the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development and the
National Science Foundation for financial support, and to an anonymous university for access to its
admission, registrar and course download records. Thanks to Chris Avery, Sunny Ladd, Kim Rueben,
and seminar participants at the London School of Economics, Russell Sage Foundation, Texas A&M
University, University of California-Berkeley, University of Florida, University of Kentucky, University
of Miami, University of Oxford, University of Virginia, NBER Education Program Meeting, and (UK)
Institute of Fiscal Studies as well as the SEA and NTA meetings for helpful comments. All errors
or omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Colleen Donovan, David N. Figlio, and Mark Rush. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cramming: The Effects of School Accountability on College-Bound Students
Colleen Donovan, David N. Figlio, and Mark Rush
NBER Working Paper No. 12628
October 2006
JEL No. I2

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper is the first to explore the effects of school accountability systems on high-achieving students'
long-term performance. Using exceptional data from a large highly-selective state university, we relate
school accountability pressure in high school to a student's university-level grades and study habits.
We exploit a change in the state's accountability system in 1999 that led to some schools becoming
newlythreatened by accountability pressure and others becoming newly-unthreatened to identify the
effects of accountability pressure. We find that an accountability system based on a low-level test
of basic skills apparently led to generally reduced performance by high-achieving students, while an
accountability system based on a more challenging criterion-referenced exam apparently led to improved
performance in college on mathematics and other technical subjects. Both types of systems are associated
with increased "cramming" by students in college. The results indicate that the nature of an accountability
system can influence its effectiveness.

Colleen Donovan
Department of Economics                              Mark Rush
University of California, Berkely                    University of Florida
Berkeley, CA 94720                                   Warrington College of Business
donovanc@econ.berkeley.edu                           Department of Economics
                                                     P.O. Box 117140
David N. Figlio                                      320 MAT
Department of Economics                              Gainesville, FL 32611-7140
University of Florida                                mark.rush@cba.ufl.edu
Gainesville, FL 32611-7140
and NBER
figlio@ufl.edu
                                      Cramming:
            The Effects of School Accountability on College-Bound Students

Introduction

School accountability – the practice of evaluating schools on the basis of the observed

performance of students, and rewarding and punishing schools according to these

evaluations – is ubiquitous in the world today, with nations on every continent

experimenting with such policies. In the United States, many states had implemented

school accountability policies well in advance of the federal No Child Left Behind Act of

2001, and some states’ experiments with accountability are currently in their second

decade. The stated purpose behind school accountability plans is to encourage schools to

more effectively educate students, and especially to ensure that all students are gaining

ground toward subject-matter proficiency.



Numerous studies, such as Figlio and Rouse (2006) and Jacob (2005), indicate that low-

performing schools facing accountability pressure have improved their students’ test

scores, not just on the high-stakes tests but also on tests that are directly comparable to

schools in other states. Aggregate studies, such as Carnoy and Loeb (2002) and

Hanushek and Raymond (2005), find that states that adopted high-stakes school

accountability plans earlier than others have experienced greater growth in average test

scores as compared with late-adopting states. The general conclusion reached by these

studies is that school accountability has had a moderately large positive effect on average

student outcomes in lower level schools.1 This research, however, focuses on the effects


1
 Other researchers have studied the incentives embedded within school accountability plans. See, for
example, Boyd et al. (2002); Cullen and Reback (2002); Deere and Strayer (2001); Figlio (2006); Figlio
and Getzler, forthcoming; Figlio and Winicki (2005); or Jacob (2005).


                                                    1
of school accountability plans on the standardized test scores of average students or low-

performing students. To date there has been no published research investigating the

effects of these plans on the other end of the academic distribution – high-performing

students who would almost surely have attained proficiency in the absence of school

accountability plans. Even though these students are not the immediate focus of

accountability plans, the effect these plans have on these students is vital to the nation

because it is these students who will become the next generation of scientists and leaders.



It is not obvious how school accountability should affect these college-bound students.

There are at least two avenues through which accountability rules and tests can influence

students. First, accountability rules can affect students’ study skills and study methods.

Second, these rules also can change students’ knowledge and what they learn:

    •    If schools pay less attention to higher-performing students, these students might

         learn different study methods, such as cramming for exams instead of practicing

         deliberate and continuous study habits. In addition, if the rewards and sanctions

         for school accountability plans give schools the incentive to substitute attention

         from more successful students to less successful students, the more successful

         students may learn less or learn differently as a consequence. However, school

         accountability plans might lead to improved study habits if the accountability

         systems induce schools to concentrate on material throughout the school year.2


2
  We suspect that schools may face different incentives to substitute attention from more successful
students to less successful students depending on their socio-economic status. In high socio-economic
status schools, college-bound students are prevalent and schools are unlikely to shift attention in
meaningful ways from these students. But in low socio-economic status schools, college-bound students
may comprise a sufficiently small fraction of the population that they can receive less attention without
controversy. Given that high-achieving students in low-income schools are likely to receive very high


                                                     2
    •   If school accountability plans and the tests they employ to evaluate schools are

        challenging and based on rigorous standards, it could be expected that school

        accountability plans would have a positive impact on students’ learning.

        However, if schools adhere strictly to the material most likely to be on the high-

        stakes test and the focus becomes more fully on high-stakes tests as ends in

        themselves rather than indicators of subject-matter knowledge, school

        accountability plans could have the effect of dulling student and teacher creativity

        and limiting what students learn.

Both of these potential consequences may manifest themselves in student performance in

college, where study habits and course performance might be improved or diminished

due to school accountability plans. So, ultimately the important effect of accountability

plans on college-bound students is an empirical issue, one which has yet to be addressed.



This paper starts to fill this void in the literature. We exploit data from a state that

changed the basis of its accountability system in 1999. This change directly influenced a

large number of schools that immediately either transitioned from being threatened with

sanctions to not being threatened at all, or vice versa. Using this identification strategy,

we can measure the impact on students of the school they attend either becoming

threatened or becoming less threatened. Because the bases of these two accountability

systems were so different, we can employ a variety of falsification tests to distinguish the

effects of school accountability sanctions from the effects of the variables underlying

these sanctions. We compare students in the high school classes of 2000 and 2001 – the


grades anyway, a reduction of attention might not provoke substantial parental awareness and protest in
these schools.


                                                    3
last high school class affected directly by the old accountability regime (because the

high-stakes test grade is the tenth grade) and the first high school class affected directly

by the new accountability regime. Because of the possibility for spillovers – even though

ninth grade is not a high-stakes grade, for instance, schools may have begun gearing up

for the tenth grade test, and curricula and teaching styles might not immediately change

even when accountability pressures change – this empirical approach represents a strong

test of the effects of accountability sanction threats on student university performance.



In order to implement this identification strategy, we utilize a remarkable dataset from a

large selective public university in the state in question. (The identity of the university

and the state in question are suppressed to preserve the anonymity of the institution that

provided us with the data.) The university in question provided us with data that allow us

to investigate the impact of attending a high school threatened with accountability

sanctions on student study habits. For six large classes in which the university’s students

watch lectures online rather than in a traditional classroom setting, for the Spring 2003

semester the university provided us with the precise timing of when students first

downloaded each lecture.3 We can therefore measure the degree to which students

“cram” for exams – delaying studying for a course until the time prior to the test, rather

than keeping up with the course throughout the semester – and relate this cramming

behavior to the threat of accountability sanctions faced by the student’s high school

during the student’s tenth grade. While our measure of cramming is only one measure of

student study habits, it has the advantage that it is directly observed and measured,

3
  During the semester in question, the download dates were collected by the university in the normal
course of events. The students were unaware that these data were being collected and so had no incentive
to alter their behavior.


                                                    4
meaning that we do not need to rely on notoriously unreliable student self-reports for

outcome data.



The university in question also provided us with information from admissions records

(the student’s high school attended, grade point average, college entrance exam scores,

race/ethnicity, and sex) as well as transcript data when in college (courses taken and

grades earned). These data allow us to identify the effects of attending a high school

threatened with accountability sanctions on a student’s subsequent collegiate success.



We find that school accountability plans have the potential to substantially affect high-

achieving students’ study habits and performance in college. First we observe that school

accountability plans apparently alter student study habits in college. Students who

attended schools threatened with sanctions under either school accountability system

displayed a dramatically increased likelihood of cramming once they attended the

university in question. Although we lack the ability to explore whether cramming

behavior is directly responsible for the relationship between accountability sanction

threats and student collegiate performance across a wide range of subjects, we can show

that the more students in an online-viewed course crammed, the worse they performed in

those classes. Second, we find that when looking at a range of college courses, school

accountability plans effect student course performance at the university in question – but

not in uniform ways. While accountability threats from the first accountability system

appears to have reduced student performance in college in general, the new

accountability system did not have the same broad negative effect on collegiate

performance. Instead, this introduction had a positive estimated effect on mathematics


                                             5
performance and other technical subjects and no large negative effects on other subjects.

We suspect this is due to the fact that the new system introduced in 1999 was strongly

standards-based, while the disbanded system was not. Therefore, the evidence suggests

that poor student study habits may be partially to blame for the low course performance

of students affected by the first accountability system, and that the second accountability

system, while apparently improving students’ performance in college courses, may have

been more effective in improving student collegiate performance were it not for the poor

study habits that accompanied the system’s introduction.



Two accountability systems

In 1999, the state in question dramatically changed its school accountability system.

Prior to 1999, schools were graded according to aggregate student performance on a low-

level test of basic skills, that is, a minimum standard of proficiency that was not linked to

instructional or curricular standards. Beginning in 1999, the state changed its system of

evaluating schools to be based on meeting proficiency targets on a new standards-based

test. The new test discriminated performance at a much higher level, and was aligned to

a far greater extent to the subject matter that state educators expected students to master.

While the majority of students statewide scored in the highest category of the test used

for pre-1999 accountability, only a small fraction of students scored in the highest

category of the test used for post-1999 accountability. The result is that the newer

accountability system was likely to affect directly the measured learning of all students,

including four-year college-bound students, in a high school, while the older

accountability system was less likely to affect directly the high-performing students’

measured academic skills. Put differently, because high achieving students were more or


                                              6
less automatically going to do well on the low-level test they faced, schools had more of

an incentive under the older accountability regime to substitute attention away from

college-bound students than they did under the new accountability regime. And since

college-bound students’ performance mattered more in the new accountability regime,

there was a larger incentive for schools to build the human capital of these students under

the new regime.



But while the two accountability systems differed considerably in their potential direct

effects on measured academic performance in high school, both accountability systems

had the potential to influence student study skills and the ways in which students

approach learning. Students in schools facing accountability pressure might learn from

their school that test performance is the goal in itself, and so might change their approach

to education from deliberate study for the sake of learning to concentrated study, that is,

cramming, for the sake of test performance.4 Both accountability regimes could

potentially help to instill this new study ethic in high-performing students. It is not clear

which accountability system would do this the most. In the earlier accountability system,

schools had a greater incentive to generally ignore high-achieving students and prepare

these students for the tests, if at all, in a very concentrated period of time which could

well lead these students to learn to cram as a result. On the other hand, in the later

accountability system, the stakes for schools were higher and the concentration on test

results as a major outcome of interest increased. The increased importance of the test


4
  Anecdotal evidence abounds regarding these changing attitudes. Schools threatened with accountability
sanctions often offer parties to reward students for high aggregate test performance, hold pep rallies to gear
students up for the accountability test, and teach test-specific preparation skills to students and their
parents.


                                                      7
results could induce schools to prepare the students more intensively as the test drew

closer and less intensively when the test was either farther away or over, thereby teaching

students to cram..



Most important for the purposes of this study is that the changing accountability regimes

dramatically affected which schools were threatened with accountability sanctions. Some

schools immediately transitioned from being threatened to no longer being threatened,

while other schools were affected in the reverse. Table 1 presents evidence of the

transitions between accountability systems. Specifically, because we will be employing

high school fixed effects in our regression models, we describe the transitions only of

high schools for which students in both the high school class of 2000 and the high school

class of 2001 are represented in our data. We observe that 22 percent of schools changed

accountability status from one accountability regime to the other, with the majority of

these schools becoming less threatened once the accountability regime shifted. Nine

percent of schools were threatened with sanctions in both accountability regimes, while

69 percent of schools were threatened in neither accountability regime. Our analysis will

focus on the bottom-left and top-right cells of Table 1 – the schools that transitioned from

threatened to not threatened, and vice versa.



Table 2 describes the attributes of the high-achieving students in our study, based on the

accountability status of their high school. We observe that the schools that transitioned

from unthreatened to threatened and vice versa were somewhat different from one

another, and also different from the schools whose accountability status did not change

over this time period. Specifically, the high schools that were not threatened under the


                                                8
old accountability regime but became threatened under the new accountability regime

sent students to the university in question who were more likely to be male, black and

Hispanic and who had modestly lower college entrance exam scores and slightly lower

adjusted high school grade point averages than did the high schools whose accountability

status changed from threatened to unthreatened or whose accountability status did not

change. The fact that these differences in student characteristics across schools are

apparent underscores the importance of estimating high school fixed effects models,

where we compare students from one graduating class in a given high school to students

in the next graduating class from the same high school.



Table 2 also compares one student attribute – SAT scores – within the same schools

across graduating classes. As can be seen, SAT scores improved for enrollees from the

high school class of 2001 vis-à-vis enrollees from the high school class of 2000 for all

types of schools. However, we observe that the group of schools that experienced a

transition from unthreatened to threatened as the accountability regime changed saw the

greatest improvement in students sent to the university, at least according to this metric.

This finding underscores the necessity of controlling for student background

characteristics in the school fixed effects analyses that follow.



Measuring study skills in college

The first purpose of this paper is to measure the effects of school accountability sanction

threats on the development of study skills. While it is impossible to directly measure

study skills, we can measure an indicator of these skills. The university that provided us

with the data had six classes for which the professors delivered lectures and the students


                                              9
watched the lectures on-line. All of these classes are required for at least one major and

several of them are required for many different majors across the university. The

students in these majors must take these on-line classes. For these six on-line classes, for

the Spring 2003 semester the university recorded not only the date of download for each

online-viewed class, but also the specific lecture downloaded. We can therefore identify

the degree to which students delay watching lectures, which is one measure of cramming

for the exam and one potentially important study skill.



Our data consist of observations on 2064 students who attended 249 public high schools

in the state for which students in both the high school graduating classes of 2000 and

2001 are present in the data. Using these data, we first study the extent of cramming, its

persistence across courses, and its effect on students’ grades. Then we explore whether

accountability sanctions can lead to cramming behavior.



Figure 1 illustrates definitively that cramming for exams occurs and is widespread in the

online-viewed classes. Each of the six graphs presents time-series plots of the fraction of

first-time downloads of lectures per day, per course. It is immediately apparent that the

pattern of downloads exhibits large cycles, and the dates of the exams in each course are

obvious by inspection. Table 3 presents similar data in tabular form. The second column

shows that 16 percent of the lectures were first downloaded by students on the day they

were delivered and another 20 percent of the lectures were first downloaded over the next

two days. But one-quarter of lectures delivered more than one week before the exam

were first downloaded in the week prior to the exam and the same fraction is true for

those lectures delivered more than two weeks before the exam. Looking more strictly at


                                             10
last minute cramming, three percent of the lectures were downloaded for the first time on

the day of the test, and another nine percent of the lectures were downloaded for the first

time one or two days before the test (this is not counting lectures delivered close to the

time of the test in question.) For empirical purposes, we define cramming as the fraction

of lectures delivered seven or more days before an exam that were first downloaded

within two days of an exam. Table 3 shows that by this definition, over 13 percent of

lectures were crammed.



The argument that accountability sanction threats teach cramming behavior requires that,

for some students, cramming is a “trait” – an attribute of the student that persists and not

simply the random occurrence within a specific class. Tables 4 and 5 present some

evidence that this is the case. We observe (see Table 4) that some students consistently

kept up with lectures while others consistently procrastinated. The second column shows

that 31 percent of students were never observed downloading a lecture within two days of

the lecture delivery and only 2.5 percent of students downloaded every lecture within two

days of delivery. 57 percent of students downloaded fewer than one-fifth of the lectures

within two days of delivery. While few students waited until the last moment to

download every lecture, a non-trivial fraction of students delayed downloads of many

lectures. Column three shows that over 2 percent of students first viewed more than half

of their lectures for the first time (!) within two days of an exam and over 10 percent first

downloaded at least one-fifth of their lectures within two days of an exam. The presence




                                             11
of these patterns suggests that students tend either to keep up with the course or to delay

viewing the lectures. 5



Table 5 illustrates that students who tend to cram in one class tend to cram in all of their

classes. This table presents a cross-tabulation of students’ cramming behavior in two

courses taken simultaneously, for the set of students for whom behavior in two courses is

observed. The top panel investigates the percentage of lectures downloaded within two

days of delivery. We observe that if a student in course #1 downloaded less than one-

third of lectures within two days of delivery, he or she was very likely to do the same (69

percent) in his or her other class, and only had a 15 percent chance of downloading more

than two-thirds of the lectures in the other class within two days of delivery. On the other

hand, if the student in course #1 downloaded more than two-thirds of lectures within two

days of delivery, he or she had a 43 percent chance of downloading less than one-third of

lectures in his or her other class within two days, but had a 41 percent chance of

downloading two-thirds or more of lectures in his or her other class within two days of

delivery. The bottom panel presents similar evidence for downloading classes within two

days of an exam. In this panel, if a student downloaded 0 percent of the lectures for the

first time within 2 days of an exam for the first class, there was an 82 percent chance that

the student also downloaded 0 percent of lectures in the second course within 2 days of

an exam and only a 5 percent chance of downloading more than one-fifth of the lectures

within 2 days of an exam. The lesson from these tables is that while cramming in courses



5
 Table 4 shows the persistence of cramming for all students for all classes. There is also considerable
within-student persistence within any given course. Students who tend to cram for the first exam in a
course also tend to cram for the second exam in the course.


                                                     12
does not follow a one-to-one correspondence, there is a very high degree of within-

student persistence in cramming across classes.



Table 6 shows that students who cram are somewhat more likely to be male, somewhat

more likely to be Hispanic and Asian, and tend to have higher SAT scores than do

students who don’t cram. While high school grade point averages are slightly higher for

cramming students as for those who do not cram, the differences are not great.



Given that cramming tends to persist for individual students, the next logical question is

whether cramming has a deleterious effect on student outcomes in the class in which

cramming occurs. Table 7 presents separate regressions of the relationship between

cramming behavior (as measured by the fraction of classes delivered more than a week in

advance of the test and first downloaded within two days of the exam) and a student’s

grade in the class, for each of the six online classes. We observe a consistent pattern

between cramming and course performance: holding constant student attributes, students

who cram more tend to perform at a lower level in the class. This correlation is

significant at conventional levels in five the six regressions. Table 7 also presents

separate regressions for students who attended threatened schools in either accountability

regime, and those who attended schools that were not threatened in either accountability

regime. Though not all the coefficients attain conventional levels of statistical

significance, the signs of all the estimated coefficients are negative so we again observe

consistent evidence of a negative relationship between cramming behavior and student

course grades, regardless of the nature of the high school that the student attended, and

across courses. In sum, student cramming persists across time within a course, and


                                             13
across courses, and is associated with reduced student course performance. Recall that if

anything, cramming students tend to look better on observables (in terms of SAT scores

and perhaps in terms of high school grade point average) than do students who cram less.

So it is important to explore whether accountability sanction threats lead high schools to

“teach” their high-performing, college-bound students to cram. We turn to this

possibility next.



Do accountability sanction threats induce student cramming?

Table 8 presents estimates of the relationship between accountability sanction threats and

student cramming behavior. Two measures of cramming are presented – the fraction of

total lectures first downloaded within one week of the exam and the fraction of total

lectures delivered a week or more before the exam and first downloaded within two days

of the exam. We estimate the model:

(Fraction of lectures downloaded)isc =   s   + αc + γXisc + β(Accountability threat)sc + µisc ,

where X is a vector of student background characteristics (race/ethnicity, sex, high school

adjusted grade point average, and SAT scores), s represents the high school attended and

c represents the student’s graduating class. Because outcomes might differ depending on

which accountability regime is active at the relevant time for a given student i, we

estimate two β coefficients – one for the estimated effect of the old accountability

sanctions and one for the estimated effect of the new accountability sanctions. If the




                                              14
accountability system induces increased cramming behavior, the estimated β coefficients

on the presence of threatened sanctions will be positive.6



The results in Table 8 show that cramming behavior is associated with accountability

sanction threats. When such a threat is removed, students attending a formerly-

sanctioned school subsequently cram less in college than do their predecessors who

attended the high school when the school was threatened. Conversely, when a new threat

is introduced, students attending a newly-sanctioned school subsequently cram more in

college than did their predecessors who attended the high school before it was threatened.

The estimated effects of the new accountability system are greater in magnitude and

statistical significance than are the estimated effects of the older accountability system.

This finding is consistent with the suggestion that the the new accountability system, with

its increased emphasis on all students’ test scores, may teach higher-achieving students to

cram more than did the older accountability system, under which the higher-performing

students could basically have been neglected.



To help insure the robustness of our results, we conducted two falsification exercises.

The first such exercise, reported in the second column of Table 9, utilizes data from the

graduation classes of 1999 and 2000, rather than 2000 and 2001, and assumes that the

accountability system switch occurred a year before it actually did.7 We observe that

there is no apparent relationship between cramming and changes in accountability

regimes when the accountability regime did not actually change.
6
 A full set of coefficient estimates is presented in Appendix Table 1.
7
 The number of observations differs from the first and third column because the number of relevant
schools and students is different in this exercise. The results of the falsification exercise are virtually
unchanged were we to limit the sample of schools to be the same as in the first and third columns.


                                                       15
Our second falsification exercise involves using the same data as in the actual analysis,

but applying the 1998 standards to test scores realized in 1999 and 1999 standards to test

scores realized in 1998, for the purposes of calculating which schools would have been

sanctioned if the systems, but not the test scores used to determine a school’s

accountability grades, had been swapped. Again, we find no apparent relationship

between measured cramming and this other characterization of school test scores. These

results suggest that it is the potential sanctions from the accountability system, and not

the actual school performance underlying the accountability system, that apparently led to

teaching cramming behavior to an affected school’s students. Our results also indicate

that schools apparently responded rapidly to the change in accountability regimes. The

first year after a school is newly threatened with sanctions or newly relieved of potential

sanctions, the empirical results demonstrate an immediate change in their college-bound

students’ study habits.



Effects of accountability on collegiate grades

Given that school accountability systems of both types apparently induced a persistent

change in study behavior among college-bound students, it is interesting to determine the

degree to which school accountability has affected these students’ performances in

college. The same forces that led to changes in outcomes could have made students more

effective or less effective class-takers because, in addition to teaching college-bound

students to cram, school accountability pressures may have either improved or harmed

these students’ human capital directly by increasing or decreasing their knowledge in

particular fields. Given the differences in the accountability systems, we expect that the

threat of sanctions with old system, under which high-performing students could be


                                             16
neglected, would have more adverse net consequences for high-performing students than

similar threats under the new system, which is based on meeting higher-level proficiency

targets linked to the curriculum. To examine this issue, we focus on the introductory

classes taken at the university. These courses, with the first digit being a “1” or a “2”, are

typically taken by freshmen and sophomores at the university. This set of courses is

much more inclusive than the six courses considered in the cramming portion of this

paper. The university in question provided us with a broader data set that we can use for

this analysis. Between Fall 2002 and Fall 2004, for every student who ever took one of

the six Internet courses we focused upon above, the university provided us with transcript

data giving us the grades in all their courses and admission data.8 These students account

for over three-quarters of the students at the university, so selection into the sample does

not seem to be at issue. We focus on the all the introductory courses taken by these

students, regardless of when they took the course. Our approach is to estimate variants of

the following model:

                 (Grade)isc =    s   + αc + γXisc + β (Accountability threat)sc + µisc ,

where all notation is as before and “Grade” is the student’s grade in the ith introductory

course. In addition, we include course-specific fixed effects to account for the fact that

student grades differ dramatically from one class to another at the university.



Table 9 presents evidence of the relationship between student grades and accountability

sanction threats for students in introductory courses at the university in question. Each

row represents a different set of courses, and the two estimated β coefficients for each


8
    Unfortunately we had the download data we used for the analysis above for only the one semester.


                                                     17
regression are reported in the table.9 The first column of the table shows the estimated

effects of the old accountability sanction threats, while the second column shows the

estimated effects of the new accountability system. The outcome is a student’s course

grade (on a four-point scale, with a grade of “A” being 4 points).



The first row of Table 9 illustrates the estimated effects of school accountability regimes

on student grades across all introductory subjects at the university. The results are starkly

different from the cramming results earlier: While the old school accountability system,

based on low-level tests of basic skills, appears to have a negative impact on the

collegiate performance of college-bound students who attended potentially-sanctioned

high schools, the new accountability system improved the performance of these students.

Apparently the beneficial effects of the new system’s increased emphasis on higher level

skills overcame its tendency to teach students to cram so that the net effect on students’

grades in introductory courses was positive. Moreover, the estimated effects are

relatively large in addition to being statistically significant: Given that the mean college

grade is a “B”, an increase or decrease of 0.1 grade points is a large change.



Both accountability systems placed emphasis on student performance in mathematics,

reading, and writing. While it is difficult to measure courses in reading comprehension in

college, we can directly test for estimated effects of school accountability systems on

mathematics and English composition. The second and third rows present the estimated

effects of accountability on math classes (e.g., calculus, college algebra, introductory


9
 The coefficient estimates on race/ethnicity, sex, graduation class, SAT scores, and high school grade point
average are available upon request from the authors.


                                                    18
statistics, quantitative methods) and English composition classes. We observe that the

estimated effects of the old accountability system are negative for these classes as well,

but the estimated effects of the new accountability system are particularly strong and

positive for the mathematics classes. If schools were responding to higher standards

embedded in the new accountability system, it follows that mathematics training may be

improved, an effect manifested in higher performance once at the university. On the

other hand, there is no apparent positive effect of the new accountability system in

English composition classes. This might be due to the possibility that the new

accountability standards for writing focused on formulaic writing skills that reflect clarity

of expression and exposition, but not higher-order writing skills.



The fourth row of Table 9 considers the relatively quantitative non-mathematics courses

at the university in question. We define “relatively quantitative” as the courses where the

average mathematics SAT scores of students taking the class exceeded the university

average; these courses include introductory chemistry, physics, economics, and other

similar classes. We find evidence of positive effects of the new accountability system –

though half the size of the estimated effects on mathematics courses – as well as negative

estimated effects of the older accountability system. This implies that the higher

mathematics standards in the new accountability system appear to have positive

spillovers to the other quantitative courses at the university.



Finally, the fifth row of Table 9 presents estimated effects of the two accountability

standards on the relatively un-quantitative courses at the university. We continue to find

negative, significant estimated effects of the old accountability system. However, the


                                              19
estimated effect of the new accountability system on the less quantitative system is

statistically and economically around zero. This result indicates that the potential

positive benefit of the new accountability system is concentrated in the more

mathematical courses, suggesting a positive spillover from increased pressure of schools

to perform, especially in mathematics.



While we believe that an accountability system based on poorly-defined standards and

low-level skills, such as the system in place before 1999, leads to reduced student

performance in college, an alternative explanation for the findings that the old

accountability system had a generally negative consequence is that the schools that were

threatened with sanctions have been improving over time – either due to the

accountability system or for other reasons. There are at least three reasons to believe that

this is not the case. First, we note that we are comparing two adjacent cohorts of students

from the same school. Because these students came from the same schools, it is unlikely

that there were massive changes in student composition from one year to the next. In

addition, these students shared three of the four years of high school together. It

therefore seems more likely that the findings presented herein are due to shocks to a

school from one year to the next, rather than temporal trends. More compelling is the

finding that schools which were threatened with sanctions under the former regime but no

longer threatened with sanctions under the new regime did not improve their aggregate

test scores (as reported by the state’s department of education) from one year to the next.

This fact indicates that it was the regime change, rather than improvements due to

incentives put in place under the old accountability regime, that led to the changes in

observed behavior by students once they came to the university. Finally, we conducted


                                             20
falsification exercises in which we feed each cohort’s aggregate test scores through the

other cohort’s accountability regime; we find no evidence that changes in student

attributes or test scores are responsible for the patterns described herein. Rather, the

patterns appear due to the design of the accountability regimes themselves.



Conclusion

This paper presents the first evidence of the effects of school accountability systems on

the long-term human capital development of high-performing, college-bound students.

The results are mixed. On the one hand, the evidence is consistent that school

accountability sanction threats are associated with changes in student study habits.

Students who attended high schools that were threatened with accountability sanctions

systematically study differently than did their school-mates who graduated from high

school in an adjacent year but who were not directly affected by the school’s threat of

sanctions. Students from high schools threatened with sanctions postpone studying and

cram more than students from the same high schools when the schools were not

threatened with sanctions. The tendency toward increased cramming seems likely to

result when threatened schools place a heavy emphasis on the outcomes of a specific test,

rather than on overall learning outcomes over the entire year. We also find evidence that

the induced increase in student cramming, ceteris paribus, leads to reduced course

performance in the classes in which the student crams.



On the other hand, whether school accountability sanction threats lead to lower overall

student course performance than would have occurred in the absence of such threats is

not as clear. We observe that students attending high schools that were threatened with


                                             21
sanctions under the state’s old accountability regime tended to perform at a lower level in

their coursework at the university, all else equal. But we do not observe this same pattern

with regard to the new accountability regime. In fact, students attending high schools

threatened with the new sanctions performed at a higher level in mathematics and

quantitative courses than their school-mates had previously done, all else equal, but the

differential performance is not observed in less quantitative courses. We suspect that the

difference in outcomes across these accountability regimes – and across course subjects

in the new accountability regime – is due to the standards-based nature of the new

accountability regime and to the subjects emphasized in the new accountability system.



These results provide potential lessons for the design of accountability systems. The

finding that students are apparently better prepared for college coursework in the specific

subjects that are emphasized by the accountability system suggests that accountability

systems that cover more subject areas may in turn produce better-prepared students. At

the same time, the finding that students performed better when their schools were

threatened with sanctions under a standards-based accountability system than under an

accountability system with lower standards indicates that a system with high-quality tests

closely aligned with rigorous standards is likely to yield better student preparation for

higher education. Indeed, one result that seems unambiguous is that an accountability

system based on poorly-defined standards and low-level skills unambiguously harms

college-bound students from high schools that are threatened with sanctions. Students

from these high schools not only cram but also do significantly worse in their

introductory college classes.




                                             22
To the extent to which school accountability systems encourages ignoring college-bound

students, the systems may lead to the unintended consequence of adversely changing the

ways in which high-performing students approach learning and scholarship. Hence the

design of the accountability system is perhaps more important that previously thought.

Accountability systems, such as Florida’s system implemented in 2002, that reward and

sanction schools based on gains in students’ scores rather than levels of students’

performance might present schools with less of an incentive to substitute effort away

from higher-performing students toward lower-performing students. But this suggestion

must remain speculation at the present because determining the impact of this new

accountability system will require additional research.




                                            23
                                      References

Boyd, Don, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. “Do High-Stakes
      Tests Affect Teachers’ Exit and Transfer Decisions? The Case of the 4th Grade
      Test in New York State.” Unpublished Manuscript, Stanford Graduate School of
      Education, 2002.

Carnoy, Martin and Susanna Loeb. “Does External Accountability Affect Student
      Outcomes” A Cross-State Analysis.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
      Winter 2002, 24(4), pp. 305-331.

Cullen, Julie Berry and Randall Reback. “Tinkering Toward Accolades: School Gaming
       under a Performance Accountability System.” in Tim Gronberg and Dennis
       Jansen, eds., Advances in Microeconomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science,
       forthcoming 2006.

Deere, Donald and Wayne Strayer. “Putting Schools to the Test: School Accountability,
       Incentives, and Behavior.” Unpublished Manuscript, Texas A&M University,
       March 2001.

Figlio, David. “Testing, Crime and Punishment.” National Bureau of Economic Research
        (Cambridge, MA) Journal of Public Economics, 2006.

Figlio, David N. and Lawrence S. Getzler. “Accountability, Ability, and Disability:
        Gaming the System,” in Tim Gronberg and Dennis Jansen, eds., Advances in
        Microeconomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, forthcoming 2006.

Figlio, David N. and Cecilia Elena Rouse. “Do Accountability and Voucher Threats
        Improve Low-Performing Schools?” Journal of Public Economics, January 2006,
        90(1-2), pp. 239-255.

Figlio, David N. and Joshua Winicki. “Food for Thought: The Effects of School
        Accountability Plans on School Nutrition.” Journal of Public Economics,
        February 2005, 89(2-3), pp. 381-394.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Margaret E. Raymond. “The Effect of School Accountability
      Systems on the Level and Distribution of Student Achievement.” Journal of the
      European Economic Association, April-May 2005, 2(2-3), pp. 406-415.

Jacob, Brian A. “Accountability , Incentives and Behavior: The Impact of High-Stakes
       Testing in the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public Economics, June 2005,
       89(5-6), pp. 761-796.




                                           24
Figure 1: Time-series patterns of first time student downloads of lectures, six Internet
courses, Spring 2003
       .04




                                                                                          .03
       .03




                                                                                          .02
 fraction




                                                                                    fraction
    .02




                                                                                          .01
       .01
       0




                                                                                          0
            15700               15750                 15800               15850                15700   15750         15800   15850
                                            day                                                                day


Course A with four midterm exams                                                   Course B with three midterm exams




                                                                                          .04
       .03




                                                                                          .03
       .02
 fraction




                                                                                    fraction
                                                                                       .02
       .01




                                                                                          .01
       0




                                                                                          0




            15700               15750                 15800               15850                15700   15750         15800   15850
                                            day                                                                day


Course C with one quiz and three midterm exams                                     Course D with three midterms and optional final
                                                                                          .03
       .04
       .03




                                                                                          .02
 fraction




                                                                                    fraction
  .02




                                                                                          .01
       .01
       0




                                                                                          0




                15720   15740       15760         15780       15800   15820                    15700   15750         15800   15850
                                            day                                                                day


Course E with four midterm exams                                                   Course F with three midterm exams




                                                                                  25
Table 1: Transitions from one accountability system to another, high school classes of
2000 and 2001:

                                              High school threatened with sanctions in
                                              high-stakes test year, class of 2001
                                                       No                      Yes
High school                    No                    0.689                  0.021
threatened with
sanctions in high-
stakes test year,
                               Yes                   0.198                  0.091
class of 2000




                                           26
Table 2: Attributes of students in study, by high school transition, high school classes of
2000 and 2001
In-state public school graduates only

                            High school               High school
                         transitioned from        transitioned from    High school did not
                          unthreatened to            threatened to        change status
                             threatened              unthreatened
Male                            0.56                     0.48                0.49
Black                           0.13                     0.08                0.06
Hispanic                        0.21                     0.08                0.09
Asian                           0.12                     0.13                0.08
SAT score                       1196                     1218               1239
Adjusted high                    3.8                      3.9                 3.9
school GPA
Comparing attributes of students in each of the two high school graduation cohorts
SAT scores: high              1174                    1208                  1233
school class of 2000
SAT scores: high              1208                    1228                  1245
school class of 2001




                                             27
Table 3: Patterns of first time student downloads of lectures, six Internet courses, Spring
2003

                                                    Fraction of first     Fraction of first
                          Fraction of first        downloads, lecture    downloads, lecture
Timing of download          downloads              delivered >=7 days   delivered >=14 days
                                                       before test           before test
Day of lecture                 0.159                      0.140                0.137
1-2 days later                 0.203                      0.177                0.167
3-6 days later                 0.253                      0.235                0.199
>=7 days later,                0.168                      0.196                0.271
>=7 days before test
>=7 days later,                0.099                     0.116                 0.123
3-6 days before test
>=7 days later,                0.086                     0.100                 0.084
1-2 days before test
>=7 days later,                0.032                     0.037                 0.019
Day of test




                                              28
Table 4: Cramming as a trait:
Percentage of lectures downloaded immediately or at the last moment, by student

                                                            Fraction of students: Percentage
                                 Fraction of students:        of lectures downloaded 2 or
        Frequency               Percentage of lectures      fewer days before the exam (for
                              downloaded within 2 days        lectures delivered >=7 days
                                      of delivery                     before exam)
          Never                          0.311                            0.533
         0.1-9.9%                        0.132                            0.263
         10-19.9%                        0.131                            0.102
         20-29.9%                        0.098                            0.045
         30-39.9%                        0.067                            0.021
         40-49.9%                        0.052                            0.015
         50-59.9%                        0.051                            0.010
         60-69.9%                        0.043                            0.006
         70-79.9%                        0.037                            0.002
         80-89.9%                        0.036                            0.002
         90-99.9%                        0.017                            0.001
          Always                         0.025                            0.001




                                          29
Table 5: Cramming as a trait:
Persistence of cramming behavior across classes, by student (row percentages)

Panel 1: Lectures downloaded 2 or fewer days after delivery (mean: 25.1%)
                                    Percentage of lectures downloaded 2 or fewer days
                                    after delivery, class #2
                                        0-33.3%            33.4-66.6%     66.7-100%
Percentage of        0-33.3%              0.691               0.159          0.151
lectures            33.4-66.6%            0.565               0.272          0.164
downloaded 2 or     66.7-100%             0.428               0.162          0.410
fewer days after
delivery, class #1

Panel 2: Lectures downloaded 2 or fewer days prior to exam, for lectures delivered >=7
days before exam (mean: 6.5%)
                                    Percentage of lectures downloaded 2 or fewer days
                                    prior to exam, class #2
                                           0%              0.1-20%            >20%
Percentage of           0%                0.819             0.128             0.054
lectures             0.1-20%              0.622             0.300             0.078
downloaded 2 or       >20%                0.516             0.258             0.226
fewer days prior
to exam, class #1




                                          30
Table 6: Attributes of students with different levels of cramming behavior

                       Percentage of lectures downloaded 2 or fewer days before exam
                             0-33.3%             33.4-66.6%             66.7-100%
Male                           0.54                  0.55                  0.62
Black                          0.06                  0.09                  0.08
Hispanic                       0.11                  0.12                  0.14
Asian                          0.08                  0.08                  0.11
SAT score                     1189                   1210                  1227
Adjusted high                  3.84                  3.83                  3.89
school GPA




                                           31
Table 7: Cramming and student course performance
Student-level relationship between course grade and cramming behavior

                       Coefficient on fraction of classes first downloaded 2 or fewer days
                       before exam
                       All students in the    Students who            Students who
                       class                  attended threatened attended schools not
                                              schools in either       threatened in either
                                              accountability          accountability
                                              regime                  regime
Course A                     -1.875**                -2.079**               -1.441
                             (0.649)                 (1.065)                (1.098)
Course B                     -0.371**                -0.084                 -0.535**
                             (0.141)                 (0.268)                (0.165)
Course C                     -1.558**                -2.032*                -1.090*
                             (0.462)                 (0.766)                (0.621)
Course D                     -0.446                  -1.919                 -0.440
                             (0.458)                 (2.564)                (0.429)
Course E                     -0.810**                -0.726*                -0.943**
                             (0.239)                 (0.474)                (0.280)
Course F                     -1.046**                -0.868*                -1.151**
                             (0.258)                 (0.509)                (0.294)

Note: Each cell represents a separate regression. Regressions also control for student sex,
race/ethnicity, SAT scores, and high school grade point average. Coefficients marked *
(**) are statistically significant at the ten (five) percent level.




                                            32
Table 8: Estimated effects of changing accountability regimes on student cramming
behavior:
High school fixed effects regressions; clustered standard errors in parentheses
Dependent variable: fraction of total classes first downloaded within week (two days) of
exam
In-state public school graduates only

                       Specification 1:       Falsification test 1:   Falsification test
                       Actual                 Assume that             2:Apply 1998
                       accountability         accountability          standards to 1999
                       sanctions included     switch occurred one     scores, and 1999
                       in model               year before it did      standards to 1998
                       (graduation years      (graduation years       scores (graduation
                       2000,2001)             1999, 2000)             years 2000, 2001)
Number of students             2064                   2394                    2064
Number of schools               249                    265                     249
present in both years
Cramming measure: Fraction of total lectures downloaded within the week before the
exam
Estimated effect of       0.030*                   0.007                -0.010
old accountability       (0.017)                  (0.019)               (0.027)
sanction threat
Estimated effect of       0.078**                 -0.008                 0.016
new accountability       (0.035)                  (0.026)               (0.032)
sanction threat
Cramming measure: Fraction of total lectures downloaded 2 or fewer days before exam
Estimated effect of       0.027*                   0.014               -0.016
old accountability       (0.015)                  (0.017)              (0.028)
sanction threat
Estimated effect of       0.062**                  0.008                 0.015
new accountability       (0.032)                  (0.025)              (0.026)
sanction threat

Note: Coefficients marked * (**) are statistically significant at the ten (five) percent
level. Clustered standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions also include school fixed
effects, course fixed effects, time effects, student race/ethnicity variables, student sex,
student high school grade point average, and student SAT scores.




                                            33
Table 9: Estimated effects of changing accountability regimes on student course
outcomes:
High school fixed effects regressions; clustered standard errors in parentheses
Dependent variable: grade in introductory course

Introductory course           Estimated effect of old        Estimated effect of new
                              accountability sanction        accountability sanction
                              threat                         threat
All introductory courses              -0.097**                         0.100**
                                      (0.030)                         (0.051)
Mathematics courses                   -0.149**                         0.277**
                                      (0.078)                         (0.115)
English composition                   -0.173**                        -0.048
courses                               (0.061)                         (0.088)
Other quantitative courses            -0.139*                          0.118*
                                      (0.042)                         (0.066)
Less quantitative courses             -0.064**                         0.044
                                      (0.029)                         (0.051)

Note: Coefficients marked * (**) are statistically significant at the ten (five) percent
level. Clustered standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions also include school fixed
effects, time effects, student race/ethnicity variables, student sex, student high school
grade point average, and student SAT scores, as well as course fixed effects.




                                           34
Appendix Table 1: Full set of coefficient estimates (except for course fixed effects and
high school fixed effects): Table 8, specification 1, top panel

                             Variable                             Coefficient
                                                               (standard error)
          Old accountability sanctions × post-change               0.030*
                                                                  (0.017)
          New accountability sanctions × pre-change                0.078**
                                                                  (0.035)
          Post-change                                             -0.007
                                                                  (0.014)
          Male                                                     0.016
                                                                  (0.012)
          Black                                                    0.002
                                                                  (0.041)
          White                                                   -0.004
                                                                  (0.033)
          Asian                                                    0.050
                                                                  (0.037)
          Hispanic                                                 0.027
                                                                  (0.038)
          Have SAT score                                          -0.093
                                                                  (0.070)
          SAT score                                                0.00006
                                                                  (0.00006)
          Have high school GPA                                    -0.075
                                                                  (0.065)
          Adjusted high school GPA                                 0.021
                                                                  (0.017)

Note: Coefficients marked * (**) are statistically significant at the ten (five) percent
level. Clustered standard errors are in parentheses.




                                             35
