                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYZING AND MANAGING MACROFINANCIAL
                       RISKS OF AN ECONOMY

                                           Dale F. Gray
                                         Robert C. Merton
                                            Zvi Bodie

                                       Working Paper 12637
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12637


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Dale F. Gray, Robert C. Merton, and Zvi Bodie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A New Framework for Analyzing and Managing Macrofinancial Risks of an Economy
Dale F. Gray, Robert C. Merton, and Zvi Bodie
NBER Working Paper No. 12637
October 2006
JEL No. E5,E6,G2,H0

                                              ABSTRACT

The high cost of international economic and financial crises highlights the need for a comprehensive
framework to assess the robustness of national economic and financial systems. This paper proposes
a new comprehensive approach to measure, analyze, and manage macroeconomic risk based on the
theory and practice of modern contingent claims analysis (CCA). We illustrate how to use the CCA
approach to model and measure sectoral and national risk exposures, and analyze policies to offset
their potentially harmful effects. This new framework provides economic balance sheets for inter-linked
sectors and a risk accounting framework for an economy. CCA provides a natural framework for analysis
of mismatches between an entity's assets and liabilities, such as currency and maturity mismatches
on balance sheets. Policies or actions that reduce these mismatches will help reduce risk and vulnerability.
 It also provides a new framework for sovereign capital structure analysis. It is useful for assessing
vulnerability, policy analysis, risk management, investment analysis, and design of risk control strategies.
 Both public and private sector participants can benefit from pursuing ways to facilitate more efficient
macro risk accounting, improve price and volatility discovery, and expand international risk intermediation
activities.

Dale F. Gray
International Monetary Fund and MF Risk              Zvi Bodie
5921 Searl Terace                                    School of Management
Bethesda, MD 20816                                   Boston University
dgray@imf.org and dgray@mfrisk.com                   704 Commonwealth Avenue
                                                     Boston, MA 02215
Robert C. Merton                                     zbodie@bu.edu
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University, Baker Library 353
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rmerton@hbs.edu
    A New Framework for Analyzing and Managing Macrofinancial Risks
                            of an Economy
                                                  By
                           Dale F. Gray, Robert C. Merton, Zvi Bodie


Introduction
          Vulnerability of a national economy to volatility in the global markets for credit,
currencies, commodities, and other assets has become a central concern of policymakers,
credit analysts, and investors everywhere. This paper describes a new framework for
analyzing a country's exposure to macroeconomic risks based on the theory and practice
of contingent claims analysis.1 In this framework, the sectors of a national economy are
viewed as interconnected portfolios of assets, liabilities, and guarantees, that can be
analyzed like puts and calls. We measure the sensitivities of the market values of these
portfolios to "shocks" in underlying market risk factors, and we illustrate how to use
contingent claims analysis to quantify sovereign credit risk. This framework makes it
transparent how risks are transferred across sectors, and how they can accumulate in the
balance sheet of the public sector and ultimately lead to a default by the government.
CCA provides a natural framework for analysis of mismatches between an entity’s assets
and liabilities, such as currency and maturity mismatches on balance sheets. The
framework also facilitates the quantification of these risk relationships and highlights
their non-linear character.


Contingent Claims Analysis
          A contingent claim is any financial asset whose future payoff depends on the
value of another asset. The prototypical contingent claim is an option – the right to buy
or sell the underlying asset at a specified exercise price by a certain expiration date. A
call is an option to buy; a put is an option to sell. Contingent claims analysis is a
generalization of the option pricing theory pioneered by Black-Scholes (1973) and
Merton (1973). Since 1973, option pricing methodology has been applied to a wide


1
 See Merton (1974, 1977, 1992, 1998). When applied to debt and equity securities, contingent claims
analysis is commonly called the "Merton Model."


                                                   2
variety of contingent claims. In this paper we focus on its application to the analysis of
credit risk and guarantees against the risk of default.
             The contingent claims approach is based on three principles: (i) the values of
liabilities are derived from assets; (ii) liabilities have different priority (i.e. senior and
junior claims); and, (iii) assets follow a stochastic process. The liabilities consist of
senior claims (such as senior debt), subordinated claims (such as subordinated debt) and
the junior claims (equity or the most junior claim). As total assets decline, the value of
risky debt declines, and credit spreads on risky debt rise. (See Annex 1 for more details.)
           Balance sheet risk is the key to understanding credit risk and crisis probabilities.
Default happens when assets cannot service debt payments. Uncertain changes in future
asset value, relative to promised payments on debt, is the driver of default risk. Shocks to
flows, prices, or liquidity frequently end up being converted into credit risk in a crisis.
But macro models do not handle credit risk well. Financial fragility is intimately related
to probability of default. Default is hard to handle in traditional macro models in part due
to assumptions which usually exclude the possibility of default. In addition, flow-of-
funds and accounting balance sheets cannot provide measures of risk exposures which are
forward-looking estimates of losses.



    Contingent Claim Balance Sheets for Sectors
We view an economy as a set of interrelated balance sheets with three types of aggregate
sectors – corporate, financial, and public sector.2 The same general principles of
contingent claims that apply to analysis of a single firm can also be applied to an
aggregation of firms. The liabilities of a firm, a portfolio of firms in a sector, or the
public sector (combined government and monetary authorities) can be valued as
contingent claims on the assets of the respective firm, sector or public sector. The
corporate sector refers to an aggregation of all non-financial firms. A more accurate
model of a sector would be CCA models for each individual firm or financial institution
and then group them into an aggregate portfolio. Treating the sector as one large firm is
simpler and capture certain risk characteristics of the sector for the purposes of this


2
    Gray, Merton, Bodie (2002); Draghi, Merton, Giavazzi, (2002); Gray (2002).


                                                     3
analysis, but data permitting, a portfolio of CCA models of individual firms or
institutions provides a richer model.

             Governments and central banks typically provide explicit or implicit financial
    support to large financial institutions in the case of serious deposit runs, illiquidity or
    insolvency. The financial guarantee from the government is a contingent asset, which is
    modeled as a put option. Interlinked CCA balance sheets for the corporate sector, the
    financial sector and the public sector are shown in Figure 1.3




3
 The household sector balance sheet can be added, with household income and assets comprising assets.
Household non-discretionary expenditures are the senior liability, debt as a subordinated obligation and
discretionary expenditures of households being the junior claim.


                                                    4
Figure 1 – Interlinked CCA Balance Sheets for the Economy
              Assets                                 Liabilities

CORPORATE SECTOR


                                                             Debt
            Corporate Assets                    (default-free value minus put
                                                            option)

                                                          Equity
                                            (call option on corporate assets)

FINANCIAL SECTOR


          Loans and other Assets                Debt / Deposits / Liabilities
    (including loans to corporate sector        (default-free value minus put
             and public sector)                             option)

          Financial Guarantees                            Equity
         (modeled as put option)           (call option on financial sector total
                                                          assets)
PUBLIC SECTOR (Government and Monetary Authorities)

             TOTAL ASSETS                    Financial Guarantees (modeled
                                               as put options related to too-
            Foreign Currency                   important-to-fail financial and
       (including contingent foreign                   other entities)
                 reserves)
                                                    Foreign-currency Debt
          Net Fiscal Asset and                  (default-free value of debt minus
          Other Public Assets                               put option)

      Value of Other Public Sector                     Base Money and
                Assets                               Local-currency Debt
                                                Held Outside of the Government
                                                   and Monetary Authorities
                                                 (call options on public sector
                                                            assets)




                                            5
         The public sector balance sheet is an analytical economic balance sheet of the
combined government and the monetary authorities.4 The goal is to construct the liability
side of the balance sheet so that the liabilities can be valued and linked to the value of
total assets. The combined balance sheet for the public sector is shown in Figure 2. The
numeraire can be in local or foreign currency units. The CCA balance sheets for large
developed economies with “hard” currencies are measured in units of local currency.
The CCA balance sheets of emerging market countries with “soft” currencies are usually
measured in a “hard” currency (e.g. US dollar) because it simplifies the analysis and we
are interested in valuation and credit risk associated with claims denominated in hard
currencies, such as foreign-currency denominated debt.


Figure 2 – Stylized Balance Sheet for the Public Sector

                  Assets                                        Liabilities


                                                                Guarantees
               Foreign Reserves

                                                         Foreign-currency Debt
                Net Fiscal Asset

                                                         Local-currency Debt
             Other Public Assets                       (held outside of monetary
                                                      authorities and government)

                                                               Base Money




4
 This analytical combined balance sheet includes the monetary authority activities related to foreign
currency reserves and “net domestic credit” to government but excludes the direct activities of the




                                                     6
         Assets include: foreign currency reserves and contingent foreign currency
reserves;5 net fiscal asset (present value of taxes and revenues, including seignorage, less
present value of government expenditures); and other public assets (e.g. equity in public
enterprises, value of the public sector’s monopoly on the issue of money, and other
financial and non-financial assets). Liabilities include: local-currency debt; foreign-
currency debt; financial guarantees; and base money. See Appendix 2 for details. It is
useful to look into the relationships between items in four categories: fiscal activities,
monetary and foreign currency reserve activities, risky debt, and financial guarantees.
           Fiscal Assets and Liabilities – In this framework, the items related to fiscal
assets and liabilities are taxes, revenues and expenditures. Expenditures can be divided
into non-discretionary expenditures which are senior claims, and discretionary
expenditures which are junior claims. Non-discretionary expenditures are core
expenditures (e.g., defense, education, core infrastructure, welfare, etc.) that will not be
given up before giving up on paying the debt. Operationally, discretionary expenditures
are ones that are subordinated to the explicit liability claims against the government.
Discretionary expenditures may become especially significant in situations of high fiscal
revenue such as windfalls from oil or natural resources.
           Under stress situations, the government maintains the non-discretionary
expenditures and cuts the discretionary expenditures. Under these assumptions, we can
subtract the present value of non-discretionary expenditures from the present value of tax
capability to obtain the net fiscal asset,6 given that non-discretionary expenditures are
clearly senior claims and have the same maturity patterns as taxes and fiscal revenues.
The net fiscal asset is thus similar to the present value of the primary fiscal surplus over
time (the present value of fiscal surplus minus interest payments). This step also
simplifies the process of constructing the CCA balance sheet because it is much easier to


monetary authority with the banking sector, such as credit and liquidity support activities that do not go
through the government balance sheet or affect foreign exchange reserves.
5
  The total foreign reserves of the public sector include actual reserves plus contingent reserves from
international financial institutions, such as the IMF, other governments or contingent credit lines.
6
  The value of assets of an operating firm can be considered as the present value of stochastic future cash
flow from income minus net new investment expenditures to create that income. For the public sector, the
net fiscal asset is the present value of stochastic future fiscal flows from taxes and revenues minus non-
discretionary expenditures equivalent to the present value of the primary fiscal surplus.


                                                     7
obtain market values for the other non-expenditure related liabilities, as will be discussed
in more detail later.
             Monetary and Foreign Reserve Assets and Liabilities – Base money is a liability
of the monetary authorities and thus a liability of the public sector.7 Base money consists
of currency in circulation, bank reserves (required reserves, excess reserves, vault cash).
The counterpart of base money liabilities are the assets of the monetary authorities net
foreign assets and net domestic assets (including credit to government less government
deposits, claims on banks and other items). Changes in base money correspond to
changes in net foreign assets and net domestic assets.
             Sovereign Local Currency Debt Liabilities – Local-currency debt of the
government is a claim on sovereign assets. On the combined balance sheet of the public
sector, the local-currency debt is the portion of debt held outside of the monetary
authorities and the government.
             Sovereign Foreign Currency Debt Liabilities – Foreign currency denominated
debt is risky debt includes foreign-currency debt.
             Financial Guarantees – As described earlier, implicit or explicit guarantees to
“too-important-to-fail” banks and other financial institutions or pension obligations are
liability items on the public sector’s balance sheet which are modeled as put options.
           Base money does not pay a “dividend”; it provides a convenience yield of money
for transactions. The quantity of base money can be increased with subsequent
consequences for inflation. Sovereign local currency debt is a claim on the public sector
balance sheet, paying a “dividend” equal to the promised interest payment. A risk
associated with holding sovereign local currency debt is that the government may dilute
(or inflate away) part of the value or the debt, or may forcibly restructure some of the
debt. The “dilution/inflation risk premium” is an extra premium demanded by the
holders of local currency debt.8


7
  Base money is also known as high-powered money or reserve money. As is the common practice, it is
the main liability of the monetary authorities (IMF, 2000, Buiter, 1993, Blejer and Schumacher, 2000).
Base money is “multiplied” by the banking system; the multipliers relate base money to M1, M2, etc.
When a country joins a currency union (i.e. merges with another sovereign or dollarizes) base money is
exchanged for foreign currency reserves.
8
    See Gray, Lim and Malone for more details.


                                                   8
Measuring Implied Asset Value and Volatilities Using Market Prices
           From the observed prices and volatilities of market-traded securities, one can
estimate the implied values and volatilities of the underlying assets. 9, 10 These implied
asset values and asset volatilities can be used to calibrate the pricing and risk model of
major sectors in the economy.
           Domestic equity markets provide pricing and volatility information for the
calculation of corporate, bank and non-bank financial assets, and asset volatilities. The
Merton model is widely used to estimate implied assets and asset volatility for firms and
financial institutions with traded equity. The method uses solves two equations for two
unknowns, asset value and asset volatility (details in Annex 1, Merton (1974), KMV
(1999), and Crouhy et. al. 2000). 11
           For the sovereign balance sheet, the prices in the international markets
(including foreign currency market, debt market, and credit derivatives market), together
with information from domestic market prices, provide the market information for the
value and volatility of liabilities on the public sector balance sheet.12 This information
can be used to calculate implied asset values, volatilities, and higher moments of implied
asset distributions for the sovereign (details are in Annex 2). Applications to a wide
range of countries is described in Gray (2001 and 2002), Gapen et. al. (2004 and 2005),
and IMF (2006). The key sectors of and economy can be calibrated and linked into an
economy-wide CCA balance sheets framework. Subsequently, we can do “forward”
simulations to estimate the impact of “shocks” and policy changes on the economic and
financial system.13




9
   An implied value refers to an estimate derived from other observed data. Techniques for using implied
   values are widely practiced in options pricing and financial engineering applications.
10
   See Bodie and Merton (1995).
11
   The CCA approach is used to calibrate balance sheets for listed corporates and banks. For unlisted
corporates and banks, information from balance sheets is used along with proxies and comparables from
CCA type models of similar firms in the same sector. In the household sector, data permitting, the
portfolio of assets is constructed (pension, mutual funds, deposits, PV of labor income and other estimated
assets) and the CCA model is used to get implied household net worth and its volatility.
12
   Gray, 2000, 2001.
13
   The MF Risk® models use simulated shocks and policy adjustments to assess impact on risk indicators.


                                                     9
Measuring Risk Exposures
        So far, we have discussed how to calculate the value of debt, guarantees, and
equity using the CCA approach. We now turn to how to measure the risk exposures. The
values of the contingent claims on the CCA balance sheets contain embedded implicit
options which can be used to obtain certain risk measures. These include risk exposures
in risky debt, probabilities of default, spreads on debt, the sensitivity of the implicit
option to the underlying asset (the delta), sensitivity to other parameters, distance to
distress, value-at-risk and other measures. The implicit put option changes in a non-
linear way as the underlying asset changes. The slope of the put option vs. asset is the
sensitivity of the put option value to the underlying asset value which is the delta. The
delta measures the change in the value of an option per unit change in the value of the
underlying asset. For example, the government’s exposure to its guarantee to the banking
sector changes as banking assets change. Figure 3 illustrates the value of the implicit put
option and the delta for the implicit put option plotted against the banking system asset.
This is simply (the absolute value of) the slope of the tangent to the function defining the
value of the option at any point. The implicit put option can be the risk exposure that the
holders of debt of a sector have, e.g. holders of sovereign debt. The implicit put option
can also be a measure of the government’s exposure, acquired through implicit or explicit
guarantees, if the government provides such guarantees. The implicit put option
increases in a non-linear way as the market value of the sector’s assets decline.




                                              10
Figure 3:


                                   Implicit Put Option Value and Delta

                     40                                                                           1

                                                                                                  0.8




                                                                                                        Delta of Put Option
                     30
  Put Option Value




                                                                                                  0.6
                     20
                                                                                                  0.4

                     10
                                                                                                  0.2

                     0                                                                            0
                          0   10   20    30    40    50        60      70    80       90      0
                                                                                           10
                                                  Asset Value
                                    (Note: Strike =40, Asset Volatility=40%)

                                        Put Value (LHS)             Put delta (RHS)




                                                          11
Linkages in a Simple Three-Sector Framework
         To show how we can apply the CCA framework, we focus on a simplified
model with three aggregate sectors – corporate, financial, and public sectors. In this
model, the corporate sector’s liabilities include bank loans which are the banking sector’s
assets. The system’s financial stability depends on the government’s financial guarantee
to the banks.
         The debt of the corporate sector can be described as default-free debt combined
with a short of a put option on corporate assets. The economic balance sheet of the
banking sector has assets consisting of corporate loans (default-free debt minus the value
of a put option). The banking sector also includes guarantees from the government as an
asset, which is a liability on the government’s economic balance sheet (Figure 4).


         Figure 4      Balance Sheets for Simple Three-Sector Framework

                            Corporate Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                Liabilities
Corporate Assets                            Debt (=Default-free value of debt
                                            minus implicit put option)
                                            Equity (Implicit call option)

                            Banking Sector Balance Sheet
                  Assets                                Liabilities
Loans (Debt of Corporate Sector)           Debt
Other Assets                               Deposits
Financial Guarantee (Implicit Put Option)  Equity (Implicit call option)

                              Public Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                    Liabilities
Foreign Reserves                               Financial Guarantee (Implicit put
                                               option)
Net Fiscal Asset and Other Assets              Foreign Debt (Default-free value of
                                               debt minus implicit put option)
Value of Monopoly on Issue of Money            Base Money and Local-currency
                                               Debt (Implicit call options)




                                            12
           These three economic balance sheets demonstrate the interdependence among
sectors; with one sector “long” a certain implicit option and another sector “short” the
same implicit option. The sector CCA balance sheets can be integrated together as
shown in Figure 5. Each sector contains assets adjusted for guarantees and when the
junior claims/equity and risky debt are subtracted the net is zero (columns). When
shocks affect the corporate sector it feeds into the financial sector and then could transmit
risk to the government. The sum of all positions can be calculated and broken down into
the portfolio of the claims of foreigners and other domestic residents. The foreigner’s
portfolio of claims is the value of what could be viewed as the present value of the risk
adjusted current account. The framework provides a relative valuation tool for market
and credit risk within sectors (e.g. sovereign foreign debt/CDS, local debt, foreign
exchange instruments, and interest rates) and across sectors (e.g. sovereign debt,
exchange rates, stock market index and banking sector equity or deposits). The economic
balance14 sheets for each of the three sectors with illustrative numbers are shown in
Figure 6 and in Annex 3.




14
  The economic balance sheet is the “mark-to-market” balance sheet of the sector’s assets and liabilities,
including the economic values of other relevant contingent assets and contingent liabilities. This is in
contrast to a traditional GAAP accounting balance sheet. For example, the government financial guarantee
to the banking system is not a GAAP entry.


                                                   13
     Figure 5          Economy-Wide CCA Balance Sheet Matrix
CCA Balance Sheet (billion US$)
                                  Sovereign     Banking Sector    Non-Bank Financial      Corporate     Horizontal Sum**

Asset without Guarantee            VSovereign       V Banks          V NBank Financial    VCorporate          ΣV
Implicit Guarantee                 minus G            +G                   +G                +G                0
Asset (including Guarantee)        ASovereign       A Banks          A NBank Financial    ACorporate          ΣA

Jr Claim or Equity                 Jr Claim         EBanks           ENBank Financial     ECorporates       Σ (J+E)

Default-free Debt Value               BS              BB                  BNBF               BC               ΣB
Expected Loss                        EL              EL                   EL                 EL              Σ EL
Risky Debt (Default-free - EL)      BS-EL           BB-EL               BNBF-EL             BC-EL        Σ Risky Debt

Assets minus Liabilities*              0               0                    0                 0                   0

Risk Indicators
Distance to Distress                D2DS          Ave D2DB            Ave D2DNB           Ave D2DC
Default Probability                  DPS           Ave DPB             Ave DPNB           Ave DPC
Spread (BPS)                         SprS             ...                   ...               ...

                                 *Equals Asset + Guarantee - Jr Claim - (Default-free Value of Debt minus EL)
                                 ** Can be broken down into risk adjusted positions of residents and foreigners




                                                    14
Integrated Value and Risk Transmission between Sectors
The framework described above is versatile and can be used to understand many types of
crises and risk shifting that cannot as easily be analyzed with other techniques. The risk-
transmission patterns can be dampened or may be magnified depending on the capital
structure and linkages. The framework can help identify situations where volatility gets
magnified and negative feedback loops that can trigger severe crises. The patterns of
value and default correlation across different asset classes, sectors and sovereign debt
values depend on these structures and links, unique to a particular economy. An example
of inter-linked sectoral economic balance sheets is shown in Figure 6.


Figure 6     Example Inter-linked Sectoral Balance Sheets (Base Case)
                        (Units are in Foreign Currency, billion US $)
                           Corporate Sector Balance Sheet
                 Assets                                    Liabilities
Corporate Assets                120        Loans ( Default-free               87.2
                                           value = 90, minus
                                           implicit loan guarantee –
                                           or put option – of 2.8)
                                           Corporate Equity (call             32.8
                                           option)
Total                           120                                           120

                             Banking Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                              Liabilities
Loans (90 -2.8)                87.2      Deposits                             81.3
Financial Guarantee             7.4      Equity                               13.3
Total                          94.6                                           94.6

                               Public Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                 Liabilities
Domestic assets                 100        Financial Guarantee to             7.4
                                           Banks

Foreign reserves                 40         Foreign Debt                     82.15
                                            Local-currency Debt &
                                            Other Liabilities                50.45

Total                           140                                           140
Note: The delta of the public sector financial guarantee is -0.35 in this base case.



                                             15
Actual risk transfer in an economy is likely to involve several risk-transmission channels.
Below are some examples of risk transmission between sectors. Annex 3 shows example
changes to base case balance sheet (Figure 6) for different types of risk transmission.
Risk Transmission from the Corporate Sector to the Banking Sector and to the
Government
         The corporate sector’s financial distress – possibly caused by stock market
declines which reduce the value of corporate assets, recession, commodity price drops, or
excessive unhedged foreign debt accompanied by currency devaluation – can be
transmitted to the financial sector.
Risk Transfer
   Corporate Sector                    Banking Sector              Government


We can use the three-sector framework to show how the risk can be transmitted from the
corporate sector to the banking sector and to the public sector through implicit and
explicit guarantees. The example of a negative shock to the corporate sector is a drop in
assets as a result of recession, equity sell-offs, the combination of currency devaluation
and unhedged foreign debt, or other negative shocks (shown in Annex 3, Figure A3-2).
The value of the assets of the corporate sector declines, so does the value of the debt (and
equity) which leads to a decline in bank assets and an increase in the implicit government
guarantee. As the corporate assets decline, the government guarantee to the banking
sector increases in a non-linear way.


Risk Transmission from the Banking Sector to the Government
         The banking sector’s financial distress, such as systemic banking crises due to
deposit runs, a decline in asset value or mismanagement, can be transmitted to the
government through guarantees.


Risk Transfer
                Banking Sector                            Government
         The example of the impact of a deposit run on the balance sheets of the three-
sector model in Annex 3, Figure A3-3 shows that the banking sector’s default barrier



                                               16
rises, when the banking sector faces a large deposit run resulting in a large increase in the
implicit guarantee.


Risk Transmission from the Government to the Banks and Feedback
         The public sector’s financial distress or default can transmit risk to the financial
system. When the banking sector is holding a significant proportion of government
securities, and there is a negative shock to the government financial position, it can have
a detrimental impact on the banks. The government’s implicit guarantee is also likely to
increase. This, in turn, makes the government financial position worse, creating a
compounding effect, which may result in the government’s failure to honor its guarantee
obligations and cause a collapse of the banking system.
Risk Transfer
           Banking/Financial System                            Government


         Figure A3-4 in Annex 3 shows the impact of a decline in government assets
resulting in lower value of sovereign debt relative to the base case. In Figure A3-5, we
assume the same decline in government assets but that the banking sector’s assets consist
of half government securities and half loans to the corporate sector (as compared to 100%
corporate loans in the base case). The vicious cycle could arise, when the lower value of
government securities lowers bank assets, and raises the implicit financial guarantee,
which in turn lowers government assets further. This means that the implicit guarantee is
higher than what is shown above. In some situations, this vicious cycle can spiral out of
control, eventually resulting in the inability of the government to provide sufficient
guarantees to banks and leading to a systemic financial crisis.


Risk Transmission from the Pension System to the Government
         The financial distress related to pension plans can result in the transmission of
risk to the government.


Risk Transfer
         Pension System                        Government



                                             17
Figure A3-6 shows an example of this type or risk transmission. We assume that the
pension system contains one-half of corporate sector equity (in a defined benefit plan
which has an implicit government guarantee). A decline in corporate assets would cause
the corporate equity value to drop. This, in turn, increases the government guarantee to
the pension system and the implicit guarantee to banks.15


Risk Transmission from the Public Sector to Holders of Public Sector Debt
             Fiscal, banking and other problems can cause distress for the government which
can transmit risk to holders of government debt.
Risk Transfer
Public Sector                          Debt Holders (sovereign foreign currency denominated
debt or sovereign local currency denominated debt)


Holders of foreign-currency debt have a claim on the value of the debt minus the
potential credit loss, which is dependent on the level of assets of the public sector (in
foreign currency terms) compared to the foreign-currency default barrier. Thus, we can
use the CCA approach to analyze the value of public sector foreign-currency debt by
comparing how the volatility of the public sector assets (measured in US dollar terms)
changes relative to the foreign-currency default barrier. A large component of the spread
on sovereign foreign-currency debt is the credit spread to compensate for the risk of
default over the horizon. The credit spread on sovereign foreign-currency debt is a
function of: (i) the ratio of sovereign asset, A, to the default barrier, DBF (associated with
default free debt value of foreign debt; (ii) the volatility of sovereign assets, σA; and, (iii)
horizon and risk-free interest rate.16 As the term (A/ DBF) declines and/or σA increases,
the spread increases in a non-linear way and eventually turns sharply higher. The total
public sector asset includes foreign currency reserves, the net fiscal asset, and the value




15
     See Bodie 2006..
16
     Spread = - 1/T ln[ N(d2) + (A/ (DBF e-rt)) N(-d1)], see Annex 1.


                                                      18
of seigniorage in US dollar terms. Thus a decline in foreign currency reserves, lower
fiscal revenues, and/or a rise the foreign debt default barrier will raise spreads.17
           The value of (risky) local currency debt is influenced by the risk that the
government may dilute (or inflate away) part of the value or the debt, or may forcibly
restructure some of the debt. The “dilution/inflation risk premium” is an extra premium
demanded by the holders of local currency debt.
           The volatility of the public sector asset is heavily influenced by exchange rate and
fiscal volatilities. In the crisis periods, the fiscal volatility and exchange rate volatility
can combine to produce a higher volatility of the sovereign asset. This means that the
risk premium on local currency debt is very likely to be higher and lead to an increase
sovereign spreads on foreign currency debt. A stylized distress scenario for an emerging
market is a decline in the sovereign asset, rolling over local currency debt which becomes
more difficult as the holders of the local currency debt demand a higher premium, likely
monetization of the deficit leading to higher inflation and depreciation of the exchange
rate. This lower foreign currency value of sovereign assets and higher volatility increases
spreads on foreign currency debt as default probability can increase. A sovereign can, in
principle always issue more money but foreign currency cannot be printed. This is
somewhat analogous to a firm that can dilute stock holders, e.g., stock splits, and issue
shares but cannot print hard cash needed to service debt.




17
     See IMF GFSR April 2006, Box 3.6 for sovereign CCA and impact of changes in debt structure.


                                                    19
Interrelationship of Macro Financial Contingent Claim Balance Sheets,
Risk Exposures and Traditional Macroeconomic Flows

The combined accounts – income/flow, mark-to-market balance sheets, and risk exposure
measures – comprise the three important sets of interrelated accounts in the economy
which are somewhat similar to those in large modern financial institutions. Risk
managers would find it difficult to analyze the risk exposure of their financial institution
by relying solely on the income and cash flow statements, and not taking into account
(mark-to-market) balance sheets or information on their institution’s derivative or option
positions. The country risk analysis that relies only on macroeconomic flow-based
approach is deficient in a similar way, given that the traditional analysis does not take
into account the volatility of assets. Note that when the volatility of assets in the CCA
balance sheet equations is set to zero the values of the implicit put and call options go to
zero. Something very similar to the traditional macroeconomic flow of funds is the result
since the change in assets is equal to changes in cash and book value of debt. Flow of
Funds can be seen as a special deterministic case of the CCA balance sheet equations
when volatility is set to zero and annual changes are calculated. The risk transmission
between sectors is lost.


Controlling and Transferring Risk
             The application of CCA to analyze risk exposures in the sectors of an economy
offers a rich framework for comparing alternative ways to control and transfer risk.
There are several benefits. First, it gives the interrelated values and risk exposure
measures across sectors. Understanding of these values and risk exposures can help
identify particularly vulnerable situations and potential chain reactions of default. This
allows formulation of various alternative ways to control and transfer risk. Second, the
framework dovetails with risk-management strategies involving explicit derivatives and
swaps used by the private and public sectors to control, hedge or transfer risk.18
             Four broad categories of strategies are: a direct change in the financial structure
(the structure of assets and liabilities within the existing institutional structure); managing

18
     One example, in Blejer and Schumacher (2000), includes central bank forward contracts.


                                                     20
guarantees; risk transfer (diversification, hedging and insurance); and, in the longer run,
an institutional change to tailor the institutional structure to fulfill financial functions
more efficiently within the specific geopolitical environment.


Direct Change in Financial Structure
             Increases in assets and declines in default barriers can reduce the vulnerability
to distress, reduce spreads on debt, and reduce the value and the deltas of put options
(whether they are embedded in risky debt or financial guarantees from the government).
CCA, by its nature, shows how the changes in value of assets relate to changes in values
of liabilities. Thus, it provides a natural framework for analysis of mismatches, such a
currency and maturity mismatches on balance sheets. Policies or actions that reduce
these mismatches will help reduce risk and vulnerability.


Management of Guarantees
             CCA provides the key to measuring the value and understanding the risk of
guarantees. The three basic methods that a guarantor of liabilities has to manage the risks
of guarantees are:
             Monitoring – The method requires frequent marking-to-market of assets and
liabilities of the insured party and collateral that can be seized when the insured party’s
assets fall below a predetermined target.
             Asset Restrictions – This method of controlling costs and managing the cost of
the guarantee requires the insured party to (at least partially) hedge its guaranteed
liabilities with restrictions on assets in a manner that limits the volatility of net worth.
             Risk-based premiums – Under this method, the guarantor charges a fee that is
commensurate with the riskiness of the guarantee.19
             Guarantees on the debt of financial institutions, whether explicit or implicit,
should be openly recognized in the government’s balance sheet. This framework
provides a way to measure the value of the guarantee and the risk exposures associated
with the guarantee.



19
     See Merton and Bodie (1992, 1993) and Bodie and Merton (1993).


                                                   21
Risk Transfer
          There are three ways to transfer risk, diversification, hedging and insurance.
Much of the risk described here results from concentration risk and diversification to
parties who have a comparative advantage in bearing various risks. If the balance sheets
of corporations and financial institutions are weak when the economy is weak – as it is
generally the case – then it is precisely when tax revenue is low, and the cost of debt
service is high because sovereign risk has increased. In this case, the value of the
guarantees will be particularly high. This observation offers a powerful argument for
diversification of the government exposure to local shocks (see Box 1).
          The financial markets, especially in emerging markets, are often “incomplete”,
meaning that they provide only limited possibilities to shift risk across various entities
and groups. In such situations, diversification through international capital mobility is
the obvious alternative. However, the transfer across borders of the ownership of real
and financial assets is a rather inflexible way to achieve diversification (as it is costly to
reverse); often it also runs against political constraints.




                                               22
Box 1
                   Examples of Diversification, Hedging and Risk Mitigation
  •   Asset Diversification in Banking Sector – Asset diversification would suggest that a bank which invests part
      of its assets in domestic government bonds enhances its exposure to local macro shocks; the value of
      government bonds will be low precisely when the value of the loan book is low. Therefore, in such
      economies, banks should hedge the exposure of their loan book by investing in non-domestic assets—such
      as bonds.
  •   Equity Swaps as a Method of Diversifying Internationally – An equity swap would enable a small country to
      diversify internationally without violating possible restrictions on investing capital abroad. Suppose that
      small-country pension funds who already own the domestic equity were to enter into swaps with a global
      pension intermediary (GPI). In the swap, the total return per dollar on the small country’s stock market is
      exchanged annually for the total return per dollar on a market-value weighted-average of the world stock
      markets. The swap effectively transfers the risk of the small-country stock market to foreign investors and
      provides the domestic investors with the risk-return pattern of a well-diversified world portfolio. Since
      there are no initial payments between parties, there are no initial capital flows in or out of the country.
      Subsequent payments, which may be either inflows or outflows, involve only the difference between the
      returns on the two stock market indices, and no “principal” amount flow.
  •   Contingent Reserves or Contingent Sovereign Capital – Corporations sometimes contract for contingent
      equity or debt purchases triggered under pre-agreed conditions. Similarly, governments could make
      arrangements with external public or private sector entities for pre-agreed purchase of government local-
      currency debt under specific circumstances such as a sudden stop in capital flows or certain revenue losses,
      commodity price drops or natural disasters. The value of such contingent capital can be compared to the
      costs of increasing paid-in capital reserves via debt issues. This macrofinance framework could be used to
      do value-at-risk for the sovereign balance sheet to help determine the appropriate level of foreign currency
      reserves and contingent reserves or contingent sovereign capital.
  •   Sovereign Bonds with Special Features – GDP-linked bonds or bonds with specific roll-over clauses can
      help manage risk. Indexed bonds. Commodity linked bonds linked to major exports such as oil or copper.
      Catastrophe bonds (CAT) and similar instruments.
  •   Diversification and Hedging Related to Management of Foreign Reserves – A sovereign holds foreign
      currency reserves, in part, to as a cushion against potential losses of the monetary authorities or government.
      The framework described here can be used to assess the costs of increasing reserves via issue of foreign
      debt, local currency debt, money or contingent capital contracts against the benefits of having a cushion to
      mitigate losses (e.g. mitigate the risks posed by the implicit put options associated with government foreign
      and local currency debt and contingent obligations of the monetary authority). If there are excess reserves,
      the framework here could be used to assess the investments or strategies that provide the likely optimal
      hedging, diversification or risk mitigation tailored for the specific risk characteristics of the country’s
      sovereign balance sheet.
  •   Others – Other types of swaps could include assets, equity, or debt of the corporate sector, the financial
      sector, and the public sector. Weather derivatives. Credit derivatives. Positions taken by various public
      organizations to lay-off risk in adverse circumstances and/or or to mitigate tax revenue and spending risks.




         The macro finance analytical framework could be useful for the design of new
risk intermediation and risk transfer products, whereby various risks in one economy
could be packaged and sold internationally to improve the efficiency of risk sharing and
enhance returns.



                                                    23
Institutional Change
             In the longer-term, institutional changes to satisfy certain financial functions
more efficiently can reduce risk. In the case of the banking sector, this is particularly
important, given the vulnerabilities and costs of crisis in the banking system. Fiscal costs
of banking crisis show no sign of declining and can range from costs of 3% to 80% of
GDP, not to mention the inefficiencies caused before, during and after the crises. The
potential for very costly government guarantees to the banking system, which can arise
quickly and can have large associated risk exposures and costs, support the arguments
that it may be best to safely shrink the banking system. 20 Structural reform, over time,
could aim to reduce the size of the banking system and increase the role of institutions
that can fulfill the key functions of banks (payments functions and pooling and
investment of resources) but do so in an efficient and less risky manner.
           The combination of a smaller banking system, improved management of
guarantees, equity swaps between the pension system and international counterparties,
and direct change in the financial structure would dramatically reduce risk exposures and
systemic vulnerability.




20
     Posen, A. 2001, “A Strategy to Prevent Financial Crises: Safely Shrink the Banking Sector”



                                                     24
Conclusions
         The high cost of international economic and financial crises highlights the need
for a comprehensive framework to assess the robustness of countries’ economic and
financial systems. This paper proposes a new approach to measure, analyze, and manage
macroeconomic risk based on the theory and practice of modern contingent claims
analysis (CCA). We illustrate how to use CCA to model and measure sectoral and
national risk exposures, and we analyze policies to offset their potentially harmful effects.
The framework provides economic balance sheets for inter-linked sectors and a risk
accounting framework for an economy. It provides a new framework adapting the CCA
model to the sovereign balance sheet which can help forecast credit spreads and a
framework for relative valuation of credit and market risks for the sovereign and across
economic sectors.     CCA provides a natural framework for analysis of mismatches
between an entity’s assets and liabilities, such as currency and maturity mismatches on
balance sheets. Policies or actions that reduce these mismatches will help reduce risk and
vulnerability. It is useful for assessing vulnerability, policy analysis, risk management,
investment analysis, and design of risk control strategies. Both public and private sector
participants can benefit from pursuing ways to facilitate more efficient macro risk
accounting, improved price and volatility discovery, and expanding international risk
intermediation activities.




                                             25
Annex 1 – Framework for Contingent Claims Analysis, Risk Measures,
and Spreads Using Black-Scholes-Merton Formula

Black-Scholes-Merton Equations for Pricing Contingent Claims

        CCA defines these fundamental relationships between the value of assets and the
value of claims. The total market value of assets, A(t), of an entity financed with debt
and junior claims (most junior claim or equity) is equal to the market value of junior
claims and market value of risky debt, J(t) + D(t). Assets are stochastic and thus assets,
at time t, in the future may decline below the point where debt payments on scheduled
dates cannot be made. The junior claim (equity in the case of firms) can be viewed as an
implicit call option.

Assets = Junior Claim + Risky Debt
       = Junior Claim + Default-Free Debt – Debt Guarantee

The value of the junior claim, the debt guarantee embedded in the value of risky debt, and
the financial guarantee can all be formulated in terms of implicit options (Merton, 1974).
The value of “risky” debt is the default-free value of the debt minus the debt guarantee.


Risky Debt = Default-Free Debt – Debt Guarantee
           = Default-Free Debt – Implicit Put Option

Financial Guarantee = Implicit Put Option

The implicit put option is P = Be − rt ( N (−d 2 )) − A0 ( N (− d1 )) . The value of the risky debt,
D, is thus the default-free value minus the expected loss:
D = Be− rt − P = Be− rt − ( Be− rt N (−d 2 ) − A0 N (− d1 )) . The value of the junior claim, J, is
                                                        − rf T
equal to the value of call option, J = A0 N(d1 ) − Be            N(d 2 )
                ⎛A ⎞ ⎛         σ ⎞
                                 2
             ln ⎜ 0 ⎟ + ⎜ rf −   A
                                  ⎟t
                ⎝ B⎠ ⎝          2 ⎠
where d 2 =                          , and d1 = d 2 + σ A t , r is the risk free rate and t is the
                     σA t
horizon period. N(d) = the probability that a random draw from a standard normal
distribution will be less than d.

N (−d 2 ) is the risk-neutral default probability and N (− d 2* ) is the “real world or physical”
default probability. N (− d 2* ) = N (−d 2 − λ t ) where λ is the market price of risk. The
credit spread, s, is the premium required to compensate for the expected loss. The get the
formula for the spread note that the yield-to-maturity for the risky debt D is yt , then




                                                 26
              D Be − rt − P
exp(− yt t ) =  =                This can be rewritten to get the spread, s.
              B        B
              1 ⎛        P  ⎞     1 ⎛             ⎛ A            ⎞           ⎞
s = yt − r = − ln ⎜ 1 − − rt⎟ = − ln ⎜ N (d 2 ) + ⎜ − rt         ⎟ N (− d1 ) ⎟
               t ⎝ Be       ⎠     t ⎝             ⎝ Be           ⎠           ⎠
The delta of the put option is N (d1 ) − 1

Example: Assuming that:

        Asset value A=$100,
        Asset return volatility of σ = 0.40 (40%),
        Default-free value of debt = default barrier = DB = $ 75
          (derived from short-term debt, $30, plus one-half of long-term debt, $90)
        Risk-free rate = 0.05 (5%)
        Time horizon = 1, one year

The value of the junior claim/equity is $32.2 and the value of risky debt is $67.8 (equal
to the present value of the default barrier minus put option = 75*0.95 – 3.55 = 67.8). The
“delta” for the call option is N(d1), is 0.89 in the above example. The “delta” for the put
option (implicit guarantee) is N(d1) – 1, or – 0.11 in the example. Using the spread
formula above, the one-year spread for the example is calculated as: 0.0510, or 510 basis
points over the risk-free rate. The probability of default, using this model, is N(– d2), or
0.20 (20%) in the example above.


Calculating Implied Assets and Implied Asset Volatility for Firms, Banks, Non-
bank Financials with traded equity

In the Merton model for firms, banks and non-bank financials with traded equity the
following two equations are used to solve for the two unknowns A, asset value, and σ A ,
asset volatility.
                                                  −r T
                                J = A0 N(d1 ) − Be f N(d 2 )
                                                   ∂J
                                    Aσ A = J σ J        = J σ J N ( d1 ) 21
                                                   ∂A




21
 For a recently published book explaining these concepts applied to credit risk, see Crouhy, Galai, and
Mark, 2000.


                                                    27
Annex 2 – Public Sector CCA Balance Sheet and its Calibration Using
the Contingent Claims Approach

        This Annex describes a framework how the segregated contingent claim balance
sheet of the monetary authorities and the government can be combined together and how
the implied sovereign assets and asset volatility can be calculated and risk indicators
estimated.22 Useful insights can be obtained when one views relationship between the
assets and liabilities of the public sector23 in a similar way as separate balance sheets of
the government and monetary authorities where there are cross-holdings and financial
guarantees between these two public sector “partners.” Under this structure, the assets of
the monetary authority include foreign reserves, credit to the government and other
claims. The liabilities of the monetary authority partner are base money and financial
guarantees to the government, including guarantees to supply foreign currency to service
the sovereign foreign-currency denominated debt. The assets of the government partner
include the net fiscal asset, other assets, while the liabilities include credit to the
monetary authority (and could include local-currency debt held by the monetary
authority) , local-currency debt held outside of the government and monetary authority,
financial guarantees and foreign currency denominated debt.

        Figure A2-1 shows the structure of this segregated balance sheet structure. This
simplified framework is not meant to be a comprehensive catalogue of all the guarantees,
the nature of which varies by country and by the detailed structure of the relationship
between monetary authorities and the government. There may also be implicit financial
support from the monetary authorities to the government via purchase of government
local-currency debt under certain circumstances, but this is not shown here. The action of
the monetary authority “partner” of buying additional government local-currency debt
entails issue of additional base money. There are also “options,” that the government and
the monetary authorities have to “default” on the obligations to convert local currency
into foreign currency. Similarly the government could “forcibly” restructure local-
currency debt or to dictate “mandatory” purchases of government bonds by certain public
or private institutions or the option to inflate to cover potential shortfalls. Also, in some
countries, banks may have deposits with the monetary authorities that receive a higher
priority claim on foreign currency reserves than the holders of local currency, which
could be junior to claims on foreign currency for payment of external foreign-currency
debt.




22
     See Gapen, Gray, Lim, Xiao, 2005.
23
     See Buiter, W. 2000.


                                             28
Figure A2-1 – Segregated Balance Sheet for the Public Sector

                Assets                                   Liabilities

MONETARY AUTHORITY “PARTNER”




             Foreign Reserves
                                                Obligation to supply FX to
                                                Government to pay FX Debt

           Credit to Government                           Base Money

          Credit to other Sectors




GOVERNMENT “PARTNER”


                                                           Guarantees
              Net Fiscal Asset                      (to too-important-to-fail
                                                             entities)
       Other Public Sector Assets
                                                    Foreign-currency Debt
       Obligation from Monetary
       Authority to supply FX to                Local-currency Debt Held
      Government to pay FX Debt                Outside of the Government &
                                                  Monetary Authorities

                                                     Credit from Monetary
                                                          Authorities




Note that the cross-holdings of government debt and guarantees from monetary authorities to
Government are in italics. Liquidity operations of the monetary authorities are not included.

         The priority of the claims on the assets certainty can vary from country to
country. In many cases, though, we can think of the guarantees to banks or other “too big
to fail entities” as senior claims. Also most governments find it easier to inflate or dilute
local currency debt in a distress situation before defaulting of foreign currency debt.
Thus a case can be made that foreign currency debt is senior to local currency debt. The
government may certainly take the view that credit from the monetary authorities is the
most junior obligation and many governments may or may not honor that claim. The
credit from the monetary authorities is an asset on the side of the monetary authority


                                               29
partner and a liability of the government partner. Similarly, the financial guarantees to
the government partner are an asset on its balance sheet and a liability of the monetary
authority partner. When the balance sheets are combined these two items drop out. The
segregated balance sheet above reduces to the combined balance sheet in Figure 1.
Contingent claims approach can be applied to the segregated or the combined balance
sheets, the choice of which depends on the purposes of the analysis.


Calculating Implied Sovereign Assets and Implied Sovereign Asset Volatility Using
CCA for the Public Sector Balance Sheet

          This section describes how the CCA framework can be used to estimate implied
assets and asset volatility, since the market value of sovereign assets cannot be observed
directly. The public sector balance sheet in Figure A2-2 has liabilities structured in a way
that we can observe the market value of the junior claims and the distress barrier of
foreign currency debt so as to be able to adapt the Merton model to the sovereign. One
adjustment needed is to subtract the “senior” guarantee to too-big-to-fail entities from
both sides the balance sheet as shown in Figure A2-2. On the simplified balance sheet,
the local-currency debt of the government, held outside of the monetary authorities, and
base money are local currency liabilities which can be modeled as a call option on the
public sector assets with the default barrier derived from the foreign-currency debt.


Figure A2-2 Example Public Sector Contingent Claims Balance Sheet
with Liabilities Modeled with Options (all items in $ terms)

                   Assets                                Liabilities

            $Foreign Reserves

                                                      $Foreign-currency Debt
       $Net Fiscal Asset (Stochastic             (Default Free Value of Debt minus
       Present Value of Taxes minus                         Put Option )
               Expenditures)
                                                     $ Base Money plus
                                                 LC Debt Held Outside of the
           $Other Public Assets               Government & Monetary Authorities
                                                        (Call Option)
          minus $Guarantees
       (Modeled as a Put Option
     associated with Banks/Entities
         receiving guarantee)

         The units in which the balance sheet is measured can be nominal local currency
units, in real terms in local currency units, or in foreign currency. Any numeraire can be
used. Since one of the goals of the analysis here is to analyze the value of the CCA



                                            30
balance sheet in the international context (including effects of changes in FX reserves and
the credit risk embedded in foreign debt), the units are in US $.

          Local currency debt is a claim on sovereign assets whose value, in principle, can
be diluted or inflated. Money is a claim; its issue can be used to increase sovereign
assets, via increase in reserves or credit to government. It can in most cases, be
exchanged for foreign currency and in the event of dollarization reserves are used to buy
out the monetary base. In most cases it is a long-term claim and in that sense junior to
debt obligations. Local currency debt and money have some similarities to “shares” and
the value of money and local currency debt times the exchange rate can be seen a sort of
“market cap” of the sovereign.

       This model combines money and local currency debt together to get Local
Currency Liabilities (LCL) in a simple two claim CCA framework in order to calibrate
the sovereign balance sheet by calculating implied sovereign assets and asset volatility.
Value of local currency liabilities in foreign currency terms, L C L $ , is a call option of
sovereign assets in foreign currency terms, V$Sov , with strike price tied to the distress
barrier for foreign currency denominated debt B f derived from the promised payments on
foreign currency debt and interest payments up to time t.
                                                                − rf T
                                 LCL$ = V$Sov N(d1 ) − B f e             N(d 2 )

The formula for the value of local currency liabilities in foreign currency terms is:

                                                                                   − rf T
                                                  ( M LC e rd T + Bd )e
                          LCL$ = M + Bd $,t =0 =
                                                               XF
The volatility of the local currency liabilities is:

                        σ $ LCL = f ( M , Bd , rd ,σ M ,σ d ,σ X , X F , ρ M , Dd $ )
                                                                    F




The definition of the variables is shown below.

M LC base money in local currency terms; rd domestic interest rate; rf foreign interest
rate; Domestic currency denominated debt is Bd (derived from the promised payments on
local currency debt and interest payments up to time t); X F forward exchange rate;
σ X volatility of forward exchange rate; σ D volatility of domestic debt in local currency
   F                                                  d


terms; ρ D , X correlation of forward exchange rate and vol of domestic debt in local
          d   F


currency terms; ρ M , D correlation of money (in foreign currency terms) and local
                        d$


currency debt (in fc terms); σ MLC Volatility of money (in lc terms); σ M volatility of
money (in fc terms); and, σ D volatility of local currency debt (in fc terms).
                                 d$




                                                     31
The two key equations relating assets and local currency liabilities are:


                                                                     − rf T
                                  LCL$ = V$Sov N(d1 ) − B f e                 N(d 2 )
                                                        ∂L$ LCL
                          V$ Sovσ $ Sov = LCL$σ $ LCL             = LCL$σ $ LCL N ( d1 )
                                                        ∂A$ Sov

These two equations can be used to calculate the two unknowns, sovereign asset value
and sovereign asset volatility. The sovereign default probabilities, spreads and other risk
indicators can be calculated.24 Stochastic interest rates (both domestic and foreign) can
be incorporated in the model with frameworks such as Shimko et. al. (1993) which
integrate a Vasicek term-structure model into the Merton model.

Breaking Down Sovereign Assets into Key Components

The sovereign asset value can be broken down into its key components, Reserves (R), net
fiscal asset or present value of the primary fiscal surplus (PVPS), Implicit Guarantees
(G), and Other remainder items.

                                 VSov$,0 = R + PVPS$ − G$ + Other$

The value of the foreign currency reserves can be observed and the guarantee can be
estimated from the banking and corporate sector CCA model. Subtracting these from the
Implied sovereign asset we can calculate the residual which includes the primary fiscal
surplus. If we estimate the expected present value of the primary fiscal surplus (an
obvious approximation) the remainder “Other” can be estimated. “Other” may be due to
various factors, including contingent financial support from other governments or
multilaterals.

                                VSov$,0 − R + G$ − E[ PVPS$ ] = Other$

        We can use this valuation formula to evaluate the effects of changes in reserves,
the primary fiscal balance, and the implicit guarantee on the sovereign asset value. This
can be used with changes in the composition of short-term and long-term debt and with
money and the exchange rate for sensitivity and stress tests to evaluate changes in
sovereign credit spreads and other values and risk indicators.




24
  Xu, D. and Ghezzi, P. 2002 develop a stochastic debt sustainability model and show how it is related to
the CCA model described in Gray, Merton, Bodie 2002 and this paper.


                                                        32
Annex 3 – Examples of Risk Transmission Channels between Economic
Balance Sheets of Sectors

        This Annex describes the CCA equations and inter-linkages among sectors for a
simple three sector framework (base case is shown in Figure 6) and numerical examples
for a number of different scenarios, Figures A3-2 through A3-6, which demonstrate value
and risk transmission changes and calculation of risk exposures.

Figures in Annex 3:

1. Illustrative Equations for Inter-linked Balance Sheets.
(Changes in parentheses in all figures below are all relative to the base case balance sheet
shown in Figure 6.)
2. Negative shock to corporate sector assets and the subsequent impact on banking assets
and increase in government implicit guarantee.

3. Deposit run and subsequent rise in government implicit guarantee.

4. Negative shock to government assets resulting in lower value of sovereign debt.

5. Negative shock to government assets and thus a decline in the value of government
securities held by banks leading to an increase in implicit financial guarantee (and
feedback loop).

6. Negative shock to corporate sector assets (as in 2. above) in the case where the
pension system contains one-half of corporate sector equity (in a defined benefit plan
which also has an implicit government guarantee). The negative shock to corporate
sector assets results in lower pension system’s asset value with higher implicit guarantee
for pension system, in conjunction with higher implicit guarantee to banks.




                                            33
Annex 3 (cont.) – Figure A3-1

                Illustrative Equations for Inter-linked Sectors
MV stands for market value, A is assets, E is equity, J is junior claim, D is debt, FS is
financial guarantee from government, C means call option, P means put option.
(Subscripts C, B, and G refer to the corporate, banking and financial, and public sector,
respectively.)
Corporate Sector
Market value balance sheet equation for the corporate sector(s) using contingent claims.

 MV(AC) = MV(EC) + MV(DC)                                             [Market Value Balance Sheet Equation]
 MV(DC) = DBC – P[MV(AC), DBC, σC, T, r]                                            [ Equation for MV(DC)]

 MV(AC) = C[MV(AC), DBC, σC, T, r] + DBC – P[MV(AC), DBC, σC, T, r]


Bank and Financial Institutions Sector
Using the market value balance sheet equation, we substitute variables representing the
contingent claims:

 MV(AB) + FSG = MV(EB) + MV(DB)                                     [Market Value Balance Sheet Equation]


 FSG     = P[MV(AB), DBB, σB, T, r]                          [Contingent Financial Support, i.e. Guarantee]

 MV(AB) + FSG = C[MV(AB), DBB, σB, T, r] + MV(DB)



Banking sector assets contain loans to the corporate sector

 MV(DC) = DBC – P[MV(AC), DBC, σC, T, r]                               [Loans Made to the Corporate Sector]


Public sector (Government and Monetary Authority) Sector
       Using the market value balance sheet equation, we substitute in variables
representing the contingent claims:

 MV(AG) = MV(JG) + MV(DG) + FSG                                       [Market Value Balance Sheet Equation]


 MV(AG) = C[MV(AG), DBG, σG, T, r] + DBG – P[MV(AG), DBG, σG, T, r]
          + P[MV(AB), DBB, σB, T, r]

 FSG     = P[MV(AB), DBB, σB, T, r]           [Contingent Financial Support to Banks/Financial Institutions]


 MV(DG) = DBG – P[MV(AG), DBG, σG, T, r]                                             [Equation for MV(DG)]



                                             34
Annex 3 (cont.) – Figure A3-2

Negative Shock to Corporate Sector Assets, decline of $40 billion (from $120 to $80
billion) as compared to base case.

                               Corporate Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Corporate Assets                   80       Loans ( Default-free            74.1
                                 (- 40)     value = 90, minus             (- 13.1)
                                            implicit loan guarantee –
                                            or put option of 15.8)
                                            Corporate Equity                 5.9
                                                                          (- 26.9)
Total                               80                                       80
                                  (- 40)                                   (- 40)

                                Banking Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                 Liabilities
Loans (90 -15.8)                   74.1     Deposits                       81.3
                                 (- 13.1)
Financial Guarantee                13.3     Equity                          6.1
                                 (+ 5.7)                                  (-7.2)
Total                              87.4                                    87.4
                                  (- 7.2)                                 (- 7.2)

                                 Public Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Domestic assets                   100        Financial Guarantee to        13.3
                                             Banks                        (+ 5.7)

Foreign reserves                   40        Foreign Debt                   80.4
                                                                          (- 1.75)
                                             Local Currency Debt &
                                             Other Liabilities              46.2
                                                                          (- 4.25)
Total                             140                                       140

(Units are in Billions of $)

    Risk Transmission: Lower corporate assets → lower corporate equity and debt →
lower bank assets → higher guarantee from government required → higher cost of
government guarantee lowers value of sovereign debt. The value of the assets of the
corporate sector declines, so does the value of the debt (and equity) which leads to a
decline in bank assets and an increase in the implicit government guarantee. The delta of
the guarantee is -0.56 in this case, as compared to -0.35 in the base case.


                                              35
Annex 3 (cont.) – Figure A3-3
           Deposit Run – Default barrier rises for banks as $36 billion of long term savings
and time deposits become short-term liabilities with deposit run. In this contingent
claims framework for banks, the default barrier for banks includes deposits calculated as
default-free value of short and long-term deposits which is approximated by demand
deposits plus a fraction of time and saving deposits. In a deposit run, a portion of the
long-term time and savings deposits shift to the short-term category, thus raising the
overall default barrier and raising the size of the implicit guarantee of the government.
As $36 billion of long term savings and time deposits become short-term liabilities, the
result is a significant increase in implicit financial guarantees from $7.4 billion to $32.6
billion, an increase of $25.2 billion from the base case. The delta of the guarantee
is -0.83 in this case, more than double the -0.35 delta value in the base case.


                               Corporate Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Corporate Assets                  120       Loans ( Default-free             87.2
                                            value = 90, minus
                                            implicit loan guarantee –
                                            or put option – of 2.8)
                                            Corporate Equity                 32.8
Total                             120                                        120

                                Banking Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                 Liabilities
Loans (90 -2.8)                   87.2      Deposits                        117.3
                                                                            (+ 36)
Financial Guarantee                32.6       Equity                          2.5
                                 (+ 25.2)                                  (- 10.8)
Total                             119.8                                     119.8
                                 (+ 25.2)                                  (+ 25.2)

                                 Public Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Domestic assets                   100        Financial Guarantee to          32.6
                                             Banks                         (+ 25.2)

Foreign reserves                   40        Foreign Debt                    73.7
                                                                            (- 8.4)
                                             Local-currency Debt &           33.7
                                             Other Liabilities             (- 16.8)

Total                             140                                        140

(Units are in Billions of $)


                                              36
Annex 3 (cont.) Figure A3-4
Negative Shock to Public Sector Assets of $20 billion, result is lower “market value of
liabilities” as compared to base case.

                               Corporate Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Corporate Assets                  120       Loans ( Default-free             87.2
                                            value = 90, minus
                                            implicit loan guarantee –
                                            or put option – of 2.8)
                                            Corporate Equity                 32.8
Total                             120                                        120

                                Banking Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                 Liabilities
Loans (90 -2.8)                   87.2      Deposits                         81.3
Financial Guarantee                7.4      Equity                           13.3
Total                             94.6                                       94.6

                                 Public Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Domestic assets                     90       Financial Guarantee to           7.4
                                  (- 10)     Banks

Foreign reserves                    30       Foreign Debt                     79.1
                                  (- 10)                                    ( - 3.1)
                                             Local Currency Debt &
                                             Other Liabilities                33.5
                                                                           ( - 16.9)
Total                              120                                        120
                                  (- 20)                                     (- 20)

(Units are in Billions of $)

Risk Transmission: Negative shock to government assets → lower value of foreign debt
(senior debt in this example) and lower value of local-currency debt and other liabilities.




                                              37
Annex 3 (cont.) Figure A3-5
Negative Shock to Government Assets and Decline in Value of Government Securities
Held by Banks – Banking sector assets consist of half government securities and half
loans to corporate sector (as compared to 100% corporate loans in the base case). The
market value of government securities (local-currency debt) declines due to decline in
government assets of $20 billion relative to the base case. The decline in government
assets of $20 billion increases the guarantee to banks by $6.2 billion to $13.6 billion. The
vicious cycle could arise, when the lower value of government securities lowers bank
assets, and raises the implicit financial guarantee, which in turn lowers government assets
further. This means that the implicit guarantee is higher than what is shown above.

                               Corporate Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Corporate Assets                  120       Loans ( Default-free              87.2
                                            value = 90, minus              (43.6 loans
                                            implicit loan guarantee –     from banks,
                                            or put option – of 2.8)       and 43.6 to
                                                                          non-banks)
                                             Corporate Equity                 32.8
Total                              120                                        120

                                Banking Sector Balance Sheet
                Assets                                    Liabilities
Loans (43.6) and Govt.             73.6     Deposits                          81.3
Securities (30)                  ( -16.4)
Financial Guarantee               13.58     Equity                            6.1
                                 (+ 6.18)                                   ( -7.2)
Total                              94.6                                      94.6

                                 Public Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                   Liabilities
Domestic assets                     90       Financial Guarantee to          13.58
                                  (- 10)     Banks                          (+ 6.18)

Foreign reserves                    30       Foreign Debt                      76.8
                                  (- 10)                                    ( - 5.35)
                                             Local-currency Debt &
                                             Other Liabilities                 29.9
                                                                           ( - 20.55 )
Total                              120                                         120
                                  (- 20)                                      (- 20)

(Units are in Billions of $)




                                              38
Annex 3 (cont.) – Figure A3-6
This scenario describes a negative shock to corporate sector assets (as in A5-2. above), in
the case where the pension system contains one-half of corporate sector equity (in a
defined benefit plan which also has a government guarantee). The results are shown
below in Figure A5-6. A decline in corporate assets by $40 billion (from $120 to $80
billion) would cause the corporate equity value to drop by $26.9 billion to $5.9 billion (as
compared with the base case). This increases the government guarantee to the pension
system by $9 billion and the implicit guarantee to banks by $5.7 billion. In total, the
government guarantees to pension system and banking system would increase to $22.3
billion, significantly higher than $7.4 billion in the base case).




                                            39
Figure A3-6
                            Corporate Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                Liabilities
Corporate Assets                80       Loans ( Default-free            74.1
                              (- 40)     value = 90, minus             (- 13.1)
                                         implicit loan guarantee –
                                         or put option of 15.8)
                                         Corporate Equity                 5.9
                                                                       (- 26.9)
Total                            80                                       80
                               (- 40)                                   (- 40)

                             Banking Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                Liabilities
Loans (90 -15.8)                74.1       Deposits                      81.3
                              (- 13.1)
Financial Guarantee             13.3       Equity                         6.1
                              (+ 5.7)                                   (-7.2)
Total                           87.4                                     87.4
                               (- 7.2)                                  (- 7.2)
                                     Pension System
                 Assets                                  Liabilities
Corporate Equity                  3        Defined Benefit (Present       12
(initially 16.4)              (- 13.4)     Value)
Financial Guarantee               9
                                (+ 9)
Total                            12                                       12
                              Public Sector Balance Sheet
                   Assets                                Liabilities
Domestic assets                 100       Financial Guarantee to         13.3
                                          Banks & Financial               +9
                                          Guarantee to Pension          =22.3
                                          System                       (+ 14.7)
Foreign reserves                 40       Foreign Debt                   78.9
                                                                       (- 3.25)
                                          Local-currency Debt &
                                          Other Liabilities                39
                                                                       (- 11.45)
Total                          140                                        140

(Units are $ Billions.)




                                           40
References
Allen, M., C. Rosenberg, C. Keller, B. Sester, and N. Roubini, “A Balance Sheet
Approach to Financial Crisis,” IMF Working Paper 02/210, 2002.
Beckerman, P. and A. Solimano, Crisis and Dollarization in Ecuador, World Bank,
2002.
Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973), “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,”
Journal of Political Economy, 81 (May-June): 637-54.
Black, Fischer, Business Cycles and Equilibrium, Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Blejer, M and A. Cheasty, Chapter 14 in How to Measure the Fiscal Deficit, edited by,
IMF, 2000.
Blejer, Mario and Liliana Schumacher (2000), “Central banks use of derivatives and
other contingent liabilities: Analytical issues and policy implications”, Working Paper
00/66. Washington, IMF.
BIS Financial Stability Forum, Report on Capital Flows, April 2000, Chairman Mario
Draghi.
BIS Working Paper No 92, “Recent Initiatives to Improve Regulation and Supervision of
Private Capital Flows,” October 2000.
Bodie, Z. and R. C. Merton. "Pension Benefit Guarantees in the United States: A
Functional Analysis." In The Future of Pensions in the United States, edited by R.
Schmitt. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993.
Bodie, Z. and Merton R., 2000 Finance, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.

Bodie, Zvi and Robert C. Merton (2002), “International pension swaps”, Journal of
Pension Economics and Finance, vol.1 (January).
Bodie, Zvi, “On Asset-Liability Matching and Federal Deposit and Pension Insurance,”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August 2006.
Buiter, W., “Measurement of the Public Sector Deficit and Its Implications for Policy
Evaluation and Design,” Chapter 14 in How to Measure the Fiscal Deficit, edited by
Blejer, M. and A. Cheasty, IMF, 2000.
Chan-Lau, Jorge, “Anticipating Credit Events Using Credit Default Swaps, with an
Application to Sovereign Debt Crises,” IMF Working Paper 03/106, 2003.
Crouhy, Michel, Dan Galai and Robert Mark (2000) Risk Management.
New York: Mc Graw Hill.
Draghi, Mario, F. Giavazzi, and R. C. Merton, Transparency, Risk Management and
International Financial Fragility. Paper prepared for the Fourth Geneva Conference on



                                            41
“Financial Markets: Shock Absorbers or Shock Creators?” Geneva, Switzerland, May 10,
2002.
Gapen, Michael T., Dale F. Gray, Cheng Hoon Lim, and Yingbin Xiao, 2004, “The
Contingent Claims Approach to Corporate Vulnerability Analysis: Estimating Default
Risk and Economy-Wide Risk Transfer,” IMF Working Paper 04/121 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).publications@imf.org.
Gapen, Michael T., Dale F. Gray, Cheng Hoon Lim, and Yingbin Xiao, 2005,
“Measuring and Analyzing Sovereign Risk with Contingent Claims” IMF Working Paper
05/155. (Washington: International Monetary Fund). publications@imf.org
Gray, D., Robert C. Merton, Zvi Bodie, “A New Framework for Analyzing and
Managing Macrofinancial Risks,” Conference on Finance and the Macroeconomy,
October 2002, NYU.
Gray, D. and Stone, M., “Corporate Balance Sheets and Macroeconomic Policy,”
Finance and Development, September 1999.
Gray, Dale F. (2001) “Macro financial risk country report: Thailand, MFRISK™ and
Macro Financial Risk Framework.” (Macro Financial Risk Framework – Patent Pending).
Gray, D, “Macro Finance: The Bigger Picture,” Risk Magazine, June 2002.
Gray, D., Presentations at Credit Risk Summit in NY and London in 2000; GARP
Convention Presentation Feb. 2001; Presentations at several Risk Conferences, including
June 2001 Boston, April 2002 Paris and June 2002 Boston.
Gray, D., “Raise the Flags: Applying Risk Analysis Tools to Economies,” GARP Risk
Review, Issue 11, March/April 03.
Gray, D., Lim, C. H., Malone, S., “A New Debt Sustainability Framework: Incorporating
Balance Sheets and Uncertainty”, Forthcoming IMF Working Paper 2006/7. IMF.
IMF, 2006, Global Financial Stability Report IGFSR) Box 3.6 page 120.
IMF, August 2006, Gray, D. and Jones, M., Indonesia: Selected Issues Paper, Chapter
III. “Measuring Sovereign and Banking Risk in Indonesia: An Application of the
Contingent Claims Approach” in IMF Country Report No. 06/318,
publications@imf.org.
Jarrow, R., and Madan, D., “Arbitrage, Martingales, and Private Monetary Value,”
Journal of Risk, Vol 3, No. 1, Fall 2000.
KMV Corporation, “Modeling Default Risk,” 1999 KMV Corp, Crosbie, Peter, KMV.
Merton, R.C. (1973), “Theory of Rational Option Pricing,” Bell Journal of Economics
and Management Science, 4 (Spring): 141-83.(Chapter 8 in Continuous-Time Finance)
Merton, R.C., "On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates."
Journal of Finance 29 (May 1974), pp. 449-70. (Chapter12 in Continuous-Time
Finance).



                                           42
Merton, R.C., "An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Loan Guarantees and Deposit
Insurance: An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory." Journal of Banking and
Finance 1 (June 1977), pp. 3-11 (Chapter 19 in Continuous-Time Finance)
Merton, R. C. (1992), Continuous-Time Finance. Oxford, U.K.: Basil Blackwell, (Rev.
ed.)
Merton, R.C. (1995), "A Functional Perspective of Financial Intermediation," Financial
Management, Vol. 24, No. 2, (Summer): 23-41.
Merton, R.C. (1998), “Applications of Option-Pricing Theory: Twenty-Five Years
Later,” Les Prix Nobel 1997, Stockholm: Nobel Foundation; reprinted in American
Economic Review, (June): 323-349.
Merton, R.C., "Commentary: Finance Theory and the Shift to Integration", Risk, July
1999, P. 50
Merton, R.C., "Future Possibilities in Finance Theory and Finance Practice." In
Mathematical Finance – Bachelier Congress 2000, edited by H.Geman, D. Madan, S.
Pliska and T. Vorst. Berlin Springer-Verlag, 2002.
Merton, R.C. and Z. Bodie (1992), "On the Management of Financial Guarantees,"
Financial Management, 21 (Winter): 87-109.
Merton, R.C. and Bodie, Z. "Deposit Insurance Reform: A Functional Approach." In
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. Vol. 38, edited by A. Meltzer
and C. Plosser. Amsterdam: Elsevier N.V., 1993.
Moody’s Investors Service, Global Credit Research, “Moody’s Public Firm Risk Model:
A Hybrid Approach to Modeling Short Term Default Risk.”
Neftci, S. N., An Introduction to the Mathematics of Financial Derivatives, Academic
Press, USA, 2000.
Pettis, Michael, The Volatility Machine, Oxford, 2001.
Posen, A., “A Strategy to Prevent Future Crises: Safely Shrink the Banking Sector,”
Institute for International Economics, 2001. (http://www.iie.com/papers/posen0601-2.htm)
Schaechter, A., “Implementation of Monetary Policy and the Central Bank’s Balance
Sheet,” IMF Working Paper 01/149, 2001.
Shimko, David, Tejima, N. van Deventer, D. “The Pricing of Risky Debt When Interest
Rates are Stochastic”, Journal of Fixed Income, September 1993.
Xu, David, and Piero Ghezzi, 2002, “From Fundamentals to Spreads: A Fair Spread
Model for High Yield Emerging Market Sovereigns,” Global Markets Research,
Deutsche Bank.




                                            43
Dale Gray is President of MF Risk, Inc. and Sr. Risk Expert for the IMF Monetary and
Capital Markets Department, MFRisk board members include Robert C. Merton and Zvi
Bodie. Contact information for Dale Gray is email Dgray@MFRisk.com or
Dgray@imf.org. Contact information for Robert Merton is
www.people.hbs.edu/rmerton/ and Zvi Bodie is zbodie@bu.edu.

The authors would like to thank Carlos Medeiros, Michael Gapen, Yingbin Xiao, Cheng
Hoon Lim, Matt Jones, Paul Mills (all IMF), Stephen Kealhofer (Moody’s-KMV), Simon
Jiang (Moody’s Investors Service), Sam Malone (Oxford) and Joe Zou (Taconic) for
useful discussions and comments on the ideas presented in the paper.




                                         44
