                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE IMPACT OF INCENTIVES ON HUMAN BEHAVIOR:
         CAN WE MAKE IT DISAPPEAR? THE CASE OF THE DEATH PENALTY

                                           Naci H. Mocan
                                           R. Kaj Gittings

                                        Working Paper 12631
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12631


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




We thank Paul Mahler and Weijia Wu for excellent research assistance and Ted Joyce, Michael Grossman,
Steve Medema, Laura Argys, and Erdal Tekin for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2006 by Naci H. Mocan and R. Kaj Gittings. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Impact of Incentives on Human Behavior: Can We Make It Disappear? The Case of the
Death Penalty
Naci H. Mocan and R. Kaj Gittings
NBER Working Paper No. 12631
October 2006
JEL No. K0,K14,K4,K42

                                             ABSTRACT

Although decades of empirical research has demonstrated that criminal behavior responds to incentives,
non-economists frequently express the belief that human beings are not rational enough to make calculated
decisions about the costs and benefits of engaging in crime and therefore, a priori drawing the conclusion
that criminal activity cannot be altered by incentives. However, scientific research should not be driven
by personal beliefs. Whether or not economic conditions matter or deterrence measures such police,
arrests, prison deaths, executions, and commutations provide signals to people is an empirical question,
which should be guided by a solid theoretical framework. In this paper we extend the analysis of Mocan
and Gittings (2003). We alter the original model in a number of directions to make the relationship
between homicide rates and death penalty related outcomes (executions, commutations and removals)
disappear. We deliberately deviate from the theoretically consistent measurement of the risk variables
originally employed by Mocan and Gittings (2003) in a variety of ways. We also investigate the sensitivity
of the results to changes in the estimation sample (removing high executing states for example) and
weighting. The basic results are insensitive to these and a variety of other specification tests performed
in the paper. The results are often strong enough to even hold up under theoretically meaningless
measurements of the risk variables. In summary, the original findings of Mocan and Gittings (2003)
are robust, providing evidence that people indeed react to incentives induced by capital punishment.
Research findings about the deterrent effect of the death penalty evoke strong feelings, which could
be due to political, ideological, religious, or other personal beliefs. Yet, such findings do not mean
that capital punishment is good or bad, nor does it provide any judgment about whether capital punishment
should be implemented or abolished. It is simply a scientific finding which demonstrates that people
react to incentives. Therefore, there is no need to be afraid of this result.

Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Campus Box 181; P.O. Box 173364
Denver, CO 80217-3364
and NBER
naci.mocan@cudenver.edu

R. Kaj Gittings
Cornell University
Department of Economics
391 Pine Tree Road
Ithaca, NY 14850
rkg8@cornell.edu
The Impact of Incentives on Human Behavior: Can We Make It Disappear?
                          The Case of the Death Penalty


“Get your facts first, and then you can distort ‘em as much as you please.”
Mark Twain as quoted by Rudyard Kipling in From Sea to Sea (1914, p.180)


I. Introduction

       Economists are interested in the investigation of human behavior and how

individuals respond to prices and incentives. Economic theory, which demonstrates an

inverse relationship between the price of a commodity and its consumption, similarly

suggests that an increase in the price or cost of a behavior leads to a reduction in the

intensity of that behavior. Therefore, as economic analysis of consumer behavior is

applicable to any commodity ranging from apples to cars, it is also applicable to any type

of human behavior, ranging from drunk driving to sexual activity to marital dissolution.

Based on economic theory, an immense amount of empirical research has investigated

the extent to which individuals alter their behavior in response to increases in the relevant

“prices” that may impact that behavior.



Rationality and Reaction to Incentives

       One common argument made by non-economists against the economic approach

to human behavior is that people are not rational enough to behave according to the

predictions of economic theory when it comes to behaviors such as smoking,

consumption of alcohol and illicit drugs, sexual activity and crime. However, an

enormous empirical literature in economics has demonstrated that even these behaviors

are responsive to prices and incentives. For example, consumption of cigarettes declines




                                              1
when cigarette prices rise (e.g., Becker, Murphy and Grossman, 1994; Yurekli and Zhang

2000; Gruber, Sen, and Stabile, 2003), alcohol consumption is curtailed when alcohol

prices are increased (e.g., Farrell, Manning and Finch 2003, Manning, Blumberg and

Moulton 1995), drug use responds to variations in drug prices, (e.g., van Ours 1995;

Saffer and Chaloupka 1999; Grossman 2005), pregnancies and childbearing are

influenced by state and federal policies that alter the costs (e.g. Mellor 1998; Lundberg

and Plotnick 1995), and the timing of births within a year is responsive to the tax benefit

of having a child (Dickert-Conlin and Chandra, 1999). Such results hold true even in

sub-populations such as adolescents, who are thought to be present-oriented and less

rational (e.g., Pacula et al. 2001; Gruber and Zinman 2001; Grossman and Chaloupka

1998; Grossman et al. 1994; Lundberg and Plotnick 1990), and among individuals with

mental health problems (Saffer and Dave 2005). In a different vein, research in

experimental economics has demonstrated that individuals respond to changes in prices

as predicted by economic theory, and even children behave rationally when modifying

their behavior in response to variations in prices (Harbaugh et al. 2001).

       The same results are obtained from analyses of the response of criminal activity to

the relevant costs and benefits. The pioneering work of Becker (1968) indicates that

criminal activity should decline as the “price” of such activity increases. In his Nobel

Lecture on December 9, 1992, Becker stated that

               “In the 1950s and 1960s intellectual discussions of crime
       were dominated by the opinion that criminal behavior was caused by
       mental illness and social oppression, and that criminals were helpless
       “victims.”… I explored instead the theoretical and empirical
       implications of the assumption that criminal behavior is rational (see
       the early pioneering work by Bentham [1931] and Beccaria [1986]),
       but again “rationality” did not necessarily imply narrow materialism.
       It recognized that many people are constrained by moral and ethical



                                             2
       considerations, and did not commit crimes even when they were
       profitable and there was no danger of detection. However, police
       and jails would be unnecessary if such attitudes always prevailed.
       Rationality implied that some individuals become criminals because
       of the financial rewards from crime compared to legal work, taking
       into account of the likelihood of apprehension and conviction, and
       the severity of punishment.”

         Empirical analyses testing the economic model of crime have demonstrated that

illicit behavior indeed responds to incentives and sanctions. For example, Jacob and

Levitt (2003) show that incentives for high test scores motivated teachers and

administrators to cheat on standardized tests in Chicago public schools. Corman and

Mocan (2000, 2005) and DiTella and Schargrodsky (2004) demonstrate that increased

arrests and more police officers reduce crime. Levitt (1998a) shows that juvenile crime

goes down when punishment gets stiffer. Grogger (1998) and Mocan and Rees (2005)

find that the extent of criminal involvement among high school students is influenced by

both economic conditions and deterrence. Similarly, it has been shown that prison

crowding, which generates early release of prisoners, has a significant impact on crime

rates (Levitt 1996).

       One specific sub-analysis in this domain has received significant attention.

Specifically, the extent to which homicide rates respond to deterrence was first

investigated theoretically and empirically by Ehrlich (1973, 1975, 1977), who found a

deterrent effect of capital punishment. Some analysts questioned the robustness of the

results (Hoenack and Weiler 1980; Passell and Taylor, 1977), and Ehrlich and others

responded to these criticisms (Ehrlich and Mark 1977, Ehrlich and Brower 1987, Ehrlich

and Liu 1999).




                                            3
Robustness of Research Findings

       Because no one single research paper can provide the final answer to a particular

scientific question, it is always important for second-generation researchers to investigate

the robustness of the findings in the original work. Recent examples of such activity

include the debate on the impact of guns on crime, and the relationship between abortion

and crime. Lott and Mustard (1997) reported evidence on the negative impact of

concealed weapons laws on crime. Subsequently, other researchers investigated the

robustness of the original results (Plassmann and Tideman 2001; Moody 2001; Ayres and

Donohue III 2003; Plassmann and Whitley 2003). Similarly, following the paper by

Donohue III and Levitt (2001) which documents a negative relationship between abortion

and crime, a debate has surged whether the findings are reflective of a causal impact

(Joyce 2004a; Donohue III and Levitt 2004b; Joyce 2004; Foote and Goetz 2005;

Donohue III and Levitt 2006). 1

       Along the same lines, in a recent article Donohue III and Wolfers (2006)

(D-III&W hereafter) focus on a number of papers that reported a deterrent effect of death

penalty on homicide, and claim that the findings of these papers are not robust. One

section of the D-III&W piece concentrates on Mocan and Gittings (2003), but it does not

provide an accurate representation of the findings of Mocan and Gittings (2003), or the

robustness of the results. The purpose of this paper is to provide a detailed sensitivity

analysis regarding the impact of leaving death row (executions, commutations and other

removals from death row) on state homicide rates. Specifically, we make various


1 Examples of other debates include the impact of the minimum wage laws and the schooling
reform.


                                              4
attempts to eliminate the deterrent effect of capital punishment and investigate if and

under what conditions one succeeds in eliminating the impact of leaving death row on the

homicide rate.

         As we demonstrate in detail below, the signaling effect of leaving death row and

its impact on homicide is robust. Although the impact of executions disappears when one

estimates peculiar specifications as was done by D-III&W (which are inconsistent with

theory), the impact of commutations remains significant even in those models. And, as

described in the paper in detail, and summarized in Table 15, in many cases the results do

not disappear under other specifications that have no theoretical foundation.



II. The Empirical Model

       Following Mocan and Gittings (2003), the investigation of the impact of

deterrence on homicide is carried out by estimating models of the following form:

(1)    MURDERit = Dit-1 β + Xit Ω +μi +ηt +Ρit+ε it,

where MURDERit is the homicide rate in state i and year t. The vector X contains state

characteristics that may be correlated with criminal activity, including the unemployment

rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age

groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state population in

urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the party affiliation

of the governor, and the legal drinking age in the state. Theoretical and empirical

justification for the inclusion of these variables can be found in Levitt

(1998a), and Lott and Mustard (1997). The variable μi represents unobserved state-

specific characteristics that impact the murder rate, and ηt represents year effects. To



                                              5
control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, a dummy variable is

included which takes the value of one in Oklahoma in 1995 and zero elsewhere. The

models also include state-specific time-trends represented by Ρit.



Measurement of risks (increase and decrease in the cost of murder)

       The vector D represents deterrence variables, and includes the probability of

apprehension, the probability of sentencing given apprehension, as well as various

probabilities pertaining to leaving death row, conditional on sentencing.

       It is important to note that execution is not the only outcome for prisoners on

death row. During the period of 1977-97 (the time period analyzed), among the inmates

who completed their duration on death row, 17 percent were executed. The other 83

percent left death row for other reasons (e.g. commutation of the sentence, sentence or

conviction being overturned, sentence being found unconstitutional). This information

allows for an investigation as to how the murder rate reacts to an increase in the price of

crime (executions) and a decrease in the price of crime (commutation, and all removals

other than executions and deaths).

       It is important to define these probabilities appropriately at the outset. Once their

proper measurements are understood, they can be manipulated to make the deterrence

result disappear. The first one of these probabilities is the probability of apprehension

given committing murder. The second one is the probability of conviction given

apprehension, and the third one is the probability of execution (or commutation) given

conviction.




                                             6
        The probability of apprehension is a measure of the risk of getting caught, given

that a murder is committed. Because the unit of analysis is state-year, this probability is

measured as the proportion of murders cleared by an arrest in a particular state and year;

i.e. ARRATEt =(ARt/MURt), where ARt is the number of homicide arrests in a state in

year t (state subscript is dropped for ease of exposition), and MURt stands for the number

of homicides in year t.

        The second risk variable is the probability of receiving a death sentence, given

that a murder arrest took place. This probability is measured as the proportion of people

convicted for murder from the pool of individuals who were arrested for murder. 2 After

a person is arrested for murder, he/she does not automatically end up on death row.

Instead, a trial takes place. Furthermore, each person who goes to trial is not

automatically found guilty. Therefore, one can calculate the probability of being found

guilty and being sentenced to death following a trial, conditional on being arrested for

murder. The average duration between the date of a murder arrest and the date on which

an inmate is sentenced to death is more than one year. 3 Thus, the risk of receiving the

death sentence is defined as the number of death sentences handed out in a year divided

by the number of murder arrests two years prior. That is, SENTRATEt= (SENTt/ARt-2),

where SENTt represents the number of death sentences handed out in year t.

        If a person receives the death sentence after the trial, he/she is not executed

instantly. Ignoring this point (as was done by D-III&W) will be helpful in attempts to

make some of the results disappear. But the reality is, researchers recognized that the


2 That is, if 100 individuals are arrested for murder and 10 of them are subsequently convicted,
the risk of conviction is 10%.
3 For example, a person who is arrested in October 1990, is likely to receive a death sentence
after February 1992.


                                                7
average duration on death row is about six years (Bedau 1997, Dezhbakhsh, Rubin and

Shepherd 2003, Mocan and Gittings 2003, Argys and Mocan 2004). About 83 percent of

the inmates are removed from death row for reasons other than execution. One such

reason is commutation, where the inmate is granted clemency and the sentence is

changed to a prison term, typically life. Because commutation implies a reduced risk of

death, and therefore a reduced cost of committing murder, an increase in the probability

of commutations should theoretically increase the homicide rate.     The same argument is

true for all removals from death row (other than executions and other deaths while on

death row).

       Therefore, following Mocan and Gittings (2003), three death penalty-related

deterrence variables are created. The first one is the risk of execution conditional on

being sentenced to death, the second one is the risk of being commuted conditional on

being sentenced to death, and the third one is the risk of being removed from death row

for reasons other than execution or other death conditional on being sentenced to death.

This third measure includes commutations, but is more comprehensive as it also includes

removals due to overturned sentence or conviction, or sentence being found

unconstitutional. According to economic theory, an increase in the first variable (the risk

of execution) should decrease the homicide rate as it makes murder more costly. On the

other hand, an increase in the second and third variables is expected to increase the

murder rate because an increase in the commutation or removal rate is associated with a

reduction in the cost of homicide.

       Donohue III and Wolfers (2006) employ the data and methods of Mocan and

Gittings (2003), but they do not carefully consider the timing of events. They create




                                             8
these variables as the ratio of executions (or removals) in a given year to the number of

death sentences in that same year, i.e. as (EXECt/SENTt), or (REMOVEt / SENTt).

Although useful in making the deterrence results disappear, these variables have no

meaning. This is because the numerator and denominator of the ratio have no connection

to each other. As discussed above, individuals who are sentenced to death in a given year

are not at risk of execution in that same year. However, by employing the ratio of

executions in year t to the death sentences in year t, D-III&W assume that execution of

each inmate takes place in the same year he/she was sentenced to death. As mentioned

earlier, the reality is that, after being sentenced to death, on average, death row inmates

face the event of execution or commutation about six years later; and the average

duration on death row for those who are removed from death row for reasons other than

death or execution is about five years (see Figure 10, which displays the progression of

the average duration on death row over time).

       Although calculating these probabilities as was done by D-III&W is not sensible,

it would be reasonable to ask if the results were sensitive to variations in their proper

measurement. Specifically, we will consider variations in the probability of execution,

the probability of commutation, and the probability of removal from death row in three

different dimensions, and will investigate if these variations make the results disappear.

First, we will change the denominator of the risk variables to investigate if the results

disappear when we calculate the risks of execution, commutation and removals as

(EXECt/SENTt-5), (COMMt/SENTt-5), (REMOVEt/SENTt-5), assuming a five-year wait

on death row, and (EXECt/SENTt-4), (COMMt/SENTt-4), (REMOVEt/SENTt-4), assuming

a four-year wait. Put differently, we will investigate the sensitivity of the results to the




                                              9
change in denominator of the risk variable, which is the average duration on death row.

By doing so, we move the lag lengths of the risk variables towards the direction favored

by D-III&W. Second, we will analyze whether alterations in the measurement of

execution risk, commutation risk and removal risk make the result disappear if the

numerators of these ratios are changed.

       As described in detail in Mocan and Gittings (2003) an advantage of these data is

the availability of the date of each execution and removal, which enables one to create

execution, commutation and removal measures that are consistent with theory. If

executions, commutations or removals from death row send signals to potential criminals,

then the timing of the signal is important. For example, an execution which took place in

January of 1980 can have an impact on the homicide rate for the full year of 1980.

However, if the execution took place in December 1980, it will have a trivial impact on

the 1980 homicide rate. Rather, the impact of this December execution on murder will be

felt in 1981. Therefore, executions, commutations and removals are prorated based on

the month in which they occurred. As above, an execution that took place in January

1980 is expected to impact the state homicide rate for the entire twelve months in 1980.

Therefore we count this execution as a full execution in 1980. In contrast, if an execution

took place in November 1980, it is assumed that its deterrent impact on homicide is felt

during the subsequent 12-month period. Thus, this November execution counts as 2/12

of an execution for 1980 and 10/12 of an execution for 1981. The same algorithms are

applied for commutations and removals. We call these the first measure of executions,

commutations and removals. (This is the measure employed by Mocan and Gittings 2003,

and also Donohue III and Wolfers 2006).




                                            10
       As another measure, we created the following algorithm: If an execution took

place within the first three quarters of a year, we attributed that execution to the same

year. If the execution took place in the last quarter of a year (October-December) we

attributed that execution to the following year under the assumption that the relative

impact on murders would be felt in the following year. The same was done for removals

and commutations. We name these the second measures of executions, commutations

and removals (EXEC2, COMM2 and REMOVE2).



III. Let’s Make it Disappear

       We estimate various versions of Equation (1). As was done in Mocan and

Gittings (2003), each specification controls for the following variables: The murder

arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real per capita income, the

proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and

55 and over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is

black, the infant mortality rate, governor’s party affiliation, and the legal drinking age in

the state. We control for state fixed-effects, a common time trend, state-specific time

trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing,

the number of prisoners per violent crime as well as the prison death rate: a measure of

prison conditions. These last two variables are included as additional measures of

deterrence, following Levitt (1998a), and Katz, Levitt and Shustorovich (2003).

       Following Corman and Mocan (2000), Levitt (1998a), Katz Levitt and

Shistorovich (2003), and Mocan and Gittings (2003), the deterrence variables are lagged




                                             11
by one year to minimize the concerns of simultaneity. For example, if the risk variable is

(EXECt/SENTt-5), its lagged value is employed in the regressions

[i.e. (EXECt/SENTt-5)-1 = (EXECt-1/SENTt-6)]. The models are estimated with weighted-

least squares, where the weights are state’s share in the U.S. population. Robust standard

errors, which are clustered at the state level, are reported in parentheses under the

coefficients. In the interest of space, only the coefficients and standard errors pertaining

to executions, commutations and removals are reported.

        Table 1A displays the results where the first measures of execution, commutation

and removal are employed. These are the same measures used by Mocan and Gittings

(2003) and D-III&W. The only difference between D-III&W’s specification, the

specification used by Mocan and Gittings (2003), and the one reported in Table 1A is the

denominator of the execution, commutation and removal rates. Specifically, the top

panel of Table 1A measures the relevant risks as (EXECt/SENTt-5), (COMMt/SENTt-5),

(REMOVEt/SENTt-5). That is, it calculates the rates of execution, commutation and

removal per death sentences imposed 5 years earlier (assuming that the average duration

on death row is 5 years). The models presented in the middle panel of Table 1A are

identical, except, the average duration on death row is assumed to be 4 years. Thus, the

variables are calculated as (EXECt/SENTt-4), (COMMt/SENTt-4),               and

(REMOVEt/SENTt-4). 4

        A number of aspects of the results in Table 1A are noteworthy. First, the point

estimates are very robust between specifications reported in the top two panels. Second,


4 Mocan and Gittings (2003) employed risk variables that take the average duration on death row as six
years (denominator SENT lagged six years) in models for executions and commutations. Because the time
between sentencing and REMOVE from death row is about 5 years, they employed SENT lagged five years
in the denominator when the model included removals. Dohonue III and Wolfers (2006), on the other
hand, use zero lags of SENT in the denominator.


                                                 12
the execution rate has a negative and statistically significant impact on the murder rate.

Third, the commutation and removal rates have positive impacts on the homicide rate.

Fourth, these results are consistent with the specifications reported in Mocan and Gittings

(2003), despite different lag lengths of the denominator (i.e. despite the fact that duration

on death row is assumed to be shorter than it really is).

       The bottom panel of Table 1A displays the results of the model estimated by

D-III&W using the same data. In this specification, the execution, commutation and

removal rates are calculated by dividing executions, commutations and removals in a

year to the number of death sentences in that same year. Thus, they assume that the

duration on death row is less than one year. Similarly, in their specification, D-III&W

calculate the sentencing rate as the ratio of death sentences in a year to murder arrests in

that same year, assuming that the time length from arrest-to-trial-to-sentencing is less

than one year. This bizarre specification allows the execution result disappear, but even

this specification cannot eliminate the impact of commutations on the homicide rate.

       Note that the equation on page 816 of D-III&W includes a variable called

(Pardonst-1 /DeathSentencest-7). D-III&W write that Mocan and Gittings (2003) estimate

that particular regression, although Mocan and Gittings (2003) do not employ pardons in

their paper. Similarly, Table 6 of D-III&W contains specifications in which a variable

named “Pardons” is included, and a discussion is provided about pardons. 5 Mocan and

Gittings (2003) employed commutations in their regressions, not pardons.

Commutations and pardons are two unrelated events. A pardon invalidates the guilt and



5 For example, Donohue III and Wolfers state on page 818 that “… the two related measures of
the porosity of the death sentence now yield sharply different results, with the pardon rate
(emphasis added) robustly and positively associated with homicide…”


                                             13
the punishment of the inmate. A commutation reduces the severity of punishment; it is

clemency, in which the sentence is reduced, typically to life in prison.

        Table 1B reports results obtained from models where the executions,

commutations and removals are measured differently. Here we employ the second set of

variables as described in Section II above. In other words, the only difference between

results reported in Table1A and Table1B is the measurement of the numerator of the

execution, commutation, and removal rates. Once again, the impact of the execution

rates does not disappear, unless one estimates the peculiar specification promoted by D-

III&W; and similar to Table 1A, even in this case, the impact of the commutation rate on

the homicide rate is positive and statistically significant.




All Executions are in Texas

        Donohue III and Wolfers (2006) write that California and Texas are very

interesting states which contain substantial and useful information for establishing the

deterrent effect of the death penalty, but suggest that the results may be sensitive to

exclusion of Texas and California from the analysis (D-III&W p.826). Table 2A displays

the results obtained from models estimated with two different death row durations, and

two different ways to measure risk. Therefore, Table 2A is comparable to the top two

panels in Tables 1A and 1B with one difference: Texas is omitted from the models.

Table 2B is similar to Table 2A, except these regressions omit California. As the tables

demonstrate, these attempts to make the results disappear are not successful either. As

another attempt at disappearance, we excluded both Texas and California, and ran the




                                              14
regressions without both states. The results, reported in Table 2C, show that the impact

of executions and commutations or removals are still significant when Texas and

California are both omitted from the analysis.



The Importance of the Denominator Once Again

       Why is it the case that omitting Texas does not make the results disappear despite

the fact that Texas executes a disproportionately large number of death row inmates?

One obvious fallacy is to focus on executions when the correct measure is not the number

of executions, but the risk of the execution. Put differently, the number of executions

needs to be adjusted by the appropriate denominator, which is the number of death

sentences relevant for the cohort of death row inmates. Despite the fact that a particular

state has a large number of executions, the execution risk may not be high if the cohort of

inmates that was sentences to death 4-5 years earlier is also large.

       In Table 3 we summarize the number of executions, commutation, and removals

from death row for other reasons between 1977 and 1997 for selected states; and also

present the average execution risk in each state during that period. The first measure is

the number of executions in year t divided by number of death sentences 4 years earlier.

The second measure deflates the number of executions by death sentences 5 years prior.

The third and fourth measures displayed in the table are the number of executions divided

by prison population (EXECt/PRISONt), and the number of executions deflated by the

number of inmates on death row in the same year (EXECt/ROWt), respectively. We will

discuss the relevance of these last two measures in detail below, but suffice it to say that

Texas is not the highest ranked state by any of these execution risks. It is ranked 4th or




                                             15
5th, depending on the risk measure, behind Virginia, Arkansas, and Louisiana. Missouri

is generally ranked as the 5th state in execution risk. Therefore attempts to make the

results disappear would be more productive if one were to omit these states.

        Tables 4A-4C present the results obtained from models when Virginia, Arkansas

or Louisiana are dropped, respectively. In each case, dropping these states does not

influence the results. That is, even when we remove the high-risk states from the

analysis, the results are still robust. This may not be all that surprising, as the coefficients

are estimated through the variations in the variables within a state.

        This analysis shows that attempts to make the deterrence results disappear are

ineffective. Even if one estimates an unusual specification as was done by D-III&W

(replicated in the bottom panels of Table 1A and Table 1B) the estimated impact of

executions becomes statistically insignificant, but the positive impact of commutations on

the murder rate does not disappear.



IV. The Impact of Death Penalty Laws

        Donohue III and Wolfers (2006) indicate in their paper that they use our data and

programs and analyze “the death penalty effects” separately for each state, making sure to

control for the same variables as in [the] main specification.” They claim that what they

find is the following: homicide rates were higher in Kansas and New Hampshire after

these states adopted the death penalty; lower in New York and New Jersey after their

adoption of the death penalty; and homicide rates declined in Massachusetts and Rhode

Island after these states abolished the death penalty (D-III&W, p. 809).




                                              16
        In making this claim, D-III&W do not report any regression results. We

estimated various models in an effort to substantiate their assertion. Because they

indicate that they estimated the impact of the death penalty laws separately for each of

the mentioned states controlling for the same variables as in the main models, we

estimated models separately for Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Kansas, New Hampshire,

New York and New Jersey. For each state a dummy variable is created that takes the

value of one if the death penalty is legal, and zero otherwise. Kansas legalized the death

penalty in 1994. New Hampshire legalized it in 1991. Legalization took place in 1982

and 1995 for New Jersey and New York, respectively. Massachusetts and Rhode Island

abolished the death penalty in 1984. 6 Because the sample runs from 1977 to 1997,

running regressions for each state separately is complicated by a degrees-of-freedom

problem. Nevertheless, in an effort to verify the statement of D-III&W, we ran five

different models for each state while varying the number of control variables. The results

are reported in Tables 5A-5F. The number of control variables differs between the

specifications to investigate the sensitivity. The sentencing rate could only be included in

the regressions for New Jersey, because there is no variation in the number of death

sentences in the five other states. Similarly, the drinking age cannot be included in the

models. As the tables show, inclusion or exclusion of control variables has no substantial

impact on the estimated coefficients of legal death penalty indicator. In these

regressions, the coefficient of the death penalty indicator is not statistically different from

zero in Kansas, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and New York. It is negative and

significant in New Hampshire and New Jersey. Thus, these results strikingly contradict

6 Massachusetts abolished the death penalty in October 1984. Thus, 1985 is the first year with
no death penalty in Massachusetts in the data since abolishment took place. Similarly, 1985 is the
first full year where the death penalty is illegal in Rhode Island.


                                               17
the claim of D-III&W. For example, D-III&W claim that the adoption of the death

penalty increased the homicide rate in Kansas, whereas Table 5A demonstrates that the

impact was to reduce the homicide rate (by the sign of the coefficients), or at best, was

not statistically significant. Regardless, the results suggest that the impact was certainly

not to increase in homicide rate in Kansas. D-III&W make the same claim for New

Hampshire that there was an increase in the homicide rate after the adoption of capital

punishment. Table 5B, though, suggests just the opposite. The same is true for their

claims pertaining to other states, with the exception of New Jersey. D-III&W write that

the abolishment of the death penalty reduced the homicide rate in Massachusetts and

Rhode Island. Tables 5C and 5D, however, demonstrate that the impact, although not

significant, is in the opposite direction of their claim: the homicide rate was lower when

the death penalty was legal in those states, not higher, although it is not estimated with

precision. Only New Jersey is consistent with their claim (Table 5F), as the adoption of

the death penalty generated a decline in the homicide rate.

        How could D-III&W’s claims be so different from those obtained from regression

results? It is possible that D-III&W based their statement on a different type of analysis.

Somewhere else in their paper, while discussing a different work, they mention that

dummy variables are created for each “experiment” of death penalty adoption or abolition

in a state, which takes the value of one for that state subsequent to the law change. 7 Thus,

in that analysis, they examine the impact of each state-specific intervention by pooling all

the data. Following this logic, we created six state-specific dummy variables (one for

each state mentioned), which take the value of one for a particular state after the law

change in that state. Pooling all the data and estimating models with all control variables

7 Page 807, where D-III&W discuss Dezhbakhsh and Shepherd (2004).


                                               18
and also adding these intervention variables produced coefficients for these

“experiments” that were consistent with the D-III&W statement, but their statistical

significance was not. Specifically, the p-values of coefficients of the “experiment”

variables in Massachusetts and Rhode Island were 0.23, and 0.40, respectively.

       Thus, it appears that D-III&W’s statement is based on point estimates,

disregarding the statistical in-significance of these estimates. Ignoring this issue, we

should point out that many of these point estimates conflict with those reported in Tables

5A-5F. We suggest the following explanation. Their “experiment” variable is an

interaction between the state dummy and the legal dummy to indicate the legality of

death penalty in that state. However, it seems like D-III&W do not fully interact the state

dummy with the other right hand side variables. That is, they implicitly assume that the

effects of all the other right hand side variables (arrest rate, unemployment rate,

sentencing rate, percent black, etc.) are the same across states. This could be a major

concern for the meaningfulness of estimates obtained from pooled data if the restrictive

assumption that the secondary effects of the other control variables are zero turns out to

be incorrect. A fully-interacted model does not make this assumption, nor does running

the regressions separately for each state. However, because a common time component

across states is estimated in the pooled data, one can no longer obtain the usual one-to-

one mapping between the estimates of the fully interacted model and those from the state-

specific regressions.

       In an attempt to find a middle ground, we estimated the fully interacted model and

included time dummies. Unfortunately, the model is so saturated that many of the

estimates are no longer identified due to collinearities. However, as one moves from the




                                             19
D-III&W pooled model and includes more and more secondary effects the results change

significantly. For example, when we estimated the pooled regression where the state

dummies are interacted with only two explanatory variables (homicide arrest rate and

prisoners per violent crime), the coefficient for Kansas became insignificant, the

coefficients on New Hampshire and New York flipped signs and were significant, and the

coefficient on New Jersey became insignificant.

       As an alternative analysis of the direction of the impact of each state’s death

penalty laws, we performed an interrupted time-series analysis. Figures 1A and 2A

present the time-series behavior of the homicide rates in Kansas and New Hampshire

since 1960. These states legalized the death penalty in 1994 and in 1991, respectively.

Although D-III&W assert that the homicide rate went up in these states after the

legalization, Figures 1A and 2A suggest that the opposite may be the case. D-III&W

write that the homicide rates went down in New York and New Jersey after legalization

(Figures 3A and 4A), but they claim the homicide rates also went down in Massachusetts

and Rhode Island (presented in Figures 5A and 6A) due to the abolishment of the death

penalty. Figure 5A shows that there was an increase in the homicide rate in

Massachusetts after the law change, followed by a drop in 1997. It is uncertain whether

this drop can be attributable to the change in law 12 years prior. In the case of Rhode

Island, the homicide rate is fluctuating around a quadratic trend, and the level of the

homicide rate seems to have increased, rather than decreased, after the abolition.

       To investigate if the “experiment” in a state has altered the behavior of the

homicide rate in that state over time, we employed well-defined intervention analysis

methods. The time-series dynamics of the homicide rate of each state can be modeled




                                             20
separately, and intervention variables can be added to investigate if the change in the

death penalty law in that state in a particular year has altered the time-series dynamics of

the homicide rate in that state. Following Mocan and Topyan (1993), Mocan (1994),

Harvey and Durbin (1986), Let Mt stand for the homicide rate in a particular state in year

t. The dynamics of Mt over time can be expressed by Equation (2) below where μt

represents slowly-evolving trend component of the homicide rate, Ωt stands for the cycle-

component, and εt is regular random component.

(2) M t = μ t + Ω t + ε t

The trend in the homicide rate, μt, is determined by its level and the slope in each time

period, which can be written in general as random walks as in Equation (3).

      μ t = μ t −1 + β t −1 + ηt
(3)
      β t = β t −1 + ξ t

A flexible method to model the cyclical behavior of the homicide rate, represented by Ω

in Equation (2), is to assume a stochastic trigonometric process, which is depicted by

Equation (4).


(4)   Ω t = ρ cos λc Ω t −1 + ρ sin λc Ω*t −1 + τ t
      Ω* t = − ρ sin λc Ω t −1 + ρ cos λc Ω*t −1 + τ t
                                                         *




where ρ is a damping factor with 0≤ ρ≤1, λc is the frequency of the cycle in radians, and

τt and τt* are independently, identically distributed disturbances with mean zero and

variance σt2.

         The model can be extended by adding an intervention variable to investigate the

impact of an event that took place in period k. The immediate pulse effect of the

intervention can be modeled by employing the variable ωt defined as ωt=0 if t≠k, and



                                                         21
ωt=1 if t=k. If the intervention shifts the level of the variable, then the intervention

variable ωt is defined as ωt=0 if t≠k, and ωt=1 if t≥ k, and μ t = μ t −1 + β t −1 + δωt + η t .

        We estimated the model, depicted by Equations (2)-(4) by including the

intervention variables. The models are first estimated from 1977 forward to be consistent

with the time period used in the earlier analyses. The estimated trend values along with

actual data are displayed in Figures 1B-6B. As can be seen, in the four states that

adopted the death penalty, the “experiment” had altered the dynamics of the homicide

rate by reducing its level. In the two states that abolished the death penalty on the other

hand, the level of the homicide rate has increased. 8

        As another set of analyses, we estimated the models starting in 1960, except for

New York, where the data are available starting in 1965. This allows us to investigate the

impact of the adoption of the death penalty in South Dakota (in 1979), New Mexico (in

1979) and in Oregon (in 1978). Furthermore, we can also jointly investigate the impact

of the 1972 Supreme Court moratorium. The results are presented graphically in Figures

1C-9C. In each case, the Furman decision is associated with an increase in the level of

the homicide rate. Consistent with the dynamics presented in Figures 1B-6B, adoption of

the death penalty generated declines in the homicide trends, and abolition in

Massachusetts and Rhode Island produced increases in the homicide rate, although long-

run trends in these series generated subsequent declines.


8 Although the death penalty was legal during period before 1984 in Massachusetts, the 1970s
and 1980s witnessed a series of legislation and judicial rulings regarding the death penalty.
Identifying these time intervals and considering interventions associated with them did not alter
the picture depicted in Figure 5B. The same, to a lesser degree, is true for Rhode Island where
the death penalty was re-enacted in 1977, but in 1979 the Rhode Island Supreme Court issued the
opinion of the violation of the prohibitions of the 8th amendment of the U.S. constitution (Rhode
Island Secretary of State web site). Adding this potential intervention did not alter the picture
depicted in Figure 6B.


                                                  22
Evidence from Panel Data

       In this section, we investigate whether the existence of the death penalty in a state

has a separate impact on the homicide rate in addition to the risks associated with being

on the death row. To that end, we estimated the same models as those presented in

Tables 1A-4C, but we added a dichotomous indicator if death penalty is legal in a given

state in a particular year. Furthermore, we interacted this dummy variable with the

execution rate, commutation rate and removal rate variables. These specifications are

estimated by Mocan and Gittings (2003) who deflated by risk measures by death

sentences given six years earlier (SENTt-6) in models with executions and commutations,

and by death sentences five years earlier in models with removals.

       The results are displayed in Tables 6A and 6B, where the two alternative

measures of execution, commutation and removal risks are employed. In each case,

models are estimated with 4 and 5-lags of the death sentences in the denominator of the

risk variables as before. The results demonstrate that the existence of the death penalty in

a state has a negative and statistically significant impact on the homicide rate. In

addition, the execution rate has a negative impact on the homicide rate, and

commutations and removals have a positive impact, although not always statistically

significant. Once again, these results are consistent with those reported by Mocan and

Gittings (2003).



V. The Denominator of the Risk Variables Again

       Although not realized by D-III&W, individuals who received a death sentence do

not exit the death row in the same year as they received the death sentence. To make the




                                             23
point more visible, the average duration on death row is calculated each year for those

inmates who are removed that year, and plotted in Figure 10 by the reason of exit. As

can be inferred, individuals who were commuted, executed or otherwise removed from

death row had spent an average of about six years on death row. On the other had, those

who were executed or commuted in 1997 had completed about 11 years on death row.

Given this picture, one can use time-varying durations on death row to calculate the risks

of execution, commutation or removals. For example, the execution risk in year 1981

can be calculated as the number of executions in 1981 divided by the number of death

sentences in 1980 (because the duration on death row was one year in 1981). On the

other hand, the risk of execution in 1990 can be measured as the number of executions in

1990 divided by the number of death sentences in 1982 (because the average duration on

death row for those who were executed in 1990 was 8 years. See Figure 10). More

generally, the execution, commutation and removal rates are calculated as

(EXECt / SENTt-i), (COMMt / SENTt-j), and (REMOVEt / SENTt-k), where i, j and k are

average durations on death row for spells ending in year t for executions, commutations

and removals, respectively. Calculating the risks this way produced the results displayed

in Table 7. Once again, we are unsuccessful in eliminating the impact of the execution

risk on the homicide rate. 9

         Some researchers calculated the execution risk as the number of executions in a

year divided by the number of prisoners in that state in that year (e.g. Katz et al. 2003).

This calculation assumes that every prisoner in state correctional facilities is at risk of

being executed. This assumption has no validity as about 99.7 percent of the inmates in

9 Another extreme is to uniformly increase the lag length of the denominator. For example, when lag-
length seven is imposed the same results are obtained, but not surprisingly, the statistically significance is
lowered.


                                                      24
state prisons are incarcerated for non-capital offenses, and therefore they are not at risk of

being executed, and there is no a priori reason to assume that the number of total

prisoners is proportional to the number of death row inmates over time or across states. 10

A more sensible way of calculating the risk of execution would be to use the ratio of

executions to the number of inmates on death row, although as discussed before and

displayed in Figure 10, a particular death row inmate in not at risk of dying if he just

entered death row. Nevertheless, deflating by death row is much more reasonable than

deflating by total prisoners. Results obtained from this exercise are reported in Table 8.

Once again, executions have a negative impact on the murder rate in the state and

commutations are positively related to homicide. What happens if we insist on deflating

executions, commutations and removals by the total number of prisoners? The answer is

provided in Table 9. Although this inaccurate measure makes the impact of

commutations disappear, it cannot make the impact of executions go away.

        Donohue III and Wolfers (2006, p. 815) promote two denominators to be used to

deflate the number of executions. They write “A very simple alternative that avoids this

scaling issue is measuring executions per 100,000 residents.” They also write: “Another

alternative scaling –and perhaps the one most directly suggested by the economic model

of crime—is to analyze the ratio of the number of executions to the (lagged) homicide

rate.” (p. 815). Although it is evident that these suggested measures are very poor

indicators of the relevant risks, we estimated the models with these denominators as well.

The first panel of Table 10 displays the results when the number (count) of executions,

commutations and removals are deflated by state population, and the second panel

10 For example, in 1997 there were a total of 1,127,686 inmates in state prisons, and there were 3,328
death row inmates. The number of total prisoners were 1,316,302 in 2004 and the number of people on
death row was 3,314 in the same year.


                                                   25
presents the results when they are deflated by lagged homicide rate as suggested by D-

III&W.

         The dependent variable for the analysis is the homicide rate, which is measured as

homicides deflated by population. Thus, deflating executions by population, as suggested

by D-III&W, means that population enters into the denominator of both the dependent

and independent variables, inducing a positive bias in the estimated coefficient of the

execution rate. Despite this, the coefficient of the execution rate remains negative and

significant. Because the dependent variable of the analysis is the homicide rate, to use

the homicide rate as the deflator of executions is not meaningful. 11 Nevertheless, we used

the lagged homicide rate as the deflator as promoted by D-II&W. As the send panel of

Table 10 demonstrates, even this trick did not make the results disappear.



VI. Further Attempts to Make the Results Disappear

         The risk measures employed in this paper and also used in Mocan and Gittings

(2003) and D-III&W are calculated such that if there is an execution in a given state in a

given year, but it so happens that nobody was sentenced to death five years prior, then the

risk (EXECt/SENTt-5 ) cannot be calculated because the denominator is zero. On the

other hand, in cases where nobody was sentenced and nobody was executed, the

execution risk was taken as zero.

         One can adopt an algorithm where observations are dropped from the data when

the corresponding death sentences are zero, regardless of the numerator of the risk


11 Donohue III and Wolfers seem to recognize this, and write that in their analysis they
employ the lagged homicide rate as the deflator (D-III&W, ft. 63). However, if the
homicide rate has any path-dependence, such as a simple AR(1) model, using the lagged-
dependent variable in the denominator of the independent variable does not avoid a bias.


                                             26
measure. This algorithm assumes that the risks cannot be calculated in cases when they

should be zero, such as the cases where there is no legal death penalty. Even so, and

despite the fact that this algorithm eliminates about half of the legitimate observations,

the impact of the death penalty on the homicide rate remains as shown in Tables 11A and

11B. Furthermore, although the irregular specification promoted by Donohue III and

Wolfers, (which assumes that the duration from arrest-to-sentencing and from

sentencing-to-execution, commutation or removal is less than one year) eliminates the

statistical significance of the execution variables, it cannot eliminate the significance of

commutations.

         What happens to the results if we go to the extreme and use the number of

executions, commutations and removals as measures of risk, without deflating by

anything? Here, the scale of executions, commutations and removals are considered as

appropriate signals to individuals, rather than the rates at which they occur (as defined by

the correct denominator). Though we do not agree that this is the correct specification,

Table 12 shows that even this modification does not eliminate the impact of prices on

human behavior. Although the coefficients of commutations and removals are

statistically insignificant, the coefficient of execution remains significant even in this

model.

         D-III&W argue that the deterrent impact of the death penalty which exists in

states with large populations such as New York and New Jersey exert disproportionate

influence in a population-weighted regression and overwhelms the no-deterrence result

that would have been obtained in regressions with no weighting. (Donohue III and

Wolfers 2006, footnote 50). To investigate if the results are driven by this hypothesis, we




                                              27
estimated the models presented in Tables 1A and 1B without population weights. The

results are presented in Tables 13A and 13B. In models where the duration of death row

is taken as 5 years (the top panel), the results are actually stronger with the coefficients of

the commutation rate being significant. In the second panel of Tables 13A and 13B the

execution rate is insignificant, but the removal rate becomes significant when it was

insignificant in the weighted regression displayed in Tables 1A and 1B. Finally, the

results of the peculiar regression run by D-III&W remain unchanged whether the

regressions are weighted or not. Specifically, the bottom panels of Tables 13A and 13B

show that, even in their model an increase in commutations generates an increase in the

homicide rate as predicted by theory, and the coefficient of the removal rate becomes

significant in one specification.

       In Table 14 we present the results obtained from the models that exclude New

York and New Jersey, and estimate the models without weighting. As can be seen, the

impact of leaving the death row on the homicide rate cannot be eliminated by dropping

New York and New Jersey from the analysis and running the regressions with no

weighting. The same conclusion is obtained, when we ran the models displayed in

Tables 2-6 with no weights. Thus, the results are not an artifact of weighting.



VII. Ph.D. Economists versus Criminals

       In his Nobel lecture, Gary Becker described his inspiration for modeling

economic behavior of crime as follows.

                “I began to think about crime in the 1960s after driving to
         Columbia University for an oral examination of a student in economic
         theory. I was late and had to decide quickly whether to put the car in a
         parking lot or risk getting a ticket for parking illegally on the street. I



                                              28
         calculated the likelihood of getting a ticket, the size of the penalty, and
         the cost of putting the car in a lot. I decided it paid to take the risk and
         park on the street. (I did not get a ticket.)
                 As I walked the few blocks to the examination room, it occurred
         to me that the city authorities had probably gone through a similar
         analysis. The frequency of their inspection of parked vehicles and the
         size of the penalty imposed on violators should depend on their
         estimates of the type of calculations potential violators like me would
         make.” (Becker 1992, p.42).


        One standard objection to economic analysis of crime is that whether potential

criminals are as astute as Ph.D. economists to evaluate these probabilities accurately.

This objection is invalid so long as the researcher believes that empirical research should

be conceptually consistent with the underlying theory. If one assumes a priori that

individuals are incapable of calculating the risks as they are defined by theory, then there

is no room to conduct proper empirical research. For example, if one rejects the

theoretically-proper measure of the execution risk as executions within a cohort of death

row inmates in a given year divided by death sentenced handed out to that cohort in some

earlier year (because one believes that potential criminals do not observe either the

executions or the death sentences), then one ought to claim that they cannot observe and

evaluate other variables either, including the arrest rates, the size of the police force or

police spending. Thus, there would be no need to conduct research investigating

whether people react to deterrence, under the belief that people could not evaluate

variations in deterrence risks to begin with.

       Furthermore, attempts to justify the use of inappropriate variables based on the

claim that individuals cannot observe, measure or determine the values of decision

parameters will produce peculiar analyses that cannot be defended theoretically. For

example, if the theory indicates that the real wages should matter in a particular context,



                                                29
it would be silly to suggest the use of nominal wages in a regression (instead of real

wages) on the grounds that people cannot observe and predict accurately the level of the

consumer price index. If the theory indicates that the accident risk in a state is best

measured by the number of accidents per vehicle miles traveled, it would be incorrect to

promote deflating accidents by other measures such as the square miles of the state or the

number of car dealerships, on the grounds that vehicle miles traveled is difficult to

observe.

       It should be noted, however, that in our context, the results are robust even to the

use of measures that are inconsistent with theory. A summary of the findings is provided

in Table 15, which displays the results obtained from estimating various versions of

Equation (1) along with the description of the measurement of the execution,

commutation and removal rates in each specification. The table displays results that are

obtained from specifications where the key variables (execution, commutation and

removal risks) are measured as dictated by theory. The table also presents results from

the models where they are measured incorrectly. Examples are the specifications

promoted by D-III&W (reported in rows 5 and 6 of Table 15), and the specifications

where the executions, commutations and removals are deflated by lagged murder rate, by

population, or where the raw count of executions, commutations and removals are used.

As the table demonstrates, the results are remarkably stable even across models that

substantially deviate from theory.




                                             30
VIII. Conclusion and Discussion

       Do people respond to incentives? An economist’s answer to this question is a

resounding “yes,” not only because economic theory indicates that incentives matter, but

because an enormous empirical literature shows that they do. An especially confusing

dimension for non-economists is the behavior of individuals in such domains as the

consumption of addictive substances, sexual activity and criminal behavior. In the case

of criminal behavior, non-economists frequently express the belief that human beings are

not rational enough to make calculated decisions about the costs and benefits of engaging

in crime, and that criminal activity cannot be altered by incentives. Of course personal

beliefs should not determine the answers to scientific questions such as whether the earth

is round or whether criminal behavior is responsive to incentives. Rather, answers should

be provided by careful and objective scientific inquiry.

       In the economic approach to crime, decades of empirical research has

demonstrated that potential criminals indeed respond to incentives. It has been

documented that improved labor market conditions reduce the extent of criminal activity

(recent examples include Grogger 1998, Freeman and Rodgers 2000, Gould et al. 2002),

and criminal activity reacts to deterrence (e.g. Ehrlich 1975, Levitt 1998b, Kessler and

Levitt 1998, Corman and Mocan 2000, Mustard 2003, Corman and Mocan 2005). For

example, Levitt (1998b) showed that deterrence is empirically more important than

incapacitation in explaining crime, and that increases in arrest rates deter criminal

activity. Kessler and Levitt (1999) show that Proposition 8 in California, which

introduced sentence enhancements for certain crimes, reduced eligible crimes by 4

percent in the year following its passage and 8 percent 3 years after the passage,




                                             31
providing strong evidence that crime rates react to the severity of punishment. In an

analysis of the relationship between crime and punishment for juveniles, Levitt (1998a)

finds that changes in relative punishment between juveniles and adults explain 60 percent

of the differential growth rates in juvenile and adult crime, and that abrupt changes in

criminal involvement with the transition from juvenile to adult courts indicate that

individuals do respond to the expected punishment (as economic theory suggests).

Corman and Mocan (2005, 2000) show that criminal activity responds to variations in

arrests and the size of the police force.

       As discussed in the introduction, the signal provided by leaving death row is no

different from any other change in expected punishment. That is, an execution is a signal

of an increase in expected punishment, and a commutation represents a decrease in

expected punishment. However, it is sometimes claimed that because executions are

infrequent events, they cannot possibly be a strong enough signals to alter the behavior of

people. Yet, the same analysts have no difficulty in believing that a prospective criminal

observes correctly and accurately the extent of the increase in the number of arrests, and

coupled with the information about the level of crime, he calculates the enhanced risk of

getting caught, and changes his behavior. Similarly, the suggestion that if the local

authority hires 20 new police officers, the associated increase in the risk of getting caught

by this move is properly evaluated by potential criminals does not raise objections. Even

prison deaths are believed to provide signals to people who are not in prison. Katz, Levitt

and Shustorovich (2003) find that the death rate in prisons constitutes deterrence, and an

increase in prison deaths has a negative impact on crime rates. It is very difficult to argue

that an increase in prison deaths would be a signal of deterrence, but an increase in the




                                             32
executions would not. However, this is the argument put forth by some analysts (e.g.

Donohue III and Wolfers 2006).

       Clearly, analysts’ personal beliefs regarding what should and should not

constitute a strong signal are irrelevant. Whether or not police, arrests, prison deaths,

executions, or commutations provide signals to people about the extent of expected

punishment is an empirical question. In this paper we extend the analysis of Mocan and

Gittings (2003). We alter the original model in a number of directions to make the

relationship between homicide rates and death penalty related outcomes (executions,

commutations and removals) disappear. We change the measurement of the risk

variables by altering the numerator and the denominator of the variables in a variety of

ways (see Table 15 for a summary), we also investigate how the results change when we

exclude various states from the analysis. The basic results are insensitive to these and a

variety of other specification tests performed in the paper. The impact of executions

indeed becomes statistically insignificant when one estimates the specification promoted

by Donohue III and Wolfers (2006). However, that particular specification has little

theoretical relevance as we have explained in detail, and, furthermore, even that

specification cannot make the impact of commutations disappear.

       It is understandable that the death penalty may evoke strong feelings. These

feelings could be due to political, ideological, religious, or other personal beliefs. The

reactions towards the research that identifies a deterrent effect of the death penalty

suggest that it may be difficult to isolate such feelings from objective evaluation of a

research finding. One reason may be the fear that a scientific paper which identifies a

deterrent effect could be taken as an endorsement or justification of the death penalty.




                                             33
This should not be the case for any scientific research. This point is highlighted by

Mocan and Gittings (2003) and Katz,Levitt and Shustorovich (2003). For example, Katz,

Levitt and Shustorovich (2003) find that the death rate among prisoners (a proxy for

prison conditions) deters crime. This finding obviously does not suggest that the society

should increase the death rate of the prisoners by worsening the prison conditions to

reduce the crime rate. Nevertheless, the authors feel the need to state the obvious, and

write that:

               “We cannot stress enough that evidence of a deterrent effect of poor
      prison conditions is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for arguing
      that current prison conditions are either overly benign or unjustifiably
      inhumane. Efficiency arguments related to deterrence are only one small aspect
      of an issue that is inextricably associated with basic human rights,
      constitutionality, and equity considerations. Our research is descriptive, not
      proscriptive.” (p.322)


        Similarly, Mocan and Gittings (Mocan and Gittings 2003, p. 474) write that the

fact that there exists a deterrent effect of capital punishment, should not imply a position

on death penalty. There are a number of significant issues surrounding the death penalty,

ranging from potential racial discrimination in the imposition of the death penalty

(Baldus et al., 1998) to discrimination regarding who is executed and who is commuted

once the death penalty is received (Argys and Mocan 2004).

        Although it is important to preserve objectivity in evaluating scientific research,

because of the nature of death penalty, it seem like ideologues, activists, and some

scientists also feel compelled to enter the debate with opinions formed based on selective

readings and half-truths. This unfortunate phenomenon is described succinctly by

Sunstein and Vermeule (2006), where they write in their reply to D-III&W:




                                             34
              “We cannot help but add that as new entrants into the death penalty
              debate, we are struck by the intensity of people’s beliefs on the
              empirical issues, and the extent to which their empirical judgments
              seem to be driven by their moral commitments. Those who oppose
              the death penalty on moral grounds often seem entirely unwilling
              to consider apparent evidence of deterrence and are happy to
              dismiss such evidence whenever even modest questions are raised
              about it. Those who accept the death penalty on moral grounds
              often seem to accept the claim of deterrence whether or not good
              evidence has been provided on its behalf.”

        In summary, the original findings of Mocan and Gittings (2003) are robust,

providing evidence that people react to incentives in the domain of capital punishment.

Yet, this result does not imply that capital punishment is good or bad, nor does it provide

any judgment about whether capital punishment should be implemented or abolished. It

is just a scientific finding which demonstrates that people react to incentives. Therefore,

there is no need to be afraid of this result.




                                                35
                                        Table 1A
                           Determinants of the Homicide Rate
               The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                   Duration on death row: 5 years
                                   -0.0056**                                       -0.0058**       -0.0066**
    (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1            (0.0027)                                        (0.0028)        (0.0029)

                                                     0.0065                          0.0070
   (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                             (0.0047)                        (0.0046)

                                                                   0.0024***                       0.0027***
  (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                            (0.0008)                        (0.0009)

              n                       734             743             691             733              688

                                   Duration on death row: 4 years
                                   -0.0054**                                       -0.0055**       -0.0047**
    (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1            (0.0022)                                        (0.0022)        (0.0021)

                                                    0.0036*                         0.0038**
   (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                             (0.0021)                        (0.0019)

                                                                     0.0004                          0.0005
  (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                            (0.0007)                        (0.0007)

              n                       785             790             744             781              741

                                 Donohue III & Wolfers specification

    Duration on Death Row: 0 Years; Time between Arrest and Death Sentence: 0 Years

                                     0.0003                                          0.0001       0.0001
    (EXECt / SENTt )-1              (0.0014)                                        (0.0013)      (0.0014)

                                                   0.0041***                       0.0041***
    (COMMt / SENTt )-1                              (0.0013)                        (0.0013)

                                                                     0.0002                          0.0002
  (REMOVEt / SENTt )-1                                              (0.0003)                        (0.0003)
         n                            986             984             921             977              918
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the
unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age
groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the
proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of
prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a
time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered
standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, **
statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                      36
                                     Table 1B
                         Determinants of the Homicide Rate
             The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                  Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                  -0.0058***                                      -0.0062***       -0.0073***
   (EXEC2t / SENTt-5 )-1           (0.0020)                                        (0.0022)         (0.0022)

                                                     0.0044                          0.0056
  (COMM2t / SENTt-5 )-1                             (0.0047)                        (0.0040)

                                                                   0.0018***                       0.0021***
 (REMOVE2t / SENTt-5 )-1                                            (0.0007)                        (0.0007)

               n                      737             743             712             736             709

                                    Duration on Death Row: 4 years

                                   -0.0069*                                        -0.0070**        -0.0063*
   (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1           (0.0035)                                         (0.0035)        (0.0033)


                                                    0.0034*                         0.0036**
  (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1                             (0.0019)                        (0.0016)


                                                                     0.0002                          0.0005
 (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1                                            (0.0008)                        (0.0007)


               n             785         792           761       783           758
                          Donohue III & Wolfers specification
  Duration on Death Row: Zero Years; Time Between Arrest and Death Sentence: 0 Years
                                     -0.0002                                         -0.0001      -0.00004
    (EXEC2t / SENTt )-1             (0.0020)                                        (0.0019)      (0.0019)

                                                   0.0039***                       0.0039***
   (COMM2t / SENTt )-1                              (0.0010)                        (0.0001)

                                                                       -0.0002                         -0.0002
 (REMOVE2t / SENTt )-1                                                (0.0006)                        (0.0006)
        n                              989              990              952            984              949
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the
unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age
groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the
proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of
prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a
time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered
standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, **
statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                      37
                                          Table 2A
                    Determinants of the Homicide Rate (Excluding Texas)
                 The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                              Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                        -0.0039**                                         -0.0040**        -0.0049**
         (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1
                                         (0.0019)                                          (0.0019)         (0.0021)

                                                          0.0045                            0.0048
        (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1
                                                         (0.0047)                          (0.0046)
                                                                         0.0022***                         0.0025***
      (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1
                                                                          (0.0008)                          (0.0009)
                    n                       719             728              676              718              673
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                        -0.0044**                                         -0.0045**         -0.0037*
         (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1
                                         (0.0021)                                          (0.0021)         (0.0020)

                                                        0.0040***                         0.0040***
        (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                         (0.0015)                          (0.0014)
                                                                           0.0004                            0.0045
      (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                                          (0.0007)                          (0.0007)
                    n                       769             774              728              765              725
               The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                            Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                             -
                                                                                         -0.0052***       -0.0061***
        (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1           0.0048**
                                                                                          (0.0017)         (0.0020)
                                        * (0.0016)

                                                          0.0037                            0.0048
        (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                         (0.0043)                          (0.0035)
                                                                         0.0017***                         0.0020***
      (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                                          (0.0006)                          (0.0007)
                    n                       722             728              697              721              694
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                          -0.0061                                           -0.0062          -0.0053
        (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                         (0.0037)                                          (0.0037)         (0.0034)


                                                        0.0037***                         0.0040***
        (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                         (0.0013)                          (0.0012)
                                                                           0.0002                            0.0043
      (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                                          (0.0007)                          (0.0007)
                    n                       769             776              745              767              742
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact
of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                            38
                                          Table 2B
                  Determinants of the Homicide Rate (Excluding California)
                 The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                              Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                         -0.0048*                                          -0.0049*         -0.0059*
        (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1             (0.0027)                                          (0.0028)          (0.003)


                                                           0.0050                            0.0054
       (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                               (0.0047)                          (0.0046)

                                                                          0.0024***                        0.0027***
      (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                               (0.0008)                         (0.0009)

                   n                        719             728              677              718              674
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                        -0.0052**                                          -0.0052**        -0.0047**
        (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1             (0.0020)                                           (0.0020)         (0.0019)

                                                           0.0034                           0.0036*
       (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                               (0.0022)                          (0.0020)

                                                                            0.0006                            0.0008
      (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                               (0.0007)                          (0.0007)

                   n                        769             774              729              765              726
               The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                            Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                        -0.0049**                                          -0.0052**       -0.0065***
        (EXEC2t / SENTt-5 )-1            (0.0020)                                           (0.0021)        (0.0021)

                                                           0.0031                            0.0041
       (COMM2t / SENTt-5 )-1                              (0.0047)                          (0.0040)

                                                                          0.0018***                        0.0021***
     (REMOVE2t / SENTt-5 )-1                                               (0.0006)                         (0.0007)

                   n                        722             728              697              721              694
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                         -0.0063*                                          -0.0063*         -0.0059*
        (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1            (0.0032)                                          (0.0032)          (0.003)

                                                           0.0032                           0.0033*
       (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1                              (0.0020)                          (0.0018)
                                                                            0.0003                            0.0006
     (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1                                               (0.0008)                          (0.0008)

                   n                        769              776               746            767             743
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact
of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.



                                                            39
                                        Table 2C
           Determinants of the Homicide Rate (Excluding Texas and California)
             The First Measure of Executions, Commutations, and Removals
                             Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                          -0.0029                                         -0.0030**         -0.0041*
        (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1
                                         (0.0019)                                          (0.0020)         (0.0023)

                                                          0.0048                            0.0051
       (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1
                                                         (0.0043)                          (0.0042)
                                                                         0.0024***                         0.0026***
      (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1
                                                                          (0.0008)                          (0.0009)
                   n                       704              713              662              703              659
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                        -0.0041**                                         -0.0042**         -0.0036*
        (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1
                                         (0.0019)                                          (0.0019)         (0.0018)

                                                        0.0042***                          0.0043**
       (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                         (0.0011)                          (0.0019)
                                                                           0.0007                            0.0008
      (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                                          (0.0007)                          (0.0007)
                   n                       753              758              713              749              710
             The Second Measure of Executions, Commutations, and Removals
                           Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                        -0.0039**                                         -0.0042**       -0.0054***
        (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                         (0.0016)                                          (0.0017)        (0.0019)

                                                          0.0037                            0.0046
       (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                         (0.0040)                          (0.0034)
                                                                         0.0018***                         0.0020***
     (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                                          (0.0006)                          (0.0007)
                   n                       707              713              682              706              679
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                          -0.0055                                          -0.0056*          -0.0051
        (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                         (0.0034)                                          (0.0033)         (0.0031)

                                                        0.0039***                         0.0040***
       (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                         (0.0011)                          (0.0010)
                                                                           0.0004                            0.0006
     (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1
                                                                          (0.0008)                          (0.0007)
                   n                       753              760              730              751              727
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact
of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                            40
                                                                               Table 3
                                                                        Execution Risk by State

                 Number of Exits from Death Row                               Execution Risk                                Execution Risk Ranking
State         Executions Commutations Removals              EXEC t        EXECt         EXEC t         EXEC t   EXEC t      EXECt        EXEC t      EXEC t
                                                            SENTt − 4     SENTt −5     PRISON t        ROWt     SENTt − 4   SENTt −5    PRISON t     ROWt
Alabama            16               1             130      0.116         0.099         0.072          0.009     8           8           7            8
Arkansas           16               1             46       0.49          0.327         0.157          0.031     2           2           3            3
Georgia            22               6             150      0.136         0.127         0.057          0.012     7           7           8            7
Louisiana          24               2             78       0.345         0.315         0.226          0.056     3           3           1            2
Missouri           29               1             30       0.301         0.245         0.114          0.023     5           6           5            5
Nevada              6               3             32       0.079         0.08          0.072          0.007     10          9           6            9
Oklahoma            9               1             95       0.082         0.074         0.053          0.005     9           10          9            12
South              13               3             49       0.28          0.31          0.05           0.014     6           4           10           6
Carolina
Texas             144              44             166      0.307         0.304         0.135          0.026     4           5           4            4
Virginia          46               5              15       0.612         0.652         0.162          0.059     1           1           2            1

           PRISON is the total number of prisoners in the state. ROW is the number of death row inmates.




                                                                                 41
                                             Table 4A
                       Determinants of the Homicide Rate (Excluding Virginia)
                   The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                           -0.0066*                                          -0.0068*         -0.0084**
          (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1             (0.0035)                                          (0.0037)          (0.0036)


                                                           0.0087**                          0.0091**
         (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1)                             (0.0038)                          (0.0039)

                                                                            0.0025***                        0.0029***
        (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                               (0.0008)                         (0.0010)

                     n                        719             728              676              718              673
                                        Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                          -0.0052**                                          -0.0052**        -0.0045*
          (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1             (0.0025)                                           (0.0025)        (0.0024)

                                                           0.0044***                         0.0045***
         (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                               (0.0016)                          (0.0015)

                                                                              0.0004                           0.0005
        (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                               (0.0007)                         (0.0007)

                     n                        769             774              728              765              725
                 The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                              Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                          -0.0063**                                          -0.0061**       -0.0083***
          (EXEC2t / SENTt-5 )-1            (0.0026)                                           (0.0026)        (0.0024)

                                                           0.0083***                         0.0083***
         (COMM2t / SENTt-5 )-1                              (0.0030)                          (0.0031)

                                                                            0.0019***                        0.0023***
       (REMOVE2t / SENTt-5 )-1                                               (0.0007)                         (0.0008)

                     n                        722             728              697              721              694
                                        Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                            -0.0066                                            -0.0067         -0.0060
          (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1            (0.0040)                                           (0.0040)        (0.0037)

                                                           0.0043***                         0.0044***
         (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1                              (0.0013)                          (0.0012)

                                                                                0.0003                         0.0005
       (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1                                                 (0.0008)                       (0.0007)
                     n                        769              776                745           767              742
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact
of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                            42
                                              Table 4B
                      Determinants of the Homicide Rate (Excluding Arkansas)
                   The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                            -0.0055*                                         -0.0056*         -0.0065**
           (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1             (0.0028)                                         (0.0029)          (0.0031)


                                                             0.0065                            0.0068
          (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                              (0.0047)                          (0.0046)

                                                                            0.0023***                        0.0026***
        (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                               (0.0008)                         (0.0009)

                      n                       719             728              676              718              673
                                        Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                             -0.0053                                           -0.0054         -0.0043
           (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1             (0.0035)                                          (0.0035)        (0.0033)

                                                            0.0036*                          0.0038**
          (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                              (0.0021)                         (0.0019)

                                                                              0.0004                           0.0005
        (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                               (0.0008)                         (0.0008)

                      n                       769             774              728              765              725
                 The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                              Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                          -0.0058***                                        -0.0063***       -0.0074***
          (EXEC2t / SENTt-5 )-1            (0.0021)                                          (0.0023)         (0.0024)

                                                             0.0044                            0.0057
          (COMM2t / SENTt-5 )-1                             (0.0047)                          (0.0040)

                                                                            0.0017**                         0.0021***
        (REMOVE2t / SENTt-5 )-1                                             (0.0007)                          (0.0007)

                      n                       722             728              697              721              694
                                        Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                             -0.0064                                           -0.0065         -0.0057
          (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1             (0.0039)                                          (0.0039)        (0.0036)

                                                            0.0034*                          0.0036**
          (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1                             (0.0019)                         (0.0016)

                                                                                0.0002                         0.0005
        (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-1                                                (0.0008)                       (0.0008)
                      n                       769              776               745            767             742
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact
of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                            43
                                       Table 4C
                     Determinants of the Homicide Rate (Excluding Louisiana)
                 The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                              Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                          -0.0059                                          -0.0063*         -0.0071*
       (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1              (0.0035)                                          (0.0036)         (0.0038)

                                                          0.0080*                          0.0086**
       (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                               (0.0041)                         (0.0041)

                                                                          0.0022**                          0.0024**
     (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                               (0.0009)                          (0.0009)

                   n                       720              728              678              719              675
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                        -0.0041*                                           -0.0042*         -0.0041*
       (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1             (0.0023)                                           (0.0023)         (0.0024)

                                                         0.0041***                         0.0042***
       (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                               (0.0015)                          (0.0014)

                                                                            0.0006                            0.0008
     (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                                (0.0007)                          (0.0007)

                   n                       770              774              730              766              727
               The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                            Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                        -0.0060**                                          -0.0067**        -0.0063**
       (EXEC2t / SENTt-5 )-1             (0.0026)                                           (0.0026)         (0.0026)

                                                           0.0058                          0.0072**
      (COMM2t / SENTt-5 )-1                               (0.0043)                         (0.0034)

     (REMOVE2t / SENTt-5 )-                                               0.0017**                          0.0018**
                   1                                                      (0.0008)                          (0.0008)

                   n                       722              728              699              721              696
                                      Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                          -0.0039                                            -0.0040          -0.0039
       (EXEC2t / SENTt-4 )-1             (0.0027)                                           (0.0027)         (0.0028)

                                                         0.0039***                         0.0040***
      (COMM2t / SENTt-4 )-1                               (0.0014)                          (0.0013)

     (REMOVE2t / SENTt-4 )-                                                   0.0005                         0.0006
                   1                                                         (0.0007)                       (0.0007)
                   n                       770               776               747            768             744
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact
of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                            44
                                     TABLE 5A
                 The Impact of the Death Penalty on the Homicide Rate
                                       Kansas
                                        (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)
                                     -0.0214        -0.0044         -0.0007        -0.008*        -0.0011
Death Penalty Legal (-1)
                                     (0.0220)       (0.0183)       (0.0061)        (0.0040)       (0.0033)

                                      0.0296         0.0112                       0.0293**        0.0275*
Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0225)       (0.0109)                      (0.0105)        (0.0146)

                                      -0.003        -0.0441                       -0.08***       -0.0856**
Prisoners per Violent Crime (-1)
                                     (0.0675)       (0.0498)                      (0.0160)        (0.0210)

                                     -0.0116        -0.0091                        0.0059*
Prison Death Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0063)       (0.0057)                       (0.0031)

                                      0.0066         0.0041         0.0019
Percent Black
                                     (0.0041)       (0.0042)       (0.0015)

                                     -0.0098*      -0.0098**       -0.015**
Republican Governor
                                     (0.0031)       (0.0023)       (0.0045)

Unemployment Rate                    -0.0019
                                     (0.0021)

                                     -0.0338        -0.0287*      -0.0253**        -0.0073
Per Capita Income
                                     (0.0134)       (0.0126)       (0.0065)        (0.0061)

Infant Mortality Rate                 0.0005
                                     (0.0043)

Urbanization                          0.0499
                                     (0.0667)

Percent Aged 20 - 34                   -0.04       -0.0457**      -0.0268**
                                     (0.0145)       (0.0103)       (0.0069)

Percent Aged 35 - 44                 -0.0608        -0.055**      -0.0244**
                                     (0.0274)       (0.0171)       (0.0085)

Percent Aged 45 - 54                 -0.0245       -0.0365**      -0.0177**
                                     (0.0195)       (0.0100)       (0.0067)

Percent Aged 55+                      0.013*       0.0097**        0.0074**
                                     (0.0039)      (0.0016)        (0.0027)

Time Trend                             0.0076      0.0159**         0.0072**        0.0026**       0.0014***
                                      (0.0106)      (0.0054)         (0.0029)       (0.0008)        (0.0003)
 Robust and clustered standard errors in parentheses. * statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent,
 ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or
 better.




                                                    45
                                     TABLE 5B
                 The Impact of the Death Penalty on the Homicide Rate
                                   New Hampshire
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                     -0.0226       -0.0253**       -0.0125        -0.0206**      -0.0213**
Death Penalty Legal (-1)
                                     (0.0119)       (0.0099)       (0.0105)        (0.0080)       (0.0078)

                                     -0.0051         0.0005                         0.0013         0.0004
Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0038)       (0.0027)                       (0.0023)       (0.0019)

                                      0.0412         0.0566                         0.0182         0.0168
Prisoners per Violent Crime (-1)
                                     (0.0377)       (0.0304)                       (0.0161)       (0.0140)

                                      0.0004         0.0006                         0.0005
Prison Death Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0013)       (0.0011)                       (0.0007)

                                      -0.001         0.0013         0.0022
Percent Black
                                     (0.0053)       (0.0025)       (0.0042)

                                       -0.01        -0.0046         -0.0011
Republican Governor
                                     (0.0063)       (0.0042)       (0.0049)

Unemployment Rate                     0.0013
                                     (0.0033)

                                      0.0069         0.0033         -0.0007         0.0001
Per Capita Income
                                     (0.0108)       (0.0037)       (0.0039)        (0.0026)

Infant Mortality Rate                 -0.0046
                                     (0.0030)

Urbanization                          -0.0796
                                     (0.0423)

Percent Aged 20 - 34                  -0.0031        0.0091         0.0029
                                     (0.0120)       (0.0083)       (0.0104)

Percent Aged 35 - 44                  0.0032         -0.017         -0.0102
                                     (0.0166)       (0.0103)       (0.0112)

Percent Aged 45 - 54                  0.0053        -0.0006         -0.003
                                     (0.0220)       (0.0138)       (0.0176)

Percent Aged 55+                      -0.0079       -0.0027         -0.0032
                                     (0.0069)       (0.0046)       (0.0038)

Time Trend                             -0.0183       0.0055            0.006         -0.0003         -0.0001
                                      (0.0142)      (0.0047)         (0.0050)       (0.0017)        (0.0008)
 Robust and clustered standard errors in parentheses. * statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent,
 ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or
 better.




                                                    46
                                     TABLE 5C
                 The Impact of the Death Penalty on the Homicide Rate
                                    Massachusetts
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                     -0.0055        -0.0059        -0.0082*        -0.0075        -0.0066
Death Penalty Legal (-1)
                                     (0.0060)       (0.0048)       (0.0045)        (0.0065)       (0.0051)

                                      0.0028         0.0017                        -0.0022         -0.002
Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0103)       (0.0061)                       (0.0062)       (0.0047)

                                     -0.0932        -0.1127                        -0.1152        -0.1253
Prisoners per Violent Crime (-1)
                                     (0.1731)       (0.1374)                       (0.1178)       (0.0762)

                                      0.0012         0.0008                        -0.0001
Prison Death Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0044)       (0.0021)                       (0.0012)

                                     -0.0022        -0.0021         -0.0015
Percent Black
                                     (0.0046)       (0.0019)       (0.0017)

                                     -0.0069        -0.0058         -0.0043
Republican Governor
                                     (0.0133)       (0.0098)       (0.0084)

Unemployment Rate                     0.0004
                                     (0.0026)

                                     -0.0149        -0.0151       -0.0159**        -0.0005
Per Capita Income
                                     (0.0203)       (0.0088)       (0.0071)        (0.0034)

Infant Mortality Rate                0.00003
                                     (0.0073)

Urbanization                          -0.0287
                                     (0.1967)

Percent Aged 20 - 34                  0.0124        0.0127*        0.0152**
                                     (0.0145)       (0.0063)       (0.0059)

Percent Aged 35 - 44                  0.0384         0.0358         0.0299
                                     (0.0522)       (0.0205)       (0.0190)

Percent Aged 45 - 54                  0.0309         0.0309        0.0324*
                                     (0.0371)       (0.0177)       (0.0167)

Percent Aged 55+                      -0.0051       -0.0041         -0.0045
                                     (0.0144)       (0.0025)       (0.0027)

Time Trend                             -0.0078      -0.0079           -0.0068         0.0003         0.0003
                                      (0.0098)      (0.0061)         (0.0057)       (0.0006)        (0.0006)
 Robust and clustered standard errors in parentheses. * statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent,
 ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or
 better.




                                                    47
                                      TABLE 5D
                 The Impact of the Death Penalty on the Homicide Rate
                                     Rhode Island
                                        (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)
                                     -0.0087        -0.0051         -0.0043        -0.0034        -0.0063
Death Penalty Legal (-1)
                                     (0.0046)       (0.0096)       (0.0070)        (0.0076)       (0.0067)

                                      0.0264        -0.0025                        -0.0142        -0.0135
Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0155)       (0.0222)                       (0.0131)       (0.0105)

                                      0.0851         0.0235                        -0.0089        -0.0086
Prisoners per Violent Crime (-1)
                                     (0.0409)       (0.0559)                       (0.0291)       (0.0257)

                                     0.0089**        0.0001                         -0.0009
Prison Death Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0032)       (0.0033)                       (0.0017)

                                      0.0007         0.0011         0.0009
Percent Black
                                     (0.0021)       (0.0029)       (0.0021)

                                     -0.0124*       -0.0057         -0.0048
Republican Governor
                                     (0.0056)       (0.0074)       (0.0055)

Unemployment Rate                     0.0008
                                     (0.0014)

                                      0.0138         0.0057         0.0065          0.0027
Per Capita Income
                                     (0.0067)       (0.0076)       (0.0055)        (0.0038)

Infant Mortality Rate                -0.005**
                                     (0.0015)

Urbanization                          -0.0985
                                     (0.0759)

Percent Aged 20 - 34                  0.0084         0.0129         0.0136
                                     (0.0092)       (0.0165)       (0.0125)

Percent Aged 35 - 44                 -0.0818*        -0.007         -0.0031
                                     (0.0303)       (0.0354)       (0.0190)

Percent Aged 45 - 54                  -0.0177        0.0161         0.0199
                                     (0.0242)       (0.0339)       (0.0243)

Percent Aged 55+                      -0.0155        0.0042         0.0053
                                     (0.0103)       (0.0146)       (0.0099)

Time Trend                             0.0139        0.0007           -0.0001        -0.0013         -0.0008
                                      (0.0100)      (0.0129)         (0.0071)       (0.0013)        (0.0011)
 Robust and clustered standard errors in parentheses. * statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent,
 ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or
 better.




                                                    48
                                      TABLE 5E
                 The Impact of the Death Penalty on the Homicide Rate
                                      New York
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                      0.0087         0.0165         0.0113          0.0119         0.0145
Death Penalty Legal (-1)
                                     (0.0183)       (0.0122)       (0.0125)        (0.0108)       (0.0194)

                                     -0.0454        -0.0003                        -0.0163        -0.0139
Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0836)       (0.0345)                       (0.0377)       (0.0341)

                                     -0.0514        -0.3344                      -0.4935***      -0.4907**
Prisoners per Violent Crime (-1)
                                     (0.5724)       (0.2532)                       (0.0799)       (0.1214)

                                     -0.0043        -0.0065*                      -0.0076*
Prison Death Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0035)       (0.0029)                      (0.0037)

                                     -0.0041        -0.0053         -0.0049
Percent Black
                                     (0.0088)       (0.0040)       (0.0034)

                                     -0.0015        -0.0006         -0.0094
Republican Governor
                                     (0.0220)       (0.0126)       (0.0156)

Unemployment Rate                     0.0028
                                     (0.0031)

                                     -0.0142        -0.0176        -0.0409*       0.0132**
Per Capita Income
                                     (0.0280)       (0.0257)       (0.0185)       (0.0050)

Infant Mortality Rate                 0.0055
                                     (0.0143)

Urbanization                          -0.2638
                                     (0.4182)

Percent Aged 20 - 34                  0.0689         0.0746        0.1102**
                                     (0.0577)       (0.0409)       (0.0264)

Percent Aged 35 - 44                   0.05          0.0449         0.0524
                                     (0.0388)       (0.0304)       (0.0378)

Percent Aged 45 - 54                  0.1108         0.12**        0.1581**
                                     (0.0549)       (0.0467)       (0.0402)

Percent Aged 55+                      -0.0116       -0.0063       -0.0134**
                                     (0.0283)       (0.0099)       (0.0049)

Time Trend                             -0.0151      -0.0015           -0.0021        0.005**        0.0071**
                                      (0.0178)      (0.0061)         (0.0069)       (0.0015)        (0.0017)
 Robust and clustered standard errors in parentheses. * statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent,
 ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or
 better.




                                                    49
                                       TABLE 5F
                  The Impact of the Death Penalty on the Homicide Rate
                                      New Jersey
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                     -0.0101        -0.009*       -0.0085***      -0.0132**      -0.0132**
Death Penalty Legal (-1)
                                     (0.0140)       (0.0037)       (0.0017)        (0.0036)       (0.0030)

                                     -0.0281        -0.0217                        -0.0151        -0.0191*
Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0479)       (0.0334)                       (0.0119)       (0.0095)

                                      0.0028        -0.0361                        -0.1273        -0.1135
Sentencing Rate
                                     (0.6044)       (0.2605)                       (0.1565)       (0.1388)

                                      0.0617         0.0694                        -0.0403        -0.0357
Prisoners per Violent Crime (-1)
                                     (0.2990)       (0.1368)                       (0.0511)       (0.0366)

                                     -0.0005        -0.00004                        0.0005
Prison Death Rate (-1)
                                     (0.0017)       (0.0007)                       (0.0009)

                                      0.0054         0.0031        0.0021**
Percent Black
                                     (0.0054)       (0.0024)       (0.0008)

                                     -0.0002         0.0012         0.0008
Republican Governor
                                     (0.0081)       (0.0041)       (0.0027)

Unemployment Rate                     0.0007
                                     (0.0052)

                                      0.0034        -0.0047       -0.0041**         0.0001
Per Capita Income
                                     (0.0260)       (0.0081)       (0.0018)        (0.0018)

Infant Mortality Rate                 0.0007
                                     (0.0054)

Urbanization                          0.2388
                                     (0.3706)

Percent Aged 20 - 34                  -0.0155        0.0006         0.0056
                                     (0.0413)       (0.0146)       (0.0043)

Percent Aged 35 - 44                  -0.0477       -0.032*       -0.0278**
                                     (0.0393)       (0.0148)       (0.0067)

Percent Aged 45 - 54                  -0.0374       -0.0145         -0.0017
                                     (0.0682)       (0.0274)       (0.0086)

Percent Aged 55+                      -0.0102       -0.0111         0.0001
                                     (0.0455)       (0.0159)       (0.0013)

Time Trend                             0.0031         0.01*         0.0099**          0.0003         0.0004
                                      (0.0134)      (0.0041)         (0.0024)       (0.0008)        (0.0008)
 Robust and clustered standard errors in parentheses. * statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent,
 ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or
 better.




                                                    50
                                         Table 6A
                            Determinants of the Homicide Rate
                The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                                (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)
                                                              SENTt-4      SENTt-4      SENTt-5        SENTt-5
                                             -0.0152**        -0.0148**    -0.0123**    -0.0135**      -0.0116**
   Death Penalty Legal (-1).                  (0.0063)         (0.0060)     (0.0056)     (0.0064)       (0.0056)

                                              -0.0009           -0.0019      -0.0020      -0.0028        -0.0021
   Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)                 (0.0032)          (0.0026)     (0.0024)     (0.0026)       (0.0026)

                                              -0.0026           0.0093       0.0112       -0.0105        -0.0171
      Sentencing Rate (-1)                   (0.0216)          (0.0222)     (0.0236)     (0.0198)       (0.0198)

                                            -0.0401***        -0.0397***   -0.0378***   -0.0391***    -0.0375***
Prisoners per Violent Crime (-1)              (0.0087)          (0.0083)     (0.0085)    (0.0086)      (0.0087)


   Death Penalty Legal (-1) x                                 -0.0056**    -0.0050**    -0.0061**      -0.0069**
     Execution Rate (-1)                                       (0.0022)     (0.0020)     (0.0028)       (0.0029)


   Death Penalty Legal (-1) x                                 0.0038**                    0.0067
    Commutation Rate(-1)                                      (0.0019)                   (0.0046)


   Death Penalty Legal (-1) x                                                0.0005                    0.0028***
      Removal Rate (-1)                                                     (0.0007)                    (0.0009)


                   n                            894              781          741          733            688
 The column headings SENTt-4 and SENTt-5 mean that execution, commutation and removal rates are
 calculated by deflating EXECt, COMMt and REMOVEt by SENTt-4 or SENTt-5. Each model includes the
 following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real per capita
 income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
 over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant
 mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison
 death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a
 dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to
 indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *
 indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical significance between 5 and 1
 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                         51
                                     Table 6B
                         Determinants of the Homicide Rate
             The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                         (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)           (5)
                                                      SENTt-4           SENTt-4        SENTt-5       SENTt-5
                                     -0.0152**        -0.0147**        -0.0126**       -0.0136**    -0.0131**
Death Penalty Legal (-1).             (0.0063)         (0.0060)         (0.0056)        (0.0064)     (0.0057)

                                       -0.0009         -0.0018           -0.0028        -0.0029       -0.0028
Homicide Arrest Rate (-1)             (0.0032)        (0.0026)          (0.0028)       (0.0026)      (0.0028)

                                       -0.0026         0.0092            0.0121         -0.0069       -0.0105
   Sentencing Rate (-1)               (0.0216)        (0.0222)          (0.0237)       (0.0209)      (0.0199)


Prisoners per Violent                -0.0401***      -0.0398***        -0.0387***     -0.0399***    -0.0388***
Crime (-1)                            (0.0087)        (0.0082)           (0.0082)       (0.0085)      (0.0085)


Death Penalty Legal (-1) x                            -0.0070**         -0.0064*      -0.0064***    -0.0075***
  Execution Rate (-1)                                  (0.0035)         (0.0032)        (0.0021)      (0.0022)


Death Penalty Legal (-1) x                            0.0036**                          0.0054
 Commutation Rate(-1)                                 (0.0016)                         (0.0040)


Death Penalty Legal (-1) x                                               0.0005                     0.0022***
  REMOVE Rate (-1)                                                      (0.0007)                     (0.0007)


                n                       894                783            758             736          709
The column headings SENTt-4 and SENTt-5 mean that execution, commutation and removal rates are
calculated by deflating EXECt, COMMt and REMOVEt by SENTt-4 or SENTt-5. Each model includes the
following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real per capita
income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant
mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison
death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a
dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to
indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered standard errors are in parentheses. *
indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical significance between 5 and 1
percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                      52
                                            Table 7
                                Determinants of the Homicide Rate
                                     With Time Varying Lags
                     The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal

                                       -0.0058*                                    -0.0058*         -0.0055*
      (EXECt / SENTt-i) -1             (0.0031)                                    (0.0034)         (0.0029)

                                                       0.0014                       0.0009
     (COMMt /SENTt-j) -1                              (0.0064)                     (0.0067)

                                                                     0.0003                          0.0001
    (REMOVEt/SENTt-k) -1                                            (0.0008)                        (0.0008)

                 n                        830           642           784            629              773

                  The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal

                                       -0.0049*                                    -0.0050          -0.0049*
     (EXEC2t / SENTt-i) -1             (0.0026)                                    (0.0032)         (0.0027)

                                                       0.0009                       0.0004
    (COMM2t /SENTt-j) -1                              (0.0054)                     (0.0059)

                                                                     0.0007                          0.0006
   (REMOVE2t/SENTt-k) -1                                            (0.0007)                        (0.0007)

                   n                       833           643            806            632              797
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the
unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age
groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the
proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of
prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a
time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered
standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, **
statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.
i, j and k are average durations on death row for spells ending in year t for executions, commutations and
removals, respectively.




                                                      53
                                            Table 8
                                Determinants of the Homicide Rate

               The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                deflated by Death Row Inmates
                                       -0.0465*                                   -0.0463*        -0.0466
       (EXECt / ROWt) -1               (0.0277)                                   (0.0276)        (0.0284)

                                                    0.0098***                    0.0097***
      (COMMt / ROWt) -1                              (0.0014)                     (0.0015)

                                                                   -0.0026                        -0.0021
     (REMOVEt / ROWt) -1                                           (0.0062)                       (0.0062)

                 n                       894           894           890            894             890
             The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                            deflated by Death Row Inmates
                                       -0.0501*                                   -0.0500*        -0.0485
      (EXEC2t / ROWt) -1               (0.0287)                                   (0.0285)        (0.0298)


                                                    0.0084***                    0.0083***
     (COMM2t / ROWt) -1                              (0.0017)                     (0.0017)


                                                                   -0.0043                        -0.0039
    (REMOVE2t /ROWt) -1                                            (0.0051)                       (0.0052)


                 n                       894           894           893            894             893


ROW stands for the number of death raw inmates. Each model includes the following variables: The
murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the
state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the
state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking
age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each
model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the
impact of the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a
Republican. Robust and clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance
between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at
the 1 percent level or better.




                                                     54
                                        Table 9
                           Determinants of the Homicide Rate
               The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                             deflated Total Prisoners/1,000
                                   -0.0258**                                       -0.0255**       -0.0257 **
    (EXECt / PRISt) -1              (0.0101)                                        (0.0102)        (0.0101)

                                                     0.0085                          0.0075
   (COMMt / PRISt) -1                               (0.0077)                        (0.0083)

                                                                     0.0007                          0.0006
  (REMOVEt / PRISt) -1                                              (0.0008)                        (0.0008)

              n                  894          894           894       894                             894
                  The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                               deflated by Total Prisoners/1,000
                                   -0.0208**                                       -0.0206**       -0.0208**
    (EXEC2t / PRISt) -1             (0.0083)                                        (0.0083)        (0.0083)

                                                     0.0065                          0.0056
   (COMM2t / PRISt) -1                              (0.0067)                        (0.0073)

                                                                     0.0003                          0.0028
 (REMOVE2t / PRISt) -1                                              (0.0007)                        (0.0007)

              n                       894             894             894             894             894
PRIS stands for the number of total prisoners. Each model includes the following variables: The murder
arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state
population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state
population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in
the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each model
are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of
the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican.
Robust and clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and
5 percent, ** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent
level or better.




                                                      55
                                       Table 10
                         Determinants of the Homicide Rate
               The Raw Count of Executions, Commutations, and Removals
                           Deflated by Population/100,000
                                    -0.055*                                         -0.0055*        -0.0051*
     ( #EXt / POPt )-1              (0.0281)                                         (0.028)        (0.0028)

                                                     0.0099                          0.0011
      ( #Ct / POPt )-1                              (0.0212)                         (0.020)

                                                                     0.0037                          0.0037
      ( #Rt / POPt )-1                                              (0.0061)                        (0.0063)

              n                       894             894             894             894              894
               The Raw Count of Executions, Commutations, and Removals
                       Deflated by Lagged Murder Rate x 1000
                                   -0.0543**                                       -0.0542**       -0.0543**
 ( #EXt / MURDERt-1 )-1             (0.0251)                                        (0.0022)        (0.0021)

                                                    -0.0120                         -0.0098
 ( #Ct / MURDERt-1 )-1                              (0.0254)                        (0.0252)

                                                                    -0.0004                          0.0001
 ( #Rt / MURDERt-1 )-1                                              (0.0122)                        (0.0127)

              n                       894             894             894             894              894
#EXt denotes the raw counts of executions. #Ct denotes the raw counts of commutations, and #Rt stands for
the raw counts of death row removals. POP is the population in the state. MURDER is the homicide rate.
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the
unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age
groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the
proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of
prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a
time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered
standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, **
statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                      56
                                     Table 11A
                           Determinants of the Homicide Rate
                Dropping Observations where Risk=0 and Denominator=0
               The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                   Duration on death row: 5 years
                                     -0.0043                                        -0.0045‡       -0.0061**
   (EXECt / SENTt-5) -1             (0.0027)                                        (0.0029)        (0.0026)

                                                     0.0057                          0.0061
  (COMMt /SENTt-5) -1                               (0.0050)                        (0.0050)

                                                                    0.0022**                       0.0025***
 (REMOVEt/SENTt-5) -1                                               (0.0008)                        (0.0009)

              n                       398             398             398             398              398

                                   Duration on death row: 4 years
                                   -0.0053**                                        -0.0053*       -0.0054**
   (EXECt / SENTt-4) -1             (0.0022)                                        (0.0022)        (0.0021)

                                                     0.0018                          0.0019
  (COMMt /SENTt-4) -1                               (0.0025)                        (0.0023)

                                                                     0.0002                          0.0003
 (REMOVEt/SENTt-4) -1                                               (0.0006)                        (0.0006)

              n                       426             426             426             426              426

                         Donohue III & Wolfers Specification
    Duration on Death Row: 0 Years; Time between Arrest and Death Sentence: 0 Years

                                     0.0000                                         -0.0000       -0.0000
    (EXECt / SENTt )-1              (0.0012)                                        (0.0012)      (0.0013)

                                                    0.0034*                         0.0034*
    (COMMt / SENTt )-1                              (0.0019)                        (0.0013)

                                                                     0.0004                          0.0004
  (REMOVEt / SENTt )-1                                              (0.0003)                        (0.0003)
         n                            543             543             543             543              543
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the
unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age
groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the
proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of
prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a
time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered
standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, **
statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                      57
                                       Table 11B
                           Determinants of the Homicide Rate
                 Dropping Observations where Risk=0 and Denominator=0
               The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                     Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                      -0.0052**                                            -0.0058**        -0.0068***
   (EXEC2t / SENTt-5) -1               (0.0022)                                             (0.0023)         (0.0024)

                                                          0.0041                             0.0054
  (COMM2t /SENTt-5) -1                                   (0.0045)                           (0.0037)

                                                                          0.0017**                          0.0020***
 (REMOVE2t/SENTt-5) -1                                                    (0.0006)                           (0.0007)

                n                         398              398               398              398               398

                                         Duration on Death Row: 4 years

                                       -0.0069*                                             -0.0069*         -0.0071**
   (EXEC2t / SENTt-4) -1               (0.0035)                                             (0.0036)          (0.0034)


                                                          0.0019                             0.0021
  (COMM2t /SENTt-4) -1                                   (0.0021)                           (0.0019)


                                                                          0.00002                              0.0003
 (REMOVE2t/SENTt-4) -1                                                    (0.0007)                            (0.0006)


                n             426         426         426         426          426
                         Donohue III & Wolfers Specification
    Duration on Death Row: 0 Years; Time between Arrest and Death Sentence: 0 Years
                                        -0.0006                                              -0.0007       -0.00005
    (EXEC2t / SENTt )-1                (0.0020)                                             (0.0020)       (0.0019)

                                                        0.0034**                           0.0034**
    (COMM2t / SENTt )-1                                 (0.0013)                           (0.0013)

                                                                           -0.0005                             -0.0005
 (REMOVE2t / SENTt )-1                                                    (0.0005)                            (0.0005)
                                          543              543               543               543               543
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of
the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                           58
                                         Table 12
                             Determinants of the Homicide Rate

  The Raw Counts of Executions, Commutations and Removals as Risk Variables

                              -0.0007***                                   -0.0007***    -0.0007***
           #EXt-1
                               (0.0002)                                     (0.0002)      (0.0002)

                                              -0.00008                      -0.00009
            #Ct -1
                                              (0.0002)                      (0.0002)

                                                                0.00004                     0.00005
           #Rt-1
                                                                (0.0001)                    (0.0001)
               n                    894            894            894           894           894
#EXt denotes the raw counts of executions. #Ct denotes the raw counts of commutations, and #Rt
denotes the raw counts of death row removals. Each model includes the following variables: The
murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real per capita income, the
proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the
infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime,
and the prison death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-
specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma City
bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered
standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent,
** statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent
level or better.




                                                 59
                                       Table 13A
                           Determinants of the Homicide Rate
               The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                Unweighted Regressions
                                   Duration on death row: 5 years
                                   -0.0042*                                        -0.0043**       -0.0054**
    (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1           (0.0022)                                         (0.0021)        (0.0025)

                                                   0.0079***                       0.0081***
   (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                             (0.0021)                        (0.0020)

                                                                   0.0025***                       0.0028***
  (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                            (0.0008)                        (0.0009)

              n                       734             743             691             733              688

                                   Duration on death row: 4 years
                                     -0.0037                                         -0.0036         -0.0032
    (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1            (0.0023)                                        (0.0023)        (0.0023)

                                                   0.0050***                       0.0050***
   (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                             (0.0008)                        (0.0008)

                                                                    0.0015*                         0.0016**
  (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                            (0.0008)                        (0.0007)

              n                       785             790             744             781              741

                         Donohue III & Wolfers Specification
    Duration on Death Row: 0 Years; Time between Arrest and Death Sentence: 0 Years

                                    -0.0004                                         -0.0005         -0.0005
     (EXECt / SENTt )-1             (0.0008)                                        (0.0007)        (0.0008)

                                                   0.0056**                         0.0057**
    (COMMt / SENTt )-1                             (0.0024)                         (0.0023)

                                                                    0.00035                         0.0004**
  (REMOVEt / SENTt )-1                                              (0.0002)                        (0.0002)
              n                       986             984             921             977              918
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the
unemployment rate, real per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age
groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the
proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the legal drinking age in the state, the number of
prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in each model are state fixed-effects, a
time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of the 1995 Oklahoma
City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and clustered
standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, **
statistical significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                      60
                                       Table 13B
                           Determinants of the Homicide Rate
               The Second measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                                Unweighted Regressions
                                     Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                      -0.0044**                                            -0.0046**         -0.0053*
    (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1               (0.0021)                                             (0.0022)         (0.0027)

                                                        0.0065**                           0.0069***
    (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                                (0.0026)                            (0.0022)

                                                                         0.0017***                          0.0020***
  (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                                  (0.0006)                           (0.0007)

                n                         737              743               712              736               709

                                       Duration on Death Row: 4 years

                                        -0.0048                                              -0.0048           -0.0047
    (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1               (0.0038)                                             (0.0038)          (0.0036)


                                                        0.0046***                          0.0046***
    (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                                 (0.0008)                            (0.008)


                                                                           0.0011                              0.0013
  (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                                  (0.0007)                            (0.0007)


                n             785          792        761          783          758
                          Donohue III & Wolfers Specification
     Duration on Death Row: 0 Years; Time between Arrest and Death Sentence: 0 years
                                        -0.0013                                              -0.0012       -0.0012
     (EXECt / SENTt )-1                (0.0015)                                             (0.0013)       (0.0015)

                                                        0.0044**                           0.0045**
    (COMMt / SENTt )-1                                  (0.0021)                           (0.0021)

                                                                          0.00003                             0.00007
   (REMOVEt / SENTt )-1                                                   (0.0005)                            (0.0005)
                n                         989              990               952               984               949
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of
the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                           61
                                     Table 14
      Determinants of the Homicide Rate (Excluding New York and New Jersey)
                             Unweighted Regressions
            The First Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                          Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                        -0.0043**                                        -0.0044**       -0.0056**
       (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1              (0.0022)                                         (0.0021)        (0.0025)

                                                       0.0077***                        0.0079***
       (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                             (0.0022)                         (0.0021)
                                                                        0.0027***                        0.0030***
     (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                              (0.0008)                         (0.0009)
                   n                       704             713              665             703              662
                                     Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                          -0.0038                                          -0.0036        -0.0033*
       (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1              (0.0023)                                         (0.0023)        (0.0022)

                                                       0.0050***                        0.0049***
       (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                             (0.0007)                         (0.0007)
                                                                         0.0017**                         0.0018**
     (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                              (0.0008)                         (0.0008)
                   n                       753             758              716             749              713
               The Second Measure of Execution, Commutation, and Removal
                            Duration on Death Row: 5 years
                                        -0.0044**                                        -0.0046**       -0.0054**
       (EXECt / SENTt-5 )-1              (0.0022)                                         (0.0022)        (0.0027)

                                                        0.0064**                        0.0068***
       (COMMt / SENTt-5 )-1                             (0.0026)                         (0.0022)
                                                                        0.0019***                        0.0021***
     (REMOVEt / SENTt-5 )-1                                              (0.0006)                         (0.0007)
                   n                       707             713              685             706              682
                                     Duration on Death Row: 4 years
                                          -0.0048                                          -0.0048         -0.0049
       (EXECt / SENTt-4 )-1              (0.0038)                                         (0.0038)        (0.0036)

                                                       0.0046***                        0.0045***
       (COMMt / SENTt-4 )-1                             (0.0008)                         (0.0009)
                                                                         0.0013*                          0.0015**
     (REMOVEt / SENTt-4 )-1                                              (0.0007)                         (0.0007)
                   n                       753             760              732             751              729
Each model includes the following variables: The murder arrest rate, the sentencing rate, the unemployment rate, real
per capita income, the proportion of the state population in the following age groups: 20-34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55 and
over, the proportion of the state population in urban areas, the proportion which is black, the infant mortality rate, the
legal drinking age in the state, the number of prisoners per violent crime, and the prison death rate. Also included in
each model are state fixed-effects, a time trend, state-specific time trends, a dummy variable to control for the impact of
the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, and a dummy variable to indicate is the governor is a Republican. Robust and
clustered standard errors are in parentheses. * indicates statistical significance between 10 and 5 percent, ** statistical
significance between 5 and 1 percent. *** statistical significance at the 1 percent level or better.




                                                           62
                                                             Table 15
                                                     Summary of the Results
                           Risk Measures in the Analysis (A/B)                          The Impact on the Homicide Rate of
                                                                                                        the
               A                               B                          (A/B)        Execution Commutation Removal
                                                                                         Rate          Rate         Rate
First Measures of Executions,    Death Sentences handed           (EXECt/SENTt-5),
Commutations, Removals           out 5 years prior (duration      (COMMt/SENTt-5),     --*        +              +*
                                 on death row=5 years)            (REMOVEt/SENTt-5)
First Measures of Executions,    Death Sentences handed           (EXECt/SENTt-4),
Commutations, Removals           out 4 years prior (duration      (COMMt/SENTt-4),     --*        +*             +
                                 on death row=4 years)            (REMOVEt/SENTt-4)
Second Measures of Executions,   Death Sentences handed           (EXEC2t/SENTt-5),
Commutations, Removals           out 5 years prior (duration      (COMM2t/SENTt-5),    --*        +              +*
                                 on death row=5 years)            (REMOVE2t/SENTt-5)
Second Measures of Executions,   Death Sentences handed           (EXEC2t/SENTt-4),
Commutations, Removals           out 4 years prior (duration      (COMM2t/SENTt-4),    --*        +*             +
                                 on death row=4 years)            (REMOVE2t/SENTt-4)
First Measures of Executions,    Death Sentences handed           (EXECt/SENTt),
Commutations, Removals           out the same year (duration      (COMMt/SENTt),       --         +*             +
(D-III&W Specification)          on death row=0 years)            (REMOVEt/SENTt)
Second Measures of Executions,   Death Sentences handed           (EXEC2t/SENTt),
Commutations, Removals           out the same year (duration      (COMM2t/SENTt),      --         +*             +
(D-III&W Specification)          on death row=0 years)            (REMOVE2t/SENTt)
First or Second Measures of      Death Sentences handed           (EXECt/SENTt-i),
Executions, Commutations,        out i, j, or k years prior for   (COMMt/SENTt-j),     --*        +              +
Removals                         spells ending in year t          (REMOVEt/SENTt-k)
                                 (duration on death
                                 row=changes by year)




                                                                   63
First Measures of Executions,    Death Row Inmates (ROW) (EXECt/ROWt),
Commutations, Removals                                       (COMMt/ROWt),        --*   +*   +
                                                             (REMOVEt/ROWt)
Second Measures of Executions,   Death Row Inmates (ROW) (EXEC2t/ROWt),
Commutations, Removals                                       (COMM2t/ROWt),       --*   +*   +
                                                             (REMOVE2t/ROWt)
First Measures of Executions,    Total Prisoners (PRIS)      (EXECt/PRISt),
Commutations, Removals                                       (COMMt/PRISt),       --*   +    +
                                                             (REMOVEt/PRISt)
Second Measures of Executions,   Total Prisoners (PRIS)      (EXEC2t/PRISt),
Commutations, Removals                                       (COMM2t/PRISt),      --*   +    +
                                                             (REMOVE2t/PRISt)
The Raw Count of Executions      Population (POP)            (#EXt/POPt),
(#EX), Commutations (#C),                                    (#Ct/POPt),          --*   +    +
Removals (#R)                                                (#Rt/POPt)
The Raw Count of Executions      Lagged Murder Rate          (#EXt/MURDERt),
(#EX), Commutations (#C),        (MURDER)                    (#Ct/MURDERt),       --*   --   +
Removals (#R)                                                (#Rt/MURDERt)
The Raw Count of Executions                                  (#EXt),
(#EX), Commutations (#C),                                    (#Ct),               --*   --   +
Removals (#R)                                                (#Rt)
First Measures of Executions,    Death Sentences handed      (EXECt/SENTt-5),
Commutations, Removals           out 5 years prior (duration (COMMt/SENTt-5),     --*   +*   +*
(Unweighted Regression)          on death row=5 years)       (REMOVEt/SENTt-5)
First Measures of Executions,    Death Sentences handed      (EXECt/SENTt-4),
Commutations, Removals           out 4 years prior (duration (COMMt/SENTt-4),     --    +*   +*
(Unweighted Regression)          on death row=4 years)       (REMOVEt/SENTt-4)
Second Measures of Executions,   Death Sentences handed      (EXEC2t/SENTt-5),
Commutations, Removals           out 5 years prior (duration (COMM2t/SENTt-5),    --*   +*   +*
(Unweighted Regression)          on death row=5 years)       (REMOVE2t/SENTt-5)




                                                            64
Second Measures of Executions,       Death Sentences handed           (EXEC2t/SENTt-4),
Commutations, Removals               out 4 years prior (duration      (COMM2t/SENTt-4),              --            +*                +
(Unweighted Regression)              on death row=4 years)            (REMOVE2t/SENTt-4)
First Measures of Executions,        Death Sentences handed           (EXECt/SENTt-7),
Commutations, Removals               out 7 years prior (duration      (COMMt/SENTt-7),               --            +                 +
                                     on death row=7 years)            (REMOVEt/SENTt-7)
Second Measures of Executions,       Death Sentences handed           (EXEC2t/SENTt-7),
Commutations, Removals               out 7 years prior (duration      (COMM2t/SENTt-7),              --            +                 --
                                     on death row=7 years)            (REMOVE2t/SENTt-7)

A + (--) indicates that the coefficient is positive (negative) in at least 2 of the 3 regressions pertinent to that specification. A *
indicates that the coefficient is statistically significant in at least 2 of the 3 specifications. The details are reported in various tables in
the paper. Note that a number of specifications summarized in this table are inconsistent with theory. They are estimated and reported
here as part of sensitivity analysis. Note also that this table is not an exhaustive summary of the models estimated in the paper. Other
models, which are not reported in the interest of space in this table, are consistent with the pattern displayed here. Those results are
presented in previous tables.




                                                                       65
                                                                                      Figure 1A
                                                                                 Kansas Homicide Rate

                               8



                               7



                               6
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               5



                               4



                               3



                               2

                                                                                                       Death Penalty Legal
                               1



                               0
                               1960       1963    1966    1969    1972    1975    1978   1981   1984    1987    1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                   Figure 2A
                                                                           New Hampshire Homicide Rate

                                   4



                               3.5



                                   3
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               2.5



                                   2



                               1.5



                                   1

                                                                                                Death Penalty Legal
                               0.5



                                   0
                                   1960    1963    1966    1969    1972   1975    1978   1981   1984     1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                         66
                                                                                     Figure 3A
                                                                               New York Homicide Rate

                               16



                               14



                               12
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               10



                               8



                               6



                               4

                                                                                                        Death Penalty Legal
                               2



                               0
                               1965    1968     1971      1974       1977       1980     1983    1986     1989    1992     1995      1998          2001      2004




                                                                                      Figure 4A
                                                                               New Jersey Homicide Rate

                               8



                               7



                               6
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               5



                               4



                               3

                                                                       Death Penalty Legal
                               2



                               1



                               0
                               1960   1963    1966     1969   1972      1975      1978    1981   1984    1987    1990    1993     1996      1999      2002




                                                                                           67
                                                                                    Figure 5A
                                                                            Massachusetts Homicide Rate

                                   5


                               4.5


                                   4


                               3.5
Homicides per 100,000 People




                                   3


                               2.5


                                   2
                                                                                 Death Penalty Illegal
                               1.5


                                   1


                               0.5


                                   0
                                   1960    1963    1966    1969    1972   1975    1978    1981    1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                      Figure 6A
                                                                             Rhode Island Homicide Rate

                               6




                               5
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               4




                               3




                               2




                               1

                                                                                 Death Penalty Illegal

                               0
                               1960       1963    1966    1969    1972    1975   1978    1981    1984    1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                          68
                                                                                         Figure 1B
                                                                            Kansas Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               8



                               7



                               6
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               5


                                                                                                                                                  Actual
                               4
                                                                                                                                                  Trend


                               3



                               2

                                                                                                    Death Penalty Legal
                               1



                               0
                               1960       1963    1966    1969    1972     1975    1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                         Figure 2B
                                                                         New Hampshire Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                                   4



                               3.5



                                   3
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               2.5


                                                                                                                                                  Actual
                                   2
                                                                                                                                                  Trend


                               1.5



                                   1

                                                                                             Death Penalty Legal
                               0.5



                                   0
                                   1960    1963    1966    1969    1972     1975   1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                                 69
                                                                                Figure 3B
                                                                  New York Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               16



                               14



                               12
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               10


                                                                                                                                          Actual
                               8
                                                                                                                                          Trend


                               6



                               4

                                                                                               Death Penalty Legal
                               2



                               0
                               1960   1963   1966   1969   1972    1975   1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993    1996   1999   2002




                                                                                Figure 4B
                                                                  New Jersey Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               8



                               7



                               6
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               5


                                                                                                                                          Actual
                               4
                                                                                                                                          Trend


                               3



                               2
                                                              Death Penalty Legal
                               1



                               0
                               1960   1963   1966   1969   1972   1975    1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993    1996   1999   2002




                                                                                        70
                                                                                         Figure 5B
                                                                         Massachusetts Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                                   5


                               4.5


                                   4


                               3.5
Homicides per 100,000 People




                                   3

                                                                                                                                                    Actual
                               2.5
                                                                                                                                                    Trend

                                   2


                               1.5


                                   1
                                                                                  Death Penalty Illegal
                               0.5


                                   0
                                   1960    1963    1966    1969    1972     1975     1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                          Figure 6B
                                                                          Rhode Island Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               6




                               5
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               4




                                                                                                                                                    Actual
                               3
                                                                                                                                                    Trend




                               2




                               1
                                                                              Death Penalty Illegal

                               0
                               1960       1963    1966    1969    1972     1975     1978    1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                                   71
                                                                                         Figure 1C
                                                                            Kansas Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               8



                               7



                               6
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               5


                                                                                                                                                   Actual
                               4
                                                                                                                                                   Trend


                               3



                               2

                                                                                   Furman V. Georgia
                               1
                                                                                                     Death Penalty Legal
                               0
                               1960       1963    1966    1969    1972     1975    1978    1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                         Figure 2C
                                                                         New Hampshire Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                                   4



                               3.5



                                   3
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               2.5


                                                                                                                                                   Actual
                                   2
                                                                                                                                                   Trend


                               1.5



                                   1

                                                                                   Furman V. Georgia
                               0.5

                                                                                              Death Penalty Legal
                                   0
                                   1960    1963    1966    1969    1972     1975    1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                                  72
                                                                                  Figure 3C
                                                                    New York Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               16



                               14



                               12
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               10


                                                                                                                                           Actual
                               8
                                                                                                                                           Trend


                               6



                               4

                                                                            Furman V. Georgia
                               2
                                                                                                Death Penalty Legal
                               0
                               1960   1963   1966   1969   1972     1975   1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993    1996   1999   2002




                                                                                 Figure 4C
                                                                   New Jersey Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               8



                               7



                               6
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               5


                                                                                                                                           Actual
                               4
                                                                                                                                           Trend


                               3

                                                                  Death Penalty legal
                               2



                               1

                                                              Furman V. Georgia
                               0
                               1960   1963   1966   1969   1972    1975    1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993    1996   1999   2002




                                                                                         73
                                                                                                   Figure 5C
                                                                                   Massachusetts Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend


                                                5


                                               4.5


                                                4


                                               3.5
Homicides per 100,000 People




                                                3

                                                                                                                                                           Actual
                                               2.5                                                                                                         Trend


                                                2


                                               1.5
                                                                                        Furman V. Georgia
                                                1
                                                                                        Death Penalty Illegal
                                               0.5


                                                0
                                                1960   1963   1966   1969   1972     1975   1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                                   Figure 6C
                                                                                   Rhode Island Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                                               6




                                               5
                Homicides per 100,000 People




                                               4




                                                                                                                                                           Actual
                                               3
                                                                                                                                                           Trend




                                               2


                                                                                        Death Penalty Illegal
                                               1


                                                                                        Furman V. Georgia
                                               0
                                               1960    1963   1966   1969   1972     1975   1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                                          74
                                                                                           Figure 7C
                                                                           South Dakota Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               4.5


                                   4


                               3.5
Homicides per 100,000 People




                                   3


                               2.5
                                                                                                                                                   Actual
                                                                                                                                                   Trend
                                   2


                               1.5


                                   1

                                          Furman V. Georgia
                               0.5
                                                                  Death Penalty Legal
                                   0
                                   1960     1963    1966    1969    1972     1975   1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                          Figure 8C
                                                                             Oregon Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                               7




                               6




                               5
Homicides per 100,000 People




                               4
                                                                                                                                                   Actual
                                                                                                                                                   Trend
                               3




                               2


                                       Furman V. Georgia
                               1

                                                            Death Penalty Legal
                               0
                               1960       1963     1966    1969    1972     1975    1978   1981   1984   1987   1990   1993   1996   1999   2002




                                                                                                  75
                                                                                                                             Figure 9C
                                                                                                               New Mexico Homicide Rate and Fitted Trend

                                                         14




                                                         12




                                                         10
                          Homicides per 100,000 People




                                                          8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Actual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Trend
                                                          6




                                                          4

                                                                Furman V. Georgia
                                                          2

                                                                                                     Death Penalty Legal
                                                          0
                                                          1960          1963      1966      1969       1972     1975   1978     1981          1984      1987      1990     1993    1996   1999     2002




                                                                                                                                     Figure 10
                                                                                                      Duration on Death Row From Sentencing to Exit


                     18


                     16


                     14


                     12
Years on Death Row




                     10


                     8


                     6


                     4


                     2


                     0
                                                         1977

                                                                 1978

                                                                           1979

                                                                                     1980

                                                                                              1981

                                                                                                        1982

                                                                                                                1983

                                                                                                                       1984

                                                                                                                              1985

                                                                                                                                       1986

                                                                                                                                                 1987

                                                                                                                                                           1988

                                                                                                                                                                    1989

                                                                                                                                                                            1990

                                                                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                                                                          1992

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1997




                                                                                                                       Executions              Commutations                Removals




                                                                                                                                          76
                                      References

Argys, Laura M., and Mocan, H. Naci. "Who Shall Live and Who Shall Die? An
Analysis of Prisoners on Death Row in the United States" Journal of Legal Studies
(2004): 255-92.

Ayres, Ian, and Donohue III, John. “The Latest Misfires in Support of the ‘More Guns,
Less Crime’ Hypothesis.” Stanford Law Review 55 (2003): 1371-98.

Baldus, David C. Woodworth; George, Zuckerman; David, Weiner; Neil Allan; and
Broffit, Barbara. “Race Discrimination and the Death Penalty in the Post Furman Era:
An Empirical and Legal Overview with Preliminary Findings from Philadelphia.”
Cornell Law Review, 83 (1998): 1638-1770.

Beccaria, Cesarc, marchese di. On Crimes and Punishment. Indianapolis, Hackett
Publishing (1986).

Becker, Gary S. “Crime and Punishment: An Economics Perspective.” Journal of
Political Economy, 76 (1968): 169-217.

Becker, Gary S. Nobel Lecture. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/
laureates/1992/becker-lecture.html (1992)

Becker, Gary, Michael Grossman, and Kevin Murphy. “An Empirical Analysis of
Cigarette Addiction.” American Economic Review 81 (1994): 396-418.

Bedau, Hugo A. The Death Penalty in America. New York, Oxford University Press,
(1982).

Bertrand, Marianne; Duflo, Esther; and Mullainathan, Sendhil. “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-and-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119
(2004): 249-75.

Bentham, Jeremy. A Theory of Legislation. New York, Harcourt, Brace (1931).

Bowers, William J. and Pierce, Glenn L. “The Illusion of Deterrence in Isaac Ehrlich’s
Research on Capital Punishment.” Yale Law Journal 85 (1975): 187-208.

Cameron, Samuel. “A Review of the Econometric Evidence on the Effects of Capital
Punishment.” Journal of Socio-Economics 23 (1994): 197-214.




                                           77
Corman, Hope; Noonan, Kelly; Reichman, Nancy; and Dhaval, Dave. “Demand for Illicit
Drugs among Pregnant Women.” In Substance Use: Individual Behavior, Social
Interactions, Markets and Politics, Bjorn Lindgren and Michael Grossman (eds.).
Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research. Amsterdam, Elsevier,
(2005): 41-59.

Corman, Hope, and Mocan, Naci H. “A Time-Series Analysis of Crime, Deterrence,
and Drug Abuse in New York City.” American Economic Review 90 (2000): 584-604.

Corman, Hope, and Mocan, Naci H. “Carrots, Sticks, and Broken Windows.” Journal of
Law and Economics (2005): 235-66.

Cover, James Perry and Thistle, Paul D. “Time Series, Homicide, and the Deterrent
Effect of Capital Punishment,” Southern Economic Journal 54 (1988): 615-622.

Dezhbakhsh, Hashem; Rubin, Paul H.; and Shepherd, Joanna. “Does Capital Punishment
Have a Deterrent Effect? New Evidence from Post-moratorium Panel Data.”
American Law and Economics Review 5 (2003): 344-76

Dickert-Conlin, Stacey, and Amitabh Chandra, “Taxes and the Timing of Births,”
Journal of Political Economy 107 (1999): 161-77.

Di Tella, Rafael and Schargrodsk, Ernesto. “Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using
the Allocation of Police Forces After a Terrorist Attack,” The American Economic
Review 94 (2004): 115-33.

Donohue III, John, and Levitt, Steven. “Measurement Error, Legalized Abortion, the
Decline in Crime: A Response to Foote and Goetz (2005).” Working Paper No. 11987.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.

Donohue III, John, and Levitt, Steven. “Further Evidence that Legalized Abortion
Lowered Crime: A Reply to Joyce.” Journal of Human Resources 39 (2004): 29-49.

Donohue III, John, and Levitt, Steven. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2001): 379-420.

Donohue III, John, and Wolfers, Justin. “Uses and Abuses of Empirical Evidence in the
Death Penalty Debate.” Stanford Law Review 58 (2006): 791-846.

Ehrlich, Isaac. “The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: A Question of Life and
Death.” American Economic Review 65 (1975): 395-417.

Ehrlich, Isaac. “Capital Punishment and Deterrence: Some Further Thoughts and
Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 85 (1977): 741-788.




                                           78
Ehrlich, Isaac. “The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: Reply.” American
Economic Review 67 (1977): 452-458.

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Brower, George D. “On the Issue of Causality in the Economic
Model of Crime and Law Enforcement: Some Theoretical Considerations and
Experimental Evidence.” American Economic Review 77 (1987): 99-106.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Liu, Zhiqiang. “Sensitivity Analyses of the Deterrence Hypothesis:
Let’s Keep the Econ in Econometrics.” Journal of Law and Economics 17 (1999): 455-
488.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Randall, Mark, “Fear of Deterrence: A Critical Evaluation of the
“Report of the Panel on Research on Deterrent and Incapacitative Effects” Journal of
Legal Studies 6 (1977): 293-316.

Farrell, Susan; Manning, Willard G.; and Finch, Michael D. “Alcohol Dependence and
the Price of Alcoholic Beverages,” Journal of Health Economics 22 (2003): 117-47.

Foote, Christopher, and Christopher Goetz. “Testing Economic Hypotheses with State-
Level Data: A Comment on Donohue and Levitt (2001).” Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston Working Paper, No. 5-15. November 2005.

Forst, Brian. “Capital Punishment and Deterrence: Conflicting Evidence?” Journal of
Criminal Law and Criminology 74 (1983): 927-942.

Freeman, Richard B. and Rodgers, William M., III. “Area Economic Conditions and the
Labor Market Outcomes of Young Men in the 1990s Expansion.” In Prosperity for All?
The Economic Boom and African Americans. Robert Cherry, William M. Rodgers III
(eds.). New York, Russell Sage Foundation, (2000): 50-87.

Grossman, Michael. “Individual Behaviours and Substance Use: The Role of Price.” In
Substance Use: Individual Behaviour, Social Interactions, Markets and Politics, Bjorn
Lindgren and Michael Grossman (eds.). Vol. 16 of Advances in Health Economics and
Health Services Research. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2005; pp. 15-39.

Grossman Michael and Frank Chaloupka. “The Demand for Cocaine by Young Adults: A
Rational Addiction Approach.” Journal of Health Economics; 17, (1998); pp, 427-74.

Grossman Michael, Frank Chaloupka, Henry Saffer and A. Laixuthai. “Effects of
Alcohol Price Policy on Youth: A Summary of Economic Research.” Journal of
Research on Adolescence 4 (1994): 347-64.

Grogger, Jeffrey. “Market Wages and Youth Crime.” Journal of Labor Economics 16
(1998): 756-91.




                                          79
Gruber, Jonathan; Sen, Anindya; and Stabile, Mark. “Estimating price Elasticities when
there is Smuggling: The Sensitivity of Smoking to Price in Canada.” Journal of Health
Economics 22 (2003): 821-42.

Gruber, Jonathan and Jonathan Zinman. “Youth Smoking in the United States: Evidence
and Implications.” In Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, Jonathan
Gruber (ed.) Chicago: The University of Chicago Press (2001): 69-120.

Gould, Eric D.; Weinberg, Bruce A.; Mustard, David B. “Crime Rates and Local Labor
Market Opportunities in the United States: 1979-1997.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 84 (2002): 45-61

Harbaugh, William T.; Krause, Kate; Liday, Steven G., Jr.; and Vesterlund, Lise. “Trust
in Children.” In Trust and reciprocity: Interdisciplinary lessons from experimental
research , Ostrom, Elinor; Walker, James (eds.) New York: Russell Sage Foundation
(2003): 302-22.

Harvey, Andrew, and Durbin, J. “The Effect of Seat Belt Legislation on British Road
Causalities: A Case Study in Structural Time Series Modeling.” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society 149 (1986): 187-227.

Hoenack, Stephen A., and Weiler, William C. “A Structural Model of Murder Behavior
and the Criminal Justice System.” American Economic Review 70 (1980): 327-341.

Jacob, Brian A. and Levitt, Steven D. “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Pevelance
and Predictors of Teacher Cheating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2003): 843-
877.

Joyce, Ted, “Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?” Journal of Human Resources 39
(2004a): 1-28.

Joyce, Ted, “Further Tests of Abortion and Crime.” Working Paper No. 10564.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2004b.

Katz, Lawrence; Levitt, Steven D.; and Shustorovich, Ellen. “Prison Conditions, Capital
Punishment, and Deterrence.” American Law and Economics Review 5 (2003): 318-43.

Kipling, Rudyard. From Sea to Sea: vol. 9 New York, Doubleday & Co. (1914).

Kleck, Gary. “Racial Discrimination in Criminal Sentencing: A Critical Evaluation of
the Evidence with Additional Evidence on the Death Penalty.” American Sociological
Review 46 (1981): 783-804.

Kessler, Daniel P., and Levitt, Steven D. “Using Sentence Enhancements to Distinguish
between Deterrence and Incapacitation.” Journal of Law and Economics 42 (1999): 343-
63.



                                           80
Layson, Stephen K. “Another View of the Canadian Time-Series Evidence on
Homicide and Deterrence.” Canadian Journal of Economics 16(1983): 52-73.

Leamer, Edward. “Let’s Take the Con out of Econometrics,” American Economic
Review 73 (1983): 31-43.

Levitt, Steven D. “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from
Prison Overcrowding Litigation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), (1996)
pp. 319-51.

Levitt, Steven D. “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of
Police on Crime,” American Economic Review 87 (1997): 270-290.

Levitt, Stephen D. “Juvenile Crime and Punishment,” The Journal of Political
Economy 106 (1998a): 1156-1185.

Levitt, Stephen D. “Why Do Increased Arrest Rates Appear to Reduce Crime:
Deterrence, Incapacitation, or Measurement Error?” Economic Inquiry 36 (1998b): 353-
372.

Lott, John R. Jr. and Mustard, David B. “Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry
Concealed Handguns.” The Journal of Legal Studies 26 (1997): 1-68.

Lundberg, Shelly and Plotnick, Robert D. "Effects of State Welfare, Abortion and Family
Planning Policies on Premarital Childbearing among White Adolescents.” Family
Planning Perspectives 22 (1990): 251-75.

Lundberg, Shelly and Plotnick, Robert D. "Adolescent Premarital Childbearing: Do
Economic Incentives Matter?" Journal of Labor Economics 13 (1995): 177-200.

Manning, Willard G., Blumberg, L.; and Moulton, L. “The Demand for Alcohol: The
Differential Response to Price.” Journal of Health Economics 14 (1995): 123-48.

McFarland, Sam G. “Is Capital Punishment a Short-Term Deterrent to Homicide? A
Study of the Effects of Four Recent American Executions.” Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology 74 (1983): 1014-1032.

McManus, Walter S. “Estimates of the Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: The
Importance of the Researcher’s Prior Beliefs.” Journal of Political Economy 93 (1985):
417-425.

Mellor, Jennifer M. "The Effect of Family Planning Programs on the Fertility of Welfare
Recipients: Evidence from Medicaid Claims." Journal of Human Resources 33 (1998):
866-95.




                                            81
Mocan, Naci. "Is There a Unit Root in U.S. Real GNP? A Re-Assessment." Economics
Letters 45 (1994): 23-31.

Mocan, Naci, and Gittings, Kaj R. “Getting Off Death Row: Commuted Sentences and
the Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment.” Journal of Law and Economics 46 (2003):
453-478.

Mocan, Naci and Rees, Daniel. “Economic Conditions, Deterrence and Juvenile Crime:
Evidence from Micro Data.” American Law and Economics Review 7 (2005): 319-49.

Mocan, Naci, and Topyan, Kudret. “Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from
a Structural Time-Series Model." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 55 (1993):
363-89.

Moody, Carlisle. “Testing for the Effects of the Concealed Weapons Laws: Specification
Errors and Robustness.” Journal of Law and Economics 44 (2001): 799-813.

Mustard, David B. “Reexamining Criminal Behavior: The Importance of Omitted
Variable Bias.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2003): 205-11.

Pacula, Rosalie, Michael Grossman, Frank Chaloupka, Patrick O’Malley, Llyod Johnston
and Matthew Farrelly. “Marijuana and Youth.” In Risky Behavior Among Youths: An
Economic Analysis, Jonathan Gruber (ed.) Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
(2001): 271-326.

Passell, Peter and Taylor, John. “The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: Another
View.” American Economic Review 67 (1977): 445-451.

Plassmann, Florenz, and Tideman, Nicolaus. “Does the Right to Carry Concealed
Handguns Deter Countable Crimes? Only a Coumt Analysis Can Say.” Journal of Law
and Economics 44 (2001): 771-98.

Plassmann, Florenz, and Whitley, John. “Confirming ‘More Guns, Less Crime.’ ”
Stanford Law Review 55 (2003): 1313-69.

Pokorak, J. “Probing the Capital Prosecutor’s Perspective: Race and Gender of the
Discretionary Actors.” Cornell Law Review 83 (1998):

Raphael, Steven and Winter-Ebmer, Rudolf. ” Identifying the Effect of Unemployment
on Crime,” The Journal of Law and Economics XLIV (2001): 259-83.

Saffer, Henry and Dave, Dhaval. “Mental Illness and The Demand for Alcohol, Cocaine
and Cigarettes.” Economic Inquiry 43 (2005): 229-46.

Saffer, Henry, and Chaloupka, Frank. “The Demand for Illicit Drugs.” Economic Inquiry
37 (1999): 401-11.



                                           82
Sorensen, Jon; Wrinkle, Robert; Brewer, Victoria, et. al. “Capital Punishment and
Deterrence: Examining the Effect of Executions on Murder in Texas.” Crime and
Delinquency 45 (1999): 481-493.

Sunstein, Cass and Vermeule, Adrian. “Deterring Murder: A Reply.” Stanford Law
Review 58 (2006): 847-57.

Van Ours, Jan. “The Price Elasticity of Hard Drugs: The case of Opium in the Dutch East
Indies, 1923-1938.” Journal of Political Economy103 (1995): 261-79.

Yurekli A. and P. Zhang, “The Impact of Clean-air laws and Cigarette Smuggling on
Demand for Cigarettes: An Empirical Model.” Journal of Health Economics 9 (2000):
159-70.




                                           83
