                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TACIT COLLUSION IN THE PRESENCE OF CYCLICAL DEMAND AND ENDOGENOUS
                           CAPACITY LEVELS

                                        Christopher R. Knittel
                                           Jason J. Lepore

                                        Working Paper 12635
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12635


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Christopher R. Knittel and Jason J. Lepore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Tacit Collusion in the Presence of Cyclical Demand and Endogenous Capacity Levels
Christopher R. Knittel and Jason J. Lepore
NBER Working Paper No. 12635
October 2006
JEL No. L0,L1,L13,L49

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze tacit collusion in an industry characterized by cyclical demand and long-run scale decisions;
firms face deterministic demand cycles and choose capacity levels prior to competing in prices. Our
focus is on the nature of prices. We find that two types of price wars may exist. In one, collusion can
involve periods of mixed strategy price wars. In the other, consistent with the Rotemberg and Saloner
(1986) definition of price wars, we show that collusive prices can also become countercyclical. We
also establish pricing patterns with respect to the relative prices in booms and recessions. If the marginal
cost of capacity is high enough, holding current demand constant, prices in the boom will be generally
lower than the prices in the recession; this reverses the results of Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991).
In contrast, if the marginal cost of capacity is low enough, then prices in the boom will be generally
higher than the prices in the recession. For costs in an intermediate range, numerical examples are
calculated to show specific pricing patterns.

Christopher R. Knittel
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
crknittel@ucdavis.edu

Jason J. Lepore
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
jjlepore@ucdavis.edu
                                                                                                                  2




1        Introduction

Inferring collusion is di¢cult because there rarely is a “smoking gun.” Instead, empirical research
has focused on dynamic pricing patterns predicted by theories of collusion that are inconsistent with
static models of competition. One such strand of literature tests whether observed equilibrium
prices are consistent with the predicted collusive prices when …rms face cyclical demand. This
literature leverages the result that when …rms face demand cycles, conditional on current demand,
prices will be higher if demand is expected to rise in the future, compared to if it is expected to fall.1
We show that when …rms face endogenous capacity constraints, these predicted pricing patterns
can change; therefore, ignoring capacity constraints may lead us to conclude collusion does not
exist when, in fact, it exists.

        Collusion when …rms face capacity constraints, has recently been the focus of a number of
antitrust cases in both the US and Europe. The US Department of Justice recently launched
an investigation into capacity collusion in the DRAM market. Mergers increasing the ability of
…rms to coordinate have also concerned the European Commission. The Commission blocked the
Airtours and First Choice Holidays merger in the package holiday travel market partly because of
concerns about an increased coordination in capacities; in this industry capacity levels are chosen
well in advance of consumer bookings. Coordinating on capacity was also the Commission’s initial
objection to the UPM-Kymmene/Haindl newsprint merger.2

        Antitrust policy-makers have noted the di¢culty of uncovering collusion in markets with strict
capacity constraints. Coordinating on capacities can lead to lower capacity levels and outputs
closer to these capacity levels. Therefore, if one observed the market, taking capacity levels as
given, they may conclude that collusion does not exist, presuming instead that …rms are simply
capacity constrained. This added di¢culty increases the importance of understanding how prices
behave when …rms collude on both capacities and prices.

        In this paper, we analyze the collusive behavior of …rms where changing the scale of opera-
tion takes a signi…cant period of time and market demand ‡uctuates cyclically. Our goal is to
establish testable implications with respect to pricing behavior along the demand cycle. Firms face
    1
    See, for example, Borenstein and Shepard (1996) and Rosenbaum and Sukharomana (2001).
    2
    While the Commission ultimately concluded that coordinating on capacities was too di¢cult, our analysis suggests
that this conclusion may have been unwarranted.
                                                                                                                   3


deterministic demand cycles and choose capacity levels before competing in prices. This represents
industries where the cycles are frequent, or capacity is di¢cult to alter; for example, the holiday
travel market cited above, electricity markets where demand cycles each day and capacity changes
can take over 18 months, or the gasoline re…ning market where demand exhibits annual ‡uctuations
while re…ning capacity has remained fairly constant.3

       The inclusion of the scale decision as a formal choice variable in the dynamic game can drastically
change the collusive pricing patterns and the e¤ectiveness of collusion. Capacity constraints have
two countervailing e¤ects on …rms’ ability to collude. First, low capacity levels may reduce the
incentive for a …rm to deviate from collusion by limiting the immediate gain from defection. That
is, if a …rm’s capacity is less than the market demand at the collusive price, the …rm cannot supply
the entire market after a low price defection. On the other hand, low capacity levels can decrease
the severity of the credible punishment after a deviation, decreasing the incentive to collude. We
…nd that whether low or high capacities best facilitate collusion depends on how expensive it is to
install; hence, the price of capacity is a key determinant of collusive behavior. Furthermore, we
…nd that endogenizing capacity constraints can have a signi…cant impact on the e¤ectiveness of
collusion, since …rms are able to choose capacity levels to increase the collusive pro…ts.

       Our primary analysis is concerned with collusive pricing patterns. Consistent with the existing
literature, we identify two types of price wars. Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) show that when each
period’s demand depends on an independent identically distributed (iid) shock and there are no
capacity constraints, prices may be inversely correlated with the level of demand. Because the gain
from cheating is greater when demand is higher (and the punishment is independent of the current
level of demand), prices may fall when demand increases in order to counteract the incentive to
cheat; we refer to these counter-cyclical prices as mild price wars.4

       A second type of price war also exists. Consistent with Staiger and Wolak (1992), we …nd
under certain capital prices and discount levels, …rms will switch between cooperative and non-
cooperative mixed-pricing behavior; we refer to these periods as severe price wars. As the marginal
cost of capacity increases, severe price wars are only possible in periods of higher and higher
demand. Unlike the mild price wars, severe price wars correspond to periods where one …rm
actually undercuts the other in equilibrium.5
   3
     Other industries such as cement, railroad, steel, heavy electrical equipment and p etroleum also loosely …t this
abstract description. Scherer and Ross (1990) describe these industries as all having relatively high concentration,
high …xed costs, relatively low marginal costs and non-stationary demand patterns. The high …xed costs come from
the requirement of long-term pre-commitment to production technologies and/or resource investment.
   4
     While this does not represent a price war in the sense that …rms revert to non-cooperative pricing, we keep
Rotemberg and Saloner’s nomenclature.
   5
     Green and Porter (1984) also …nd reversion to non-cooperative behavior in a model of collusion.; however, this
                                                                                                                      4


    We also establish testable implications with respect to the relative prices during booms and
recessions. The …rst of these states, if the marginal cost of capacity is high enough, then for equal
current demand levels, prices in booms will generally be lower than prices in recessions. In this case,
capacity is too costly to hold as extra punishment. 6 Instead, …rms choose low capacity levels to limit
the gain from deviations in high demand periods. Since low capacity levels lead non-cooperative
prices to be highest in these periods, the near-term punishment after a defection is smallest when
demand is growing. For most model speci…cations, the converse is also true: If the cost of capacity
is low enough, then prices in the booms will be generally higher than prices in the recessions when
…rms collude. In this case, capacity is cheap enough that holding large amounts, to increase the
credible level of punishment, is most helpful to maximize collusive pro…ts. Therefore, the near-term
loss after a deviation is largest when demand is growing. If the cost is in an intermediate range,
no such blanket pricing patterns can be established; the relationship can change along the demand
cycle.

    To further examine pricing patterns, we calculate numerical examples for di¤erent costs at
varying discount factors. Numerical examples with extremely low costs show very similar pricing
patterns to the limitless capacity model of Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991). As in Haltiwanger
and Harrington (1991), we also …nd that prices are pro-cyclical for high discount factors, but can
become extremely counter-cyclical if …rms are impatient enough. With high capacity costs, at equal
current demand levels, collusive prices are lower in the boom than in the recession and never become
counter-cyclical. The prices always remain high in the largest demand periods, while severe price
wars can occur in the lowest demand periods. An intermediate cost speci…cation shows patterns of
both the low and high cost cases. For most discounts, prices are higher in the low demand periods
of the boom than the low demand periods in the recession, while lower in the high demand periods
of the boom than in the high demand periods of the recession.

    Our results are not limited to a model with perfectly in‡exible capacities. In Section 7 we show
that as long as there is su¢cient time lag to adjust capacity and a positive …xed cost of adjustment,
the pricing implications of the model are identical to the case of perfectly in‡exible capacities. This
is not surprising given that our model can be construed as one with in…nite adjustment costs.
is driven by information asymmetries rather than capacity constraints.
    6
      We follow the existing literature and refer to b ooms as periods where demand is growing and recessions as periods
where demand is contracting.
                                                                                                   5


1.1   Relation to existing literature

This paper builds on a literature that began with Rotemberg and Saloner (1986). Rotemberg and
Saloner analyze an industry where …rms compete over an in…nite horizon, face iid demand shocks
in each period, and have in…nite capacities; …rms observe these demand shocks prior to choosing
prices. In this setting, as the discount factor falls away from unity, collusive prices will be lower
when demand is high. This is because the gains from cheating are highest during high demand
periods and the punishment is independent of the current demand state (because of the iid demand
shocks). As such, prices may be lower the greater is demand. Rotemberg and Saloner refer to this
lowering of prices as a price war.

   Kandori (1991) generalizes the model of Rotemberg and Saloner to the setting of Markov uncer-
tainty in demand levels. For a class of demand shocks, the collusive prices are shown to exhibit the
same price wars during booms—prices lowered from monopoly levels in high demand states—as
in the iid case. The key to this result is that the Markov distribution approaches a stationary
distribution over time.

   Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991) extend the model of Rotemberg and Saloner in a di¤erent
direction by assuming …rms face deterministic demand cycles. Their results demonstrate that
stationary future demand is far from an innocuous assumption and, in fact, drives the price war
results of Rotemberg and Saloner. Once demand movements are no longer independent, the loss
from punishment in the future depends on the state of demand today. With deterministic demand
cycles, the losses from punishment di¤er for all periods of the cycle; the losses will be greater
when demand is going to grow in the near future. Based on this key insight, Haltiwanger and
Harrington show that, holding current demand …xed, …rms sustain weakly higher collusive prices
in a boom period than a recession period. When the …rms are su¢ciently impatient, prices can
become counter-cyclical just as in the Rotemberg and Saloner model.

   Bagwell and Staiger (1997) study a model of repeated price competition with Markov uncer-
tainty in demand growth rates; the growth rate switches randomly between a high and a low rate.
Under this speci…cation the concept of recessions and booms can be de…ned analogously to Halti-
wanger and Harrington, if shocks are positively correlated. With positive correlation, if the growth
rate is high today, it is more likely to be high tomorrow, hence this is a boom. Conversely, when the
growth rate is low, it is more likely to be low tomorrow, this is a recession. As in the Haltiwanger
and Harrington model, holding the current level of demand constant, the expected future loss after
a deviation is greater during a boom than in the recession, since demand levels are expected to
                                                                                                                           6


remain high.7 Therefore, because the immediate gain from a deviation is the same, …rms sustain
higher collusive price in the boom.

        Staiger and Wolak (1992) extend the model of Rotemberg and Saloner in another direction
by keeping iid demand shocks, but including endogenous capacity constraints. The supergame is
the in…nite repetition of a game that involves …rst, a choice of capacities by both …rms when the
demand for the period is uncertain. Then, after observing the other …rm’s capacity and the realized
demand state, the …rms choose their prices. The single-period subgame is an extension of the Kreps
and Scheinkman (1983) model to include iid demand uncertainty.8 The introduction of capacity
constraints changes one primary analytical feature of the Rotemberg and Saloner model: The
capacity constraints limit the gains from cheating in high demand states by limiting the quantity
a …rm can sell when they cheat. Clearly, if the demand realization is high enough such that the
sum of the capacities of the two …rms is less than the demand at the monopoly price, then no …rm
gains from deviating in that state. Staiger and Wolak show that the nature of price wars depends
on the degree of excess capacity in an industry. Mild price wars, occur in demand states with little
excess capacity, while severe, mixed-strategy, price wars occur in states with more excess capacity.

        Fabra (2006) also studies collusion under capacity constraints and cyclical demand. Our analysis
di¤ers in two important respects. First, Fabra assumes exogenous capacity levels; we …nd endoge-
nizing capacity can have large e¤ects. More importantly, Fabra limits the analysis to the critical
point for mild price wars—the point on the cycle where prices …rst deviate from monopoly levels;
we derive more general results with respect to prices. She …nds that if the exogenous capacity
constraints are large enough, the critical point for price wars is during the recession. While if the
capacity constraints are low enough, the critical point is in the boom of the cycle.



2        Preliminaries

Consider an industry with two …rms and a market for a single homogeneous product. The index i
is used to identify an arbitrary …rm, where i = 1; 2. The two …rms are in…nitely lived and modeled
as initially choosing capacities, then interacting in a Bertrand-Edgeworth price game in each period
    7
      One di¤erence being that in the Haltiwanger and Harrington model there is no uncertainty. Another distinction
between the two models is that Bagwell and Staiger’s model has only multiplicative demand shifts. This restriction
leads to a single-collusive price for all boom states and a single collusive price for all recession states b oth independent
of the demand level.
    8
      There is a substantial literature on dynamic oligopoly games of capacity and price competition with stationary
demand, including Brock and Scheinkman (1985), Benoit and Krishna (1987), Davidson and Deneckere (1990),
Compte, Frédéric and Rey (2002) and Besanko and Dorazelski (2004).
                                                                                                         7


that follows. The parameter µ is a …nite real number that represents the state of demand. The
market demand function at any time t; given the state µt 2 R+ ; is D(¢; µt ) : R+ 7! R+. The inverse
demand for any time t; given the state µt 2 R+ ; is P (¢; µt ) : R+ 7! R+ . Demand is assumed to
follow deterministic cyclical ‡uctuations over time based on the parameter µ. The structure of
demand movements is given by cycles that repeat every ¿ (…nite) periods.9 The market demand
function follows the deterministic cyclical time path:
                                    8
                                    >
                                    > µ1 if t 2 f1; ¿ + 1; 2¿ + 1; :::g;
                                    >
                                    >
                                    >
                                    < µ2 if t 2 f2; ¿ + 2; 2¿ + 2; :::g;
                               µt =    ..                                                              (1)
                                    >
                                    >   .
                                    >
                                    >
                                    >
                                    :
                                      µ¿ if    t 2 f¿; 2¿; 3¿; :::g :


      Each …rm has a capacity xi 2 R+, the absolute limit on the number of units it can produce.
The marginal cost of production is zero up to the …rm’s capacity and in…nite for any quantity
beyond. The two …rms have a common discount factor ± 2 (0; 1). We label the generic ¿-period
cycle of demand parameters as £ = fµ1 ; µ2 ; :::; µ¿ g ½ R¿+. In order to simplify notation, we de…ne
X(µ) = D(0; µ) < 1 and P(µ) = P(0; µ) < 1, for all µ 2 £. It will also be useful to denote by
X = maxµ2£ X(µ); the maximum demand at a price of zero over all states µ 2 £.

      The …rst three assumptions establish the basic properties of the industry demand function.


Assumption 1 For each µ 2 £ the quantity X(µ) is such that 8q 2 [0; X (µ)), P(q; µ) 2 (0; 1)
and 8q ¸ X(µ), P(q; µ) = 0. On (0; X(µ)), P(q; µ) is twice-continuously di¤erentiable, strictly
decreasing and concave in q.


Assumption 2 Demand is increasing in µ 2 £, such that for all p 2 (0; P(µ)), D(p; µ 0) > D(p; µ)
if and only if µ 0 > µ.


Assumption 3 For any q 2 (0; X(µ)), the marginal inverse demand is increasing in the demand
parameter:
                          @P(q; µ0 ) @P(q; µ)
                                    ¸         if µ0 ¸ µ for all µ and µ0 in £.
                            @q         @q
For all µ 2 £,
                                                @P(q; µ)
                                          lim            > ¡1.
                                         q"X(µ)   @q
  9
    Similar assumptions about the structure of demand were introduced in Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991),
although the assumptions we use are most similar to Fabra (2006).
                                                                                                                     8


    The next two assumptions specify the properties of the capacity cost function each …rm faces.


Assumption 4 The capacity cost function is homogeneous across …rms. The marginal cost is the
constant c > 0, such that each …rm’s cost function is ci (xi) = cxi for i = 1; 2:


Assumption 5 The industry cost of capacity permits positive pro…t:
                                                       P¿       t¡1
                                                          t=1 ±     P (0; µt )
                                         c < c(±) =         P¿       t¡1       .
                                                              t=1 ±


    In order to construct speci…c results about pricing patterns, it is helpful to make a regularity
assumption on the structure of the demand cycles.


Assumption 6 The cycle has a single peak:

                                       µ1 < µ 2 < ::: < µbt > ::: > µ¿ > µ 1.


    The …nal assumption is important; this minimal regularity of the demand cycles is required
to make clear statements describing collusive pricing patterns. Two important features of this
model are the deterministic nature of demand cycles and the exogenous …rm structure. This model
pertains to industries where entry or exit of …rms is unlikely to happen.10 From this point onward
we impose assumptions 1-6, although only results pertaining to pricing patterns over the demand
cycle require assumption 6.



3     The non-cooperative equilibrium

The non-cooperative equilibrium of a single cycle serves as a baseline to compare the most-collusive
supergame equilibrium. Thus, we …rst describe the subgame perfect equilibrium of a single cycle
stage-game. Since each demand cycle of pricing games is the same, the subgame perfect equilibrium
for a single cycle will be all that is needed to construct the non-cooperative subgame perfect
equilibrium of the in…nitely repeated game. First, we outline the timing of the stage-game.
  10
     The deterministic structure of demand has proven itself useful in the case of the Bertrand sup ergame and provided
results conceptually analogous to the uncertain Markov setting where the end of booms and recessions is unknown.
Here we are referring to the similarity of results in Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991) with deterministic demand
cycles relative to Bagwell and Staiger (1997) with Markov demand cycles.
                                                                                                                 9


3.1       The timing of a typical stage-game

The game takes place over a single demand cycle µ1 ; µ2 ; :::; µ¿ .


Period 1 :        At the beginning of the game, each …rm i = 1; 2 chooses xi independently and
simultaneously. Then each …rm i = 1; 2, observes the other …rms capacity xj and chooses p1(i) 2
(0; P(µ1)] independently and simultaneously. From this point on, j is used as j = 1; 2 such that
j 6= i.


Period 2 :        Each …rm observes the other …rm’s choice p1(j). Then the …rms choose p 2(i) 2
(0; P(µ2)], independently and simultaneously.
    ..
     .


Period ¿ :        Each …rm observes the other …rms choice of p¿ ¡1 (j). The …rms choose p¿ (i) 2
(0; P(µ¿ )] independently and simultaneously.


3.2       The pricing stage-games

There are ¿ pricing stage-games that follow the initial capacity choice. Here we …x the two …rms’
capacity choices at arbitrary values x1 and x2 and examine the pricing in each stage-game over the
¿-period cycle.

    We assume the demand is rationed using the Surplus Maximizing Rationing rule.11 Dasgupta
and Maskin (1986a, 1986b) prove the existence of the Nash equilibrium in each pricing stage-game.
Following Kreps and Scheinkman (1983), the revenue of the pricing subgames can be split into
three regions. To help characterize the equilibrium revenue, we de…ne the Cournot best response
functions as follows
                               rc (y; µ) = arg      max         fP(x + y; µ)x ¡ cxg
                                                 x2[0;X(µ)¡y]

and
                                  r(y; µ) = arg       max        fP(x + y; µ)xg :
                                                  x2[0;X(µ)¡y]

  11
     We are con…dent that the character of the most-collusive equilibrium in the paper can be extended to alternate
demand rationing rules, particularly, if the Beckman demand rationing rule were assumed. The primary di¤erence
in the most-collusive equilibrium would be the possibility of severe price wars in higher demand p eriods. Davidson
and Deneckere (1986) provide a characterization of the non-coop erative pricing subgame with Beckman rationing.
                                                                                                                      10


The unique-equilibrium expected revenue function, given capacities x1 and x2 , is:
                                  8
                                  >
                                  < P(x1 + x2 ; µ)xi if x1 · r(x2 ; µ) and x2 · r(x1; µ)
                                  >
                  n
                 Ri (x1; x2; µ) =   0                if minfx1; x2g ¸ X(µ)
                                  >
                                  >
                                  : R¤(x ; x ; µ)    otherwise.
                                      i 1 2


       The third region only has a mixed-strategy pricing equilibrium. The expected revenues in this
region depend on which …rm possesses more capacity,

                                       8
                                       < R(xj; µ)                              if xi ¸ xj
                   R¤i (x1; x2; µ) =                     xi
                                       : R(x1; x2; µ) 2 [ R(xi; µ); R(xi ; µ)] if xi < xj .
                                                         xj
The function R(xj ; µ) is the follower’s pro…t in a zero cost Stackelberg game. Denote by pni(x1 ; x2; µ)
the non-cooperative pricing of …rm i given capacities x1 and x2 .

       The Nash equilibrium of each pricing stage-game constructs the unique non-cooperative sub-
game perfect equilibrium of the entire pricing cycle game, given …xed capacities. The reasoning
is as follows: If in each time, t ¸ 1; the other …rm prices according to the Nash equilibrium of
each individual stage-game, the best response is to price Nash in the current and all subsequent
stage-games.


3.3      The capacity choice stage-game

Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) prove, in a sequential capacity and price game with one period of
pricing, the unique Nash equilibrium is in pure strategies and has the same price and quantity sold
as the analogous Cournot game. In our setting, the non-cooperative subgame perfect capacities
will generally not be the same as the analogous game with Cournot pricing. Even the existence of
an equilibrium with symmetric pure strategy capacities is not guaranteed. This issue is studied in
Lepore (2006), where it is shown that there are equilibria that involve pure symmetric capacities
in only two cases: (i) the demand cycle has very little variance in demand periods and the cost of
capacity is relatively high, or (ii) the demand cycle includes many large similar demand periods,
few very small demand periods and the cost of capacity is low enough. For any demand cycle
that does not …t the description of (i) or (ii), all non-cooperative equilibrium will generally involve
asymmetric capacities.12
  12
    Lep ore (2006) studies a two-stage game where demand is uncertain at the capacity choice stage, but is realized
before …rms choose prices. This structure nests our P  single-cycle capacity stage-game
                                                                                    P       as a sp ecial case, where the
probability measure ¹ on [µ1; µbt ] is de…ned by ¹(µ) = t2fs2f1;::;¿ gjµs=µg ± t¡1 = t2f1;::;¿g ± t¡1 .
                                                                                                               11


4    The most-collusive equilibrium

In this section, we examine the in…nite-time game with collusive pricing. We focus on the ba-
sic properties of the most-collusive equilibrium. The most-collusive equilibrium is the symmetric
subgame perfect equilibrium with the maximal joint pro…t for the industry.13 By assumption, the
most-collusive equilibrium is always symmetric in terms of pure strategies for capacities, if there is a
feasible symmetric equilibrium. If the set of feasible symmetric capacity subgame perfect equilibria
is empty, then the most-collusive equilibrium can involve asymmetric capacities. In the primary
analysis of the paper, we restrict attention to symmetric capacity collusion.14

    The most-collusive equilibrium is symmetric in terms of pure strategies for prices as well, unless
the non-cooperative equilibrium pricing yields more revenue than any incentive compatible pricing
strategy. In that case, the most-collusive pricing is the non-cooperative pricing equilibrium for that
periods stage-game and might only be symmetric in terms of mixed strategies and expected pro…ts.

    The most-collusive equilibrium may be supported by many punishment strategies if …rms are
patient enough. As the discount factors fall away from unity, an ‘optimal’ punishment, as de…ned
by Abreu (1986, 1988), is among the only symmetric punishments that can support the complete
set of subgame perfect equilibria for all discounts. The most-collusive equilibrium does not neces-
sarily exist unless an optimal punishment exists to support it. In the case of exogenous capacity
constraints, Lambson (1987) proves that the optimal punishment exists and is at the security level;
the security level is the minimum pro…t that a …rm’s competitor can force upon it. Reversion to
non-cooperative pricing forever after a cheat yields security level payo¤s. Accordingly, we use non-
cooperative reversion to calculate the optimal punishment, although it is not necessary to think of
the …rms actually using this non-cooperative threat. The ‘optimal’ punishment is not unique and,
in fact, Lambson has shown that there is a stick-carrot type punishment that is also optimal.

    At the upper bound, when the …rms are extremely patient (or, analogously, the period length
is very short), the most-collusive equilibrium might be identical to the monopoly equilibrium in
prices with each …rm having half of the monopoly capacity. The unique monopoly capacity choice
is labeled xm (c; ±). Firms may also be able to sustain monopoly prices if total capacity is greater
than the monopoly level. At capacity x, the unique capacity constrained-monopoly price for each
period t is given by:
                              pm
                               t (x) = arg max fD(p; µ t)pjD(p; µ t) · xg.
                                              p2[0;P (µ)]

  13
     Although the name, most-collusive equilibrium, has been used predominantly in the literature, the more appro-
priate name might be the “best symmetric equilibrium” used by Kandori (1991).
  14
     In Appendix II subsection 10.2, the reasoning behind this restriction is discussed.
                                                                                                                        12


We label the constrained-monopoly prices at the unique monopoly capacity as pm        m m
                                                                             t (c) = pt (x (c; ±))
for all t = f1; 2; :::g.15

       The solution to the most-collusive equilibrium involves multiple incentive compatibility con-
straints for each pricing stage-game and the initial capacity choice. We will explain the equilibrium
capacities and prices following a backward induction-type approach. First, we describe the way the
pricing incentive compatibility constraints dictate equilibrium pricing behavior given …xed sym-
metric capacities. Then, the capacity incentive compatibility constraints are analyzed taking the
most-collusive pricing behavior as given. The next two subsections provide some insight into how
the interaction of these constraints dictates the most-collusive capacity levels. The unique most-
collusive equilibrium price strategies, given the symmetric capacities x1 = x2 = x, are denoted
by pct (x; ±) for t = f1; 2; :::g. The most-collusive capacities and prices are denoted by xc(c; ±) and
p ct(c; ±) = pct(xc (c; ±); ±) for t = f1; 2; :::g, respectively.16


4.1      The pricing constraints

For each period, the pricing stage-game incentive compatibility constraints can naturally be sep-
arated into two constraints. The …rst is the standard collusive pricing constraint for …rms under-
cutting the collusive price, guaranteeing that the immediate gain from an undercut cannot exceed
the future loss from punishment. The second is a by-product of capacity constraints that only
applies if the under-cutting constraint is already binding. If the price in any period is bound signif-
icantly below the monopoly level by the under-cutting constraint, then the possibility of a higher
price deviation also exists. This over-cutting constraint is a feature unique to models with capacity
constraints since depending on the rationing rule, a …rm may have an incentive to increase its price.


1) The incentive compatibility constraint for under-cutting. The arbitrary price vector
                                                                                                     17
p = (pt )1
         t=1 is in the set of under-cutting incentive compatible collusive prices if it is such that,


                   Gut(pt ; x1; x2)(i) · L(p; x1; x2; ±)(i), for all i = 1; 2, and t = 1; 2; :::

where,
  15
      The proof of both existence and uniqueness of the monopoly prices and capacity is provided in Appendix II.
  16
      The existence and uniqueness of the most-collusive equilibrium prices and a discussion of the conditions guaran-
teeing incentive compatible most-collusive capacities is the primary sub ject of Appendix II.
   17
      Note that Di (pt ; µ t) depends on the speci…cation of a particular collusive demand rationing rule. See the Appendix
II for a discussion of the range of possible rules.
                                                                                                                       13



                     Gut(p t ; x1 ; x2 )(i) = pt (minfxi; D(pt ; µt )g ¡ Di(pt ; µt )),
                                               P
                     Lt (p; x1; x2; ±)(i) = 1     s=t+1 ±
                                                          s¡1
                                                              (p sDi (ps ; µs ) ¡ Rni(x1 ; x2; µ s)) .


2) The incentive compatibility constraint for over-cutting. The arbitrary price vector
p = (pt )1
         t=1 is in the set of over-cutting incentive compatible collusive prices if it is such that,


                   Got(p t; x1; x2 )(i) · Lt (p; x1 ; x2 ; ±)(i), for all i = 1; 2, and t = 1; 2; :::

where,

             Got(pt ; x1; x2)(i) =       max            f½t min fD(½t ; µ t); xj ¡ D(pt ; µt )gg ¡ pt Di (p t; µt ).
                                     ½t 2[0;P (µ t 0]



       In some cases, it is possible that there is no pure strategy price vector that satis…es both the
over-cutting and under-cutting constraints. In this case, the highest incentive compatible expected
revenue comes from non-cooperative mixed-strategy pricing.


4.2      The most-collusive pricing determined by the constraints

The most-collusive pricing in each period is determined by whether the …rst constraint is binding,
both are binding, or neither binds. The most-collusive revenue in each period depends on the …xed
capacity levels, x1 and x2, and the two constraints to subgame perfect pricing. At this point, we
impose symmetry in the …rms’ capacity choices so that x1 = x2 = x. In any period, there are three
basic most-collusive pricing patterns. Which of the three pricing patterns takes place, depends on
how the demand parameter of a given time period relates to the most-collusive capacity.18


Region 1 (constrained-monopoly pricing) The collusive price for a period of demand in this
region is sustainable at or above the single-period unconstrained-monopoly level. We denote by
p um
  t  the unconstrained-monopoly price for the period µt , formally,

                                           pum
                                            t  = arg            max         fpD(p; µt )g :
                                                             p2[0;P(µt )]


If the capacity constraint binds so strongly that no undercut can increase the demand for both …rms,
then the most-collusive price is above the single-period unconstrained-monopoly level . This is where
  18
    The characterization of the pricing regions follows similar lines to Staiger and Wolak (1992) with the exception
that they assume linear demand.
                                                                                                         14


µt is such that D(p um
                    t ; µ t) ¸ 2x. The revenue of each …rm in this region of demand parameters is
P (2x; µt )x. Price is higher than the single-period unconstrained-monopoly level for time period t,
i.e. pct (c; ±) > p um                                                            um
                    t . The prices are at the unconstrained-monopoly level if D(p t ; µ t) · 2x, thereby
permitting sustainable joint surplus maximizing revenue. When capacities are su¢cient to meet
demand at the unconstrained-monopoly price, each …rm earns half the unconstrained-monopoly
pro…t for that single state: p um   um
                               t D(pt ; µt )=2.



Region 2 (Mild price wars) These are periods such that each …rm’s under-cutting incentive
compatibility constraint binds at the constrained-monopoly price, but the over-cutting constraint
does not play a roll. In this region, pct (c; ±) is lower than pm    c
                                                                t (2x (c; ±)) and since pt D(pt ; µt )=2 and
Ls (pc ; x; ±) for s 6= t are increasing in p t on (0; pum
                                                        t ), the most-collusive price in this region is the
highest price that is under-cutting incentive compatible. More precisely, pct (c; ±) is the largest price
less than the unconstrained-monopoly price such that the incentive constraint holds with equality
for period t.


Region 3 (non-cooperative pricing) In this region, the highest revenue level that satis…es the
incentive compatibility constraints is from the non-cooperative pricing strategies. Thus, the pricing
and revenue will be at the non-cooperative levels.

   A severe mixed-strategy price war period must be within this region. In particular, mixed-
strategy price wars occur for demand periods where, for at least one …rm i, xi 2 (r(µ t; xj ); X(µt ))
and for all p that are incentive compatible, pD(p; µ t)=2 < Rn (x; µt ).


4.3    The capacity constraint

The most-collusive capacity choices involve incentive compatibility constraints to insure no devia-
tion from the collusive capacity level is bene…cial to either …rm. We de…ne discounted pro…ts, at
the most-collusive prices, given capacities x1 = x2 = x, as ¦c(x; c; ±). The pro…t from deviating
from x is given as ¦n (xi; x; c; ±), where the prices are non-cooperative. Formally,
                                          µ         µ      ½                        ¾¶     ¶
                     c              P1     t¡1
                                            c                    D(p ct(c; ±); µt )
                    ¦ (x; c; ±) =   t=1 ±  pt (c; ±) min x;                            ¡ cx ,
                                                                         2
                                   P1 t¡1 n
                ¦n (xi; x; c; ±) =  t=1 ± (R (xi; x; µ t) ¡ cxi ) .
                                                                                                                             15


The incentive compatibility constraint: Capacities                            An arbitrary capacity x 2 [0; X ] is in
the set of symmetric incentive compatible collusive capacity levels if:

                                        ¦c (x; c; ±) ¸ max f¦n(xi ; x; c; ±)g .
                                                        xi 2[0;X]




       This incentive constraint is more complex than the pricing incentive constraints. If the discount
factor is far enough away from one, then the most-collusive prices interact in substantive ways with
the capacity choices.


4.4      The most-collusive capacities determined by the constraint

Region 1 (Monopoly(ish) capacities) If the capacity incentive constraint does not bind at
the joint pro…t maximizing capacities, then xc(c; ±) = b
                                                       xc(c; ±) is the most-collusive equilibrium.
bc(c; ±) is de…ned as:
x
                                           bc(c; ±) 2 arg max f¦c (»; c; ±)g.
                                           x
                                                            »2[0;X]

This is half the capacity a monopolist would choose given the most-collusive prices. In spite of
the fact that the capacity incentive constraint does not bind, the most-collusive capacities are not
necessarily half the monopolists capacity. The most-collusive prices might be di¤erent than the
constrained-monopoly prices which is likely to lead to a di¤erent choice of joint pro…t maximizing
capacities. Hence, we denote the most-collusive capacities in this context as monopoly-ish capacities.
If the most-collusive prices are all monopoly prices, then 2b
                                                            xc (c; ±) = xm (c; ±). In this region,
capacities are always symmetric.


Region 2 (Symmetric Capacities) In this region, the capacity incentive constraint binds
strongly that x
              bc (c; ±) is not incentive compatible, but the set of symmetric pure strategy capacities
that satisfy the incentive constraint is non-empty. The only capacities that are in the incentive
                                          bc (c; ±).19 In this region, the most-collusive capacities
compatible set are capacities larger than x
can range greatly, lying anywhere inside the interval [b
                                                       xc (c; ±); X]. If the cost of capacity is low
enough, the capacities will be close to the upper bound X for most discounts. It is also possible
  19
    At any symmetric capacity level x < xbc (c; ±); the most-collusive pro…t is lower than at b              xc (c; ±). Based on
                                                                        n               n      c
Proposition 3 in Benoit and Krishna (1987), for each µt; Ri (z; x; µt ) ¸ R i (z; b           x (c; ±); µt) 8 z 2 [0; X], hence
¦n (z; x; c; ±) ¸ ¦n (z ; b
                          xc (c; ±); c; ±) 8z 2 [0; X ] ; ± 2 (0; 1) and c 2 (0; c (±)). These two facts together imply the
incentive constraint for the most-collusive capacity choice is violated for all x < b     xc (c; ±).
                                                                                                                       16


that the marginal cost of capacity is high enough that the capacities will never get very large and
                                      bc (c; ±).20
the capacities will barely stray from x


Region 3 (Asymmetric capacities) In this region, the incentive constraint binds so harshly
that the only admissible capacities are the non-cooperative capacities given the most-collusive
revenue. In this case, an equilibrium with symmetric pure strategy capacities is not likely to exist.
There is no collusion in capacities, instead they are the result of competition with most-collusive
prices. For much of the subsequent analysis, we do not consider discount-cost combinations in this
region.



5         Dynamic pricing patterns

Here we present some general properties of the most-collusive equilibrium of the in…nite time game.
As in most collusion games, the level of collusive pro…ts that can be maintained by the optimal
punishment varies with the discount factor of the two …rms. If the discount factor is close enough
to one, monopoly prices are sustainable and most-collusive capacities are symmetric.


Proposition 1 There exists ±(c) 2 (0; 1) such that for all ± 2 [±(c); 1), p ct(c; ±) = pm    c
                                                                                        t (2x (c; ±)) for
all t 2 f1; :::; ¿g.


         The proof of all propositions and theorems presented in the body of the text are located in
Appendix I. The proof of Proposition 1 is based on …rst establishing that there is a discount
factor where all collusive prices are at the monopoly level. This is essentially a Folk theorem for
capacity constrained pricing in this speci…c class of models. To show this for a single period t, we
…x capacities at an arbitrary level and all other prices at the constrained-monopoly levels. The
constrained-monopoly price level is sustainable in period t, if the discount factor is one. The fact
that the future loss is continuous and goes to zero as ± goes to zero is used to prove that the
monopoly price is sustainable if and only if the discount is greater or equal to ±(t; x) < 1. The
discount factor ±(c), is the smallest discount such that all most-collusive prices are at constrained-
monopoly levels at the most-collusive capacities, for all ± 2 [±(c); 1]:

         In contrast, there is a discount factor such that, for any discount factor above this level the most-
collusive equilibrium involves pure strategy capacities and is not the non-cooperative equilibrium.
    20
    In Section 6, the high cost (c = 0:05) numerical example involves capacity levels fairly close to half the monop olist
capacities for all discounts where collusive pricing is sustainable.
                                                                                                        17


Proposition 2 There exists ±(c) 2 (0; ±(c)], such that for all ± 2 (±(c); 1) the most-collusive
equilibrium involves pure symmetric capacities, xc (c; ±) and p ct(c; ±) 6= pn(xc (c; ±); µt ) for at least
one t 2 f1; ::; ¿g.


      In all that follows, the range of discount factors where the most-collusive equilibrium is primarily
studied, lie between ±(c) and ±(c). In our numerical examples, the upper bound discount ±(c) is
approximately 0:64 in the lowest cost example, and approximately 0:94 when costs are extremely
high. The lower bound discount ±(c) ranges from just above 0:5 at the lowest cost, to approximately
0:76 when costs are high. Both discount factors tend to increase as the cost of capacity increases so
that the interval of discount factors between ±(c) and ±(c) has a fairly wide range across di¤erent
levels of c.

    These two propositions construct the outline of the most-collusive pricing picture shown in
Figure 1. We will expand on this diagram throughout the section to complete the picture of the
most-collusive equilibrium pricing behavior.


5.1     Pricing patterns

The goal of this section is to understand the pricing patterns of the most-collusive equilibrium
when monopoly prices are not sustainable in all periods. Towards this end, there are two classes
of results: locations of mixed-strategy price wars and general properties of prices in booms versus
recessions. Both sets of results depend on the cost of capacity.

    The presence of capacity constraints alters both the gains and losses from defecting at constrained-
monopoly prices. When demand is su¢ciently high, a defecting …rm is unable to capture the entire
market. Similarly, during high near-term demand periods, the severity of the punishment is reduced
since non-cooperative prices are no longer zero. The relative magnitude of these two countervail-
ing incentives drives the pricing patterns we would expect to see under collusion. To establish a
concrete example of the e¤ect of changes in demand levels on incentives of the …rms, we graph the
single-period expected gains and losses from cheating at the monopoly price. The …gures illustrate
the single-period gains and losses from optimal defection at unconstrained monopoly prices when
demand is of the form, D(p; µ) = µ ¡ p.

    In any period with demand parameter µ, the pro…t from deviating is determined by its relation-
ship to capacity. There are three distinct forms of the gains relative to µ, depending on the …xed
symmetric capacities. For low demand states, the gains from defection rise with demand as the
…rm is able to undercut its competitor and capture the entire market. There is a point, however,
                                                                                                     18


where the …rm is not able to meet all of the additional demand from defection and the gains from
cheating fall with µ. At some point, an individual …rm is producing at capacity under collusion and
there are no gains from cheating. Speci…cally, the short term gain in any state µ given x is:

                                           8
                                           >    µ2
                                           >
                                           <     8            if µ · 2x,
                                                µ        µ2
                               G(µ; x) =        2x   ¡        if µ 2 (2x; 4x),
                                           >
                                           >              8
                                           :
                                                0             if µ ¸ 4x.

   Figure 2 plots G(µ; x) with the capacity …xed at x = 2 in terms of the demand parameter.
The gains are non-monotonic in µ and if the demand parameter is large enough relative to the
capacity constraints, then the largest gain from deviation will be zero. In contrast, without capacity
constraints, as the demand parameter µ increases, the gain from deviating increases inde…nitely.

   The losses in the …rst period following defection can also be characterized by the period’s value
of µ relative to capacity. As with the gains, these losses initially rise and then begin to fall with µ.
When the capacity levels are su¢ciently large, such that prices fall to zero, defection implies a loss
of half of the monopoly pro…ts. If the …rms are unable to commit to zero prices upon defection,
then the losses from defection are reduced by an amount that depends on the installed capacity.
Finally, if demand is su¢ciently large such that the combined capacity base cannot meet demand
at the monopoly price, then there is no penalty from defecting. We can characterize the losses in
the …rst period following defection as:

                                       8
                                       >   µ2
                                       >
                                       >   8                     if µ · x,
                                       >
                                       >            (µ¡x)2
                                       <  ¡µ2
                                                       if µ 2 (x; 3x],
                                           8          4
                           L(µ; x) =
                                       >
                                       >   µ2
                                          ¡ (µ ¡ 2x) x if µ 2 (3x; 4x),
                                       >
                                       >   8
                                       >
                                       :0              if µ ¸ 4x.

In Figure 3 we plot the …rst period’s losses with demand parameter µ, after a deviation, when
x = 2.

   What will drive our results with respect to pricing along the cycle is that for any two time
periods on opposite sides of the cycle s and t; such that µ s = µt ; the gains from defection are the
same, but the discounted losses are di¤erent since the sequence of demand states that follow are
not identical. For equal demand levels, whether prices are higher in the boom or the recession, will
depend on where next period’s demand falls in relation to Figure 3. This in turn depends on the
endogenously chosen capacity levels. In the two following subsections, we establish some pricing
properties of the most-collusive equilibrium that are based on understanding how the immediate
                                                                                                           19


gain from a deviation, along with the discounted future losses from the deviation, vary over the
demand cycle.


5.1.1       Severe price wars

The results in this subsection apply to the demand range where severe price wars can occur. For
all demand cycles, mixed-strategy price wars can occur in a period with demand parameter µ if
and only if the capacity is between the Cournot duopoly equilibrium quantity with zero costs and
the demand for the good when price is zero, i.e. x 2 (r¤(µ); X (µ)). Both bounds on the capacity
are strictly increasing in the demand parameter µ. As capacity increases, the range of demand
parameters such that mixed-strategy price wars can occur in that period increases as well.


Theorem 1 For all µ 2 £, there exists cl (µ) and c h(µ) such that:

       (i) a mixed-strategy price war can occur in a period with demand parameter µ if and only if
c 2 [c l (µ); ch(µ)];

       (ii) cl (µ0 ) · cl (µ) and c h(µ 0) · c h(µ) if and only if µ0 ¸ µ, for all µ; µ0 2 £.


       Although not stated in the theorem itself, it is possible that cl (µ) · 0 or c h(µ) exceeds the highest
cost that permits positive pro…t for some µ 2 £. If this is the case, then under no circumstances
can that period of demand have a mixed-strategy price war.


5.1.2       Cost of capacity and prices in booms versus recessions

In the pricing model without capacity constraints studied in Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991),
one of the strongest implications is that prices in two periods with the same demand, one in the
boom and one in the recession, are always weakly greater in the boom. This result has lent itself
nicely to empirical tests.21

       In our model, pricing will not be consistently higher in booms or recessions for all marginal costs
of capacity. There are, in fact, marginal costs where a consistent inequality between prices in booms
and recessions cannot be established. However, when capacity costs in an industry are high enough,
or low enough, there are strong testable predictions for most-collusive pricing patterns. Theorem 2
  21
    Two empirical papers that utilize the predictions of Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991) are Borenstein and
Shepard (1996) with US retail gasoline data and Rosenbaum and Sukharomana (2001) with US cement industry
data.
                                                                                                                        20


establishes the fact that there is a lowest marginal cost, cb, such that if the industry’s marginal cost
exceeds this level, all prices will have a predictable pattern where prices in the boom are no greater
than prices of periods with the same demand parameter in the recession. This result implies that the
Haltiwanger and Harrington pricing pattern is reversed if capacity costs are high enough. Formally,
denote the most collusive revenue for period t by Rct (c; ±) = p ct(c; ±) min fxc (c; ±); D(p ct(c; ±); µt )=2g,
then:

Theorem 2 There exists a smallest cb such that, for all c > cb if µt 0 = µt00 where 1 · t0 < b
                                                                                             t < t00 ·
¿, then:

   1. Rct0 (c; ±) · Rtc00 (c; ±) for all ± 2 (0; 1);

   2. If pct00 (c; ±) 6= pnt00 (xc (c; ±)) and pct0 (c; ±) < pm     c               c            c
                                                              t0 (2x (c; ±)), then Rt0 (c; ±) < Rt00 (c; ±) for all
         ± 2 (±(c); ±(c));

   3. If pct0 (c; ±) 6= pnt0 (xc (c; ±)) and p ct0 (c; ±) < pm     c               c             c
                                                             t0 (2x (c; ±)), then pt 0 (c; ±) < pt00 (c; ±) for all ± 2
         (±(c); ±(c));

   4. If pct0 (c; ±) = pnt0 (xc(c; ±)), then pct00 (c; ±) = pnt00 (xc (c; ±)) for all ± 2 (0; 1).

       While the proof of Theorem 2 is presented in the Appendix I, the heuristic explanation of the
proof follows from the examples of the gains and losses at the beginning of this section. If marginal
cost of capacity is high enough, then the …rms will always choose to collude with capacities that are
small relative to the demand cycle. At small enough capacity levels, the punishment incurred after a
defection will be lowest in the highest demand periods. Now take the two demand periods on either
side of the peak. At any given price, the punishment from defecting in the period that precedes
the peak will be lower than the losses in the period following the peak. Since, at any …xed price,
the gain from a deviation in these two periods is the same, the incentive compatibility constraint in
the boom period binds more strongly than in the recession. Hence, both higher revenue and higher
prices are sustainable in the comparable recession period.

       In a similar vain, consistent pricing patterns can also exists in industries with low marginal cost
of capacity. Pricing properties in this case are slightly more delicate than the high cost case.22

Theorem 3 There exists xr 2 (xb ; X ) such that for all xc (c; ±) > xr ; if µt0 = µt00 where 1 · t0 <
tb < t00 · ¿, then:
  22
     Not all models will exhibit the pricing
                                      © 1 behavior       ª sp eci…ed in Theorem 3. Take the example: D(pt; µt) = µt (12 ¡
pt ) where the demand cycle is £ = 3:01      ; 13 ; 1; 13 . For all cost speci…cations the most-collusive equilibrium price
comparison of period 2 versus period 4 follows the pattern of Theorem 2.
                                                                                                                          21


     1. Rct00 (c; ±) · Rct0 (c; ±) for all ± 2 (0; 1);

     2. If pct0 (c; ±) 6= p nt0 (xc(c; ±)) and pct00 (c; ±) < p m      c               c             c
                                                                t00 (2x (c; ±)), then Rt00 (c; ±) < Rt0 (c; ±) for all
           ± 2 (±(c); ±(c));

     3. If pct00 (c; ±) 6= p nt00 (xc (c; ±)) and p ct00 (c; ±) < pm
                                                                   t00 (2x (c; ±)), then pt00 (c; ±) < pt0 (c; ±) for all ± 2
                                                                          c               c             c

           (±(c); ±(c));

     4. If pct00 (c; ±) = pnt00 (xc (c; ±)), then pct0 (c; ±) = pnt0 (xc (c; ±)) for all ± 2 (0; 1).


         The intuition behind Theorem 3 is straight forward: If the most-collusive capacity is large
enough, relative to the demand cycle, both the immediate gain from a defection and the individual
period loss after a defection are increasing in the demand parameter. Therefore, the future loss
from deviating is greater in comparable boom periods than recession periods. At equal current
demand levels, the gain from a defection is the same for these two periods. Hence, the incentive
constraint binds …rst and more strongly in the recession period. Both the expected revenues and
the prices are higher in comparable boom periods.

         Figure 4 summarizes the implications of Theorems 2 and 3. The complexity of the model places
a limit on the character of most-collusive pricing we can prove analytically. In particular, the precise
range in terms of marginal costs and discount factors for each of the three most-collusive patterns
is left open. In order to establish stronger patterns, we calculate numerical examples under various
demand cycles.



6         Numerical examples

6.1        Prices

To provide concrete examples of how capacity constraints a¤ect market equilibria, we parameterize
the model and conduct numerical simulations of the most-collusive equilibrium. These numerical
examples give a more detailed picture of the collusive pricing patterns over the demand cycle. In
doing so, we adopt the functional form assumptions used by Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991), so
that the results of our model can be easily compared to those described in their paper.23 Speci…cally,
demand is parameterized as: D(p t; µt ) = µt ¡400p t and we use an eight-period cycle which varies in
terms of the intercept µt , given as £ = f100; 125; 150; 175; 200; 175; 150; 125g. We analyze equilibria
    23
    Although Haltiwanger and Harrington analyze a market with three …rms, whereas we focus on a duopoly. The
details involved with solving the constrained maximization problems is discussed in Appendix III.
                                                                                                   22


under three capacity marginal cost levels. For each marginal cost, the discount factor is varied
within the range [±(c); ±(c)]. We focus our attention on (a) the relative pricing during booms and
busts, (b) the cyclicality of prices, and (c) the bene…ts from endogenizing capacity choices.

   Figure 5 is the low cost example; prices follow the predictions of Theorem 3; at the same demand
level prices are lower in the recession than in the boom for all discounts plotted. This result is
driven by the fact that capacity is so cheap that it is most productive for the cartel to hold excess
capacity to increase the severity of punishment. These results mirror those in Haltiwanger and
Harrington (1991) where …rms are without capacity constraints. The high capacity levels imply
that punishment is greatest during high demand periods, reducing the incentive to deviate during
booms, relative to recessions. This pricing pattern holds for almost all discount factors, only very
close to ±(c) is there a di¤erence. Just as in the limitless capacity setting, prices are strongly
pro-cyclical at high discounts, but become counter-cyclical for low enough discount factors. The
counter-cyclicality stems from the fact that as the discount factor falls, …rms reduce prices in the
highest demand periods to sustain collusion because the largest one-shot gains are in these periods.

   Figure 6 plots the most-collusive equilibrium prices for a high cost example. The pricing pattern
is starkly di¤erent than the low cost case; the prices follow the predictions of Theorem 2 and are
always strongly pro-cyclical. When the price of capacity is high, equilibrium capacity levels are low.
This increases the incentive to deviate during boom periods, relative to an equal demand period
in the recession. To counteract this, …rms lower prices during booms, relative to an equal demand
period in the recession. Despite this, prices never become counter-cyclical because capacity is too
expensive to hold for punishment. Instead, the …rms keep capacities small to lock in the high pro…ts
from the highest demand periods.

   Another interesting feature of the high cost equilibrium is that in period 1; at the discount
factor 0:8; the collusive pricing is the same as the non-cooperative mixed-strategy pricing given the
equilibrium capacities. This is an example of the mixed-strategy price wars detailed in Theorem 1.
In this demand period, the two …rms will almost surely name di¤erent prices in equilibrium; this
would have the appearance of a single-period undercutting price war that occurs at the beginning
of every demand cycle. In the …gure, the line from prices 0:05625 to 0:075 represents the continuous
support of the mixed-strategy pricing.    This severe price war does not occur in the equilibrium
for the lower discount factors 0:78 and 0:76. The …rms instead …nd it optimal to choose larger
capacities because their additional impatience signi…cantly lowers sustainable price levels at low
capacity levels.

   Figure 7 plots the medium cost case. In this example, both pricing patterns of Theorems 2 and
                                                                                                                   23


3 are evident. For the two largest discount factors, the prices follow the pattern of Theorem 2;
the three lowest discount factors show pricing patterns consistent with Theorem 3. The collusive
pricing at the intermediate discount factor 0:68 does not follow either theorem. Instead, we see
that prices are lower in the boom for the higher demand levels and lower in the recession for the
demand level 125.

    These numerical examples underline the importance of including capacity as a strategic tool
when analyzing and testing for collusion. Previous empirical papers test for collusion using the
Haltiwanger and Harrington result that, conditional on current demand, prices will be higher if
demand is expected to grow. Our results suggest that this may not be a powerful test since collusion
may exist even if prices don’t follow the predictions of Haltiwanger and Harrington. Furthermore,
the medium cost case implies that these inequalities may change along the demand cycle. This
suggests that empirical tests may want to focus on periods around exogenous changes in the cost
of capacity and explicitly test for an inequality reversal.


6.2    Pro…ts

By endogenizing capacity, …rms are able to cater capacity choices to best facilitate collusion. Next
we compare the bene…ts of capacity as a strategic tool by calculating equilibrium pro…ts under
four scenarios: monopoly, colluding in both capacity and prices, colluding in prices but having
non-cooperative capacities, and non-cooperative behavior.24 The third scenario represents markets
where collusion takes place after capacity choices have been made; Davidson and Deneckere (1990)
refer to this as semi-collusion. We calculate pro…ts, relative to monopoly levels for each of the
discount/capacity cost combinations discussed above. The results are striking.

    While it is not surprising that there are large di¤erences between the non-cooperative pro…ts
and the other three scenarios, we …nd that including capacity as a strategic tool can have large
e¤ects on pro…ts levels, especially when capacity costs are low. As the discount factor in the low
cost scenario drops below 0.56, semi-collusive pro…ts fall dramatically, while pro…ts when …rms
collude both in prices and capacities remain near monopoly levels.
  24
     This calculation is the pro…t at the non-cooperative symmetric candidate capacities. This provides an approximate
average pro…t from asymmetric equilibria. These capacities are also used for the calculation of most-collusive prices
at the non-coop erative capacities. See Lepore (2006) for the characterization of the symmetric candidate capacities.
                                                                                                   24


7    Extending the model: Allowing for capacity ‡exibility

The model can be extended to allow for ‡exible capacity levels without a substantive alteration of
the main results. We allow the capacity to be ‡exible in a speci…c way. That is, there is both a time
lag to alter capacity and a …xed cost to adjust capacity. The time lag is denoted as T 2 f1; 2; :::g
and is the number of pricing periods it takes to alter capacity. The adjustment cost d 2 R+ is the
…xed cost for any change from the current capacity level.


Proposition 3 For any T 2 f1; 2; :::g, there exists d¤(T) 2 R++ r f1g such that if d ¸ d¤(T),
then the most-collusive equilibrium of the ‡exible capacity game involves capacities xc(c; ±) and the
prices (pct (c; ±))1
                   t=1 for all ± 2 (±(c); 1).



    The argument is based on …rst showing that for all positive time lags, there is a …nite …xed cost
such that the optimal punishment after a deviation (price or capacity) does not involve altering
of capacity levels. Second, we show that for all positive time lags, there exists a …nite …xed cost
such that no joint change in capacity levels from initial levels is ever pro…table. The combination
of these two facts guarantees that, for all d greater than the maximum of the two …xed costs: (i) at
each pricing period and the initial capacity choice the optimization problems are identical to the
in‡exible capacity game, and (ii) at each period after the initial period it is not pro…table to alter
capacities to enhance collusive pro…ts.



8    Conclusion

We establish a predictive theory of collusive pricing over demand cycles for homogeneous product
industries with endogenous long run capacity and short run price competition. Two key features
drive the results in our model: (i) because of the capacity constraints, gains from deviating from
collusive prices do not increase monotonically with demand; and (ii) the loss after a deviation is
di¤erent for two periods of identical demand, if they di¤er in location on the business cycle. The
most-collusive pricing predictions depend on the capacity costs and fall into two categories. Our
main pricing result is with regards to how prices compare on either side of the demand peak. If the
marginal cost of capacity is high enough, pricing in two periods with the same demand will be at
least as small (much of the time smaller) in the boom than in the recession. While, if the marginal
cost of capacity is low enough, pricing in two periods with the same demand will be at least as
large (much of the time larger) in the boom than in the recession; the interval of discounts where
                                                                                                  25


this is true grows towards the unit interval as the cost of capacity decreases towards zero. Finally,
there is the possibility of a third region of costs in the middle where no blanket pricing patterns
are true when comparing booms and recession.

   The Bertrand price competition model in Haltiwanger and Harrington predicts that collusive
prices are weakly lower in similar demand periods in recessions than in booms. The fact that, in our
model, all pricing implications are not the same for all capacity costs, highlights the importance
of this feature as a determinant of collusive pricing in any industry. The …ndings in this paper
endorse the idea that cyclical variation in pricing is dependent on the expectation of future demand
as suggested by Haltiwanger and Harrington, with the caveat that how these prices vary over the
cycle depends heavily on the long run capacity cost in an industry.
                                                                                                                 26


9        Appendix I: Proof of primary results

Proof of Proposition 1.                First we show that given the capacity is …xed at x, there exists
±p (x) 2 (0; 1) such that (pct (x; ±))¿t=1 = (pm     ¿
                                               t (x))t=1 if and only if ± 2 [± p (x); 1). We …x x, and
analyze how the discount a¤ects the gains Gut(pm                             m
                                               t (x); x) and the losses Lt (p (x); x; ±), for each
period t. It is clear that Lt(pm (x); x; 0) = 0 · Gut(pm
                                                       t (x); x); and lim±!1 Lt (p (x); x; ±) ! 1 >
                                                                                  m


      t (x); x). Note the derivatives of the loss and gain function, in terms of ±, have the following
Gut(p m
                     @Lt(pm (x);x;±)           @Gu    m
                                                  t (pt (x);x)
characterizations;        @±           > 0 and        @±       = 0. Based on the continuity of Lt (pm (x); x; ±)
in ±, there exists a ±p(t) such that                                 t (x); x) if and only if ± 2 [± p(t; x); 1) for
                                          Lt (pm (x); x; ±) ¸ Gut (p m
each t. This holds for all periods over a single cycle t 2 f1; 2; :::; ¿g if and only if ± 2 [±p ; 1),
where ±p(x) = maxt2f1;::;¿gf±p(t; x)g. De…ne ± = maxx2[0;X] f±p (x)g. Therefore, for any ± 2 [±; 1)
                                                                 25
              t (x (c; ±)) for t 2 f1; 2; :::; ¿g. De…ne the set
p ct(c; ±) = pm   c


                     ©                                               1                     ª
               §(c) = ± 2 [0; 1] j 8±0 ¸ ±, ©(c; ±0 ) 6= ? and (p m           c     0    0
                                                                  t )t=1 2 ¢(x (c; ± ); ± ) :


Note that by construction [±; 1] µ §(c) µ [0; 1], and the constraint sets are closed in ±. A closed
subset of a compact set is compact, therefore §(c) is compact and the min §(c) exists. De…ne the
discount factor ±(c) = min §(c). This discount must weakly less than ±, thus ±(c) · ± < 1 and ±(c)
satis…es the statement of the proposition.

Proof of Proposition 2. De…ne the set of discount factors
                       8               ¯                                                    9
                       <               ¯ 8±0 ¸ ±, ©(c; ±0 ) 6= ? and                        =
                                       ¯
             §(c) = max ± 2 [0; ±(c)] ¯¯                     ¡ c     ¢ 1                      .
                       :                        min Lt( pt (c; ±0 ) t=1 ; xc (c; ±0 ); ±0 ) ;
                                       ¯ 0 · t2f1;2;:::;¿ g


§(c) is non-empty because, from the …rst proposition, ±(c) must be in the set. Both constraints are
continuous in ±, hence the constraint set is closed. §(c) µ [0; ±(c)] a compact set, a closed subset
of a compact set is compact, therefore §(c) is compact. De…ne the discount ±(c) = min §(c) and
notice that it meets the criteria of the statement of the proposition.

Proof of Theorem 1. The mixed strategy price wars can only occur in a demand period with pa-
                                                                              ©          £                   ¤ª
rameter µ if xc (c; ±) 2 (r¤ (µ); X(µ)). For all cost c 2 (0; c) where c = min c(±) j ± 2 inf ±(c); sup ±(c)
the range of xc(c; ±) is limited by c. If we denote

                  cl (µ) = inf fc 2 (0; c)jxc (c; ±) 2 (r¤ (µ); X(µ)) for some ± 2 (±(c); 1]g
    25
    The set ¢(x; ±) is formally de…ned in section 10.2.2 equation 9. The set ©(c; ±) is formally de…ned in section
10.2.3 equation 10.
                                                                                                        27


and
                    ch(µ) = sup fc 2 (0; c)jxc(c; ±) 2 (r¤(µ); X(µ)) for some ± 2 (±(c); 1]g,

then (i) is immediate.

       The second statement of the theorem, (ii) is true based on showing that both r¤(µ) and X (µ)
are non-decreasing in µ. X(µ) is non-decreasing in µ based on assumption 2. We show that r¤ (µ)
is increasing µ by contradiction. Suppose that µ0 > µ and r¤ (µ 0) < r¤ (µ):At r¤(µ) the following …rst
order condition must hold for the Cournot game with pro…t function P(q; µ)q:
                                                      ¯
                                     @P(q+r¤ (µ);µ) ¯
                                          @q        ¯ ¤ r¤(µ) + P (2r¤(µ); µ)               = 0.
                                                      q=r (µ)

                                                                                 ¤      0 ¯
                                                                                           ¯
Note that based on assumption 2 and 3, P(2r¤(µ); µ 0) ¸ P(2r¤(µ); µ) and @P (q+r@q (µ);µ ) ¯ ¤ ¸
                ¯                                                                            q=r (µ)
@P (q+r ¤(µ);µ) ¯
      @q        ¯ ¤ , respectively. Hence each …rm’s …rst order for P(q + r (µ); µ )q at r¤(µ) is
                                                                           ¤        0
                  q=r (µ)
positive
                                                      ¯
                                     @P (q+r ¤(µ);µ 0) ¯
                                           @q          ¯              r¤(µ) + P (2r¤(µ); µ0 ) ¸ 0:
                                                           q=r ¤(µ)

Based on the strict concavity of P(q + r¤ (µ); µ0)q the optimal choice r(r¤(µ); µ0 ) for the …rm
will exceed r¤(µ). The equilibrium quantity r¤(µ0 ) is such that r(r¤(µ0 ); µ0 ) ¡ r¤ (µ 0) = 0, hence
r(r¤(µ); µ0 )¡r¤(µ) ¸ r(r¤(µ0 ); µ0 )¡r¤(µ0 ). Since, based on Lemma 1, Kreps and Scheinkman (1983),
r(q; µ 0) is non-increasing in q, and r(q; µ0 ) ¡ q is decreasing in q, thus, r¤(µ0) ¸ r¤(µ) contradict the
previous inequality.

Proof of Theorem 2. First we prove that 9xb 2 [0; X] such that 8x0 > xb if µ t0 = µt00 where
1 · t 0 < bt < t00 · ¿, then: 1-4. For all £, if x = D(pum
                                                        ¿ ; µ¿ ), then at or bellow this capacity the
above statement is satis…ed, because all pairs of comparable periods across the cycle have equal
revenue at the constrained monopoly level. Therefore, the set of such capacities Xb is non-empty.
Denote by xb the least upper bound of Xb. Next we must show that for each ± 2 (0; 1) there exists a
cost c 2 (0; c(±)) such that xc (c; ±) < xb . Denote by ¥(c; ±) the choke capacity; the largest capacity
such that                                      µ           ½                   ¾     ¶
                               1
                               P         t¡1      m            D(p m
                                                                   t (x); µ t)
                                     ±          p t (x) min x;                   ¡ cx = 0.             (2)
                               t=1                                   2
Note that (2) will hold at zero and ¥(c; ±) > 0 for all c 2 (0; c(±)). The monopoly pro…t is strictly
concave in x hence ¥(c; ±) is a function.26 ¥(c; ±) = 0 at c = c(±) and ¥(c; ±) ! +1 as c ! 0.
The monopoly pro…t is jointly continuous in c and x therefore ¥(c; ±) is continuous in c. Based
on the median value theorem there must be a cost c 2 (0; c(±)) such that ¥(c; ±) < xb. Clearly,
  26
       See the proof of proposition 4 is Appendix II for proof of this statement.
                                                                                                   28


xc(c; ±) · ¥(c; ±) therefore the set of cost ³b = fc 2 (0; c(±)) j xc(c; ±) < xbg is non-empty. Denote
by c b = inf f³b g, the smallest cost such that the statements 1-4 are true.

Proof of Theorem 3.           In term of the exogenous capacity subgame, we need to show there
exists a lowest capacity such that for all capacities greater pricing patterns follow statements 1-4.
The proof of this is straightforward, …rst we show there exists an example of a capacity where the
statements are true for it and all capacities greater. The capacity x = X is an example. Notice
that at x ¸ X the gain from defection and non-discounted loss from punishment is the exact same
for all periods as the repeated Bertrand pricing model. Therefore the implications of Theorem 7 of
Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991) applies to this model, and the statements of this theorem are
true. So the set of capacities Xr = fxj8x0 ¸ x 1 ¡ 4 are trueg is not empty. The set is bounded, so
the in…mum of the set exists and we de…ne it as xr = inf Xr .

   Take x1 = x2 = X and an arbitrary discount factor ± 2 (0; 1) and we consider the possibility
that (i) incentive constraint might not bind for some periods, (ii) only the under-cutting constraint
might bind for some periods and (iii) the price might be bound to non-cooperative pricing in other
periods.

   (i) Consider two arbitrary comparable periods t0 and t00 such that 1 · t0 < b
                                                                               t < t00 · ¿ and
µt 0 = µt00 . Suppose the two comparable periods are such the constraint binds at least the recession
period at x1 = x2 = X, and look at property 2. Rct00 (X; ±) < Rct0 (X; ±) for all ± 2 (±p (X ); ±p(X))
and based on the continuity of the two functions, there exists ² > 0 small enough such that the
revenues will still be ordered Rct00 (X ¡ ²; ±) < Rtc0 (X ¡ ²; ±) for X ¡ ².

   (ii) Next consider any period with monopoly pricing, where both the incentive constraints are
slack. Based on the continuity of the gains and losses in prices and capacities, there exists ² > 0
small enough such that if
                                  Lt (pc(X; ±); X; ±) > Gut(pct (X ; ±); X)

for a period t, then

                         Lt (p c(X ¡ ²; ±); X ¡ ²; ±) > Gut(pct (X ¡ ²; ±); X ¡ ²)

for X ¡ ² as well.

   (iii) At the capacity levels X the non-cooperative pricing is p nt(X) = 0 for all t. For all ± 2
(1=2; 1) prices are above non-cooperative levels at capacities X. Hence, by a continuity argument
analogous to those above there exists ² > 0 such that this must also be true for X ¡ ².

   Therefore, we know that there exists xr that satis…es the proposition and is less than X .
                                                                                                   29


Proof of Proposition 3. Throughout the proof, we …x T as an arbitrary positive integer. Denote
by the single period pro…ts ¼nt (x; y) = Rn (x; y; µt ) ¡ cx.

    First, we prove that non-cooperative equilibrium pricing in each period stage-game combined
with not altering the initial capacity capacities is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the game
                                                                              xc(c; ±); X],
with time lag T and …xed adjustment cost d. This is the case if, 8k ¸ 1, x 2 [b
(x0 ; y) 2 [0; X] £ [0; X] and t = f2; :::g,

                                           P
                                        T +t+k+1
                                   d¸              ±s¡t(¼ns(x0 ; y) ¡ ¼ns(x; y)).                 (3)
                                        s=t+T +1


    The y is permitted to be any capacity; this insures staying at the collusive capacity is a subgame
perfect equilibrium for the non-deviator after any capacity cheat. The right hand side of (3) is
bounded so there is a cost d such that (3) is true. De…ne the interval of such d where (3) is true as
D1 (T ).

    For a …rm to credibly commit to increasing its capacity upon defection, it must be in its interest
to do so, conditional on a defection. For this to be the case, the increase in discounted pro…ts from
a capacity change must be greater than the adjustment costs associated with this change. If not,
the …rm would rather punish using its collusive capacity level. A …rm will only alter capacity if it
is pro…table to do so over some period of time k ¸ 1. Condition (3) guarantees that no change from
the most-collusive capacity levels will be bene…cial to either …rm, for any length of time during
punishment.

    There is also an interval of costs such that the …rms will not bene…t from jointly moving to
a new capacity on the most-collusive equilibrium path. The same argument as above applies so
that we can restrict ourselves to negating a bene…t from a single deviation. Thus, if 8k ¸ 1; 8x 2
                     xc (c; ±); X ] and 8t = f1; 2; :::g
 xc(c; ±); X]; 8y 2 [b
[b

                                           P
                                        T +t+k+1
                                   d¸              ±s¡t (¼cs (y; ±) ¡ ¼cs (x; ±)).                (4)
                                        s=t+T +1


The di¤erence on the right hand side is …nite. Hence, there exists a set …nite real numbers that
satisfy (4). Label this set of adjustment costs D2 (T ).

    Next we show that staying with the most-collusive capacity is the optimal punishment. If we
look at carrot/stick punishments in terms of capacities, then the optimal penal code is to not change
                                                                                                                   30


              xc (c; ±); X], if for all carrots: x
capacity x 2 [b                                  e, sticks: x, and t = f2; :::g ;

                    ± T +1
                             ¡                                    ¢      1
                                                                         P
               d¸   (1+±)        ¼ nt+T +1(x; x) ¡ ¼ nt+T +1(x; x) +              ±s¡t (¼cs (e  x) ¡ ¼cs (x; x))
                                                                                             x; e                  (5)
                                                                       s=t+T +2


If d is large enough, then there is no x
                                       e and x such that it is optimal to alter x for punishment. In
essence, the condition (3) guarantees that staying with x is part of the an optimal penal code. For
all …xed T , the right hand side is bounded, therefore there exists an interval of costs such that (3)
is true. Denote this interval by D3 (T ).

     De…ne
                                                     ©                        ª
                                        d¤ (T ) = min d 2 R+ j d 2 \3i=1Di (T) .                                   (6)

The minimum is well de…ned because the constraint set is non-empty, closed and bounded below.
Notice that 8d ¸ d¤ (T ), the incentive constraints are the same for the the most-collusive equilibrium
at all periods for pricing and initially for capacity. No deviation in capacities or prices, joint or
singular, will be bene…cial therefore, 8T 2 N and 8d ¸ d¤(T ) the outcomes xc(c; ±) and (p ct(c; ±))1
                                                                                                    t=1
will also be the most-collusive solution to the ‡exible capacity game.



10     Appendix II: Existence issues

10.1    Monopoly prices and capacities

                                                                                   ¿
Proposition 4 There exists a unique Monopoly solution xi = xm(c; ±) and (pm
                                                                          t (c; ±))t=1 for all
c; ±; and £.


Proof. The proof is broken down into four steps.

     First we characterize each maximization problem of the pricing subgames. Based on the as-
sumptions A.1-4 we show there is a unique solution to the problem constrained maximization
problem
                        pm
                         t (x) = arg max fpD(p; µt )jD(p; µ t) · xg for all µt 2 £                                 (7)
                                           p2[0;P(µ)]

for any subgame. If µt is such that D(p; µt ) < x, then the solution to the maximization (7) problem
is the solution to the unconstrained problem p um
                                               t  = arg maxp2[0;P (µ)] fpD(p; µt )g and the revenue
is uniquely equal to pum
                      t D(pt ; µt ). If the constraint binds, then D(pt (x); µt ) = x and the price
                           um                                         m

is uniquely determined by this equality by inverting the demand function p m
                                                                           t (x) = P (x; µt ). Thus,
                                                                                                                31


the monopoly revenue of any period t is given by
                                       8
                                       < pumD(pum ; µ ) if D(pum; µ ) < x;
                                          t       t  t        t    t
                         Rm (x; µ t) =
                                       : P(x; µt )x     if D(pum
                                                              t ; µt ) ¸ x:



   Second, we prove the monopoly revenue of each period is continuous, quasi-concave (strictly on
the relevant region) and bounded.

   Notice that for all µt , Rm (x; µt ) is bounded for all x ¸ 0 between 0 and p um   um
                                                                                 t D(pt ; µt ) and
non-decreasing in x. We …rst prove directly it is concave for all x ¸ 0. This implies that for all
x ¸0
             Rm (¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x0 ; µ t) ¸ ¸Rm (x; µt ) + (1 ¡ ¸)Rm (x0 ; µ t) for all ¸ 2 [0; 1] .              (8)

This is trivially true when min fx; x0 g > D(p um                   0       um
                                               t ; µ t) or max fx; x g · D(pt ; µt ). We are left
to verify concavity when x · D(p um            0
                                 t ; µt ) and x > D(p t ; µt ). First suppose x · D(pt ; µt ),
                                                      um                             um

x0 > D(pum                        0      um               m      um
        t ; µt ) and ¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x · D(p t ; µ t). De…ne xt = D(pt ; µt ), then for all ¸ 2 [0; 1],

                               ¡              ¢
       P (¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x0 ; µ t) ¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x0 > P(¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)xm                      m
                                                                t ; µt ) (¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)xt )

                                                         ¸ ¸P (x; µ t)x + (1 ¡ ¸)P(xm        m
                                                                                    t ; µ t)xt

                                                         = ¸P (x; µ t)x + (1 ¡ ¸)pum    um
                                                                                  t D(p t ; µ t).


If x · D(pum         0                                0
          t ; µt ), x > D(p t ; µ t) and ¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x > D(pt ; µt ), then pt D(p t ; µ t) ¸
                            um                              um              um    um


                      t D(p t ; µ t) is true for all ¸ 2 [0; 1]. Hence, R (x; µt ) is concave for all
¸P(x; µ t)x + (1 ¡ ¸)pum    um                                           m

x ¸ 0. We can further conclude that Rm(x; µt ) is strictly concave on x 2 [0; xm
                                                                               t ].

   Next we prove the monopoly revenue of each cycle is continuous, quasi-concave (strictly on the
relevant region) and bounded.
                             P¿         t¡1
   We denote Rm (x; ±) =        t=1 ±         R m(x; µt ), because ±t¡1 2 (0; 1) for all t, and each Rm (x; µ t) is
                                m
bounded the weighted sum R (x; ±) is also bounded. The weighted sum of concave functions on is a
concave function, therefore Rm (x; ±) is concave on x ¸ 0. We need to show that Rm (x; ±) is strictly
                                                                          P
concave on x 2 [0; xm
                    b
                    t
                      ], where xbm
                                 t
                                    = D(pumb
                                           t
                                              ; µbt ). De…ne, Rm
                                                               ¡b
                                                                t
                                                                  (x; ±) = t2f1;2;:::¿ grbt ±t¡1Rm (x; µt ),
and note that it is concave for all x ¸ 0. Rm (x; ±) is strictly concave on x 2 [0; xm
                                                                                     b
                                                                                     t
                                                                                       ], if

            Rm (¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x0 ; ±) > ¸Rm (x; ±) + (1 ¡ ¸)Rm (x0 ; ±) for all x; x0 2 [0; xm
                                                                                           b
                                                                                           t
                                                                                             ]
                                                                                                               32


We can re-write this expression as

                      Rm (¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x0 ; µbt ) + Rm
                                                    ¡b
                                                     t
                                                       (¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x0; ±)
                  > ¸Rm
                      ¡b
                       t
                         (x; ±) + ¸Rm (x; µbt) + (1 ¡ ¸)Rm
                                                         ¡bt
                                                            (x0 ; ±) + (1 ¡ ¸)Rm (x0; µbt ):

Based on the concavity of Rm
                           ¡b
                            t
                              (x; ±) on [0; xm
                                             b
                                             t
                                               ], the expression reduces to

           R m(¸x + (1 ¡ ¸)x0; µbt ) > ¸Rm (x; µbt) + (1 ¡ ¸)Rm (x0; µbt ) for all x; x0 2 [0; xm
                                                                                                b
                                                                                                t
                                                                                                  ]


which is true by the strict concavity of P(x; µ bt)x.

    Finally, we show that the pro…t function of the cycle is strictly concave and bounded, i.e., the
                                                           ¿
maximum exists and is uniquely labeled as (xm(c; ±); (p m
                                                        t )t=1).
                                                                                           P¿        t¡1
    We de…ne the costs over a single cycle of x units of capacity as C(±) =                  t=1 ±         c. The
single cycle monopoly pro…t     ¦m (x; c; ±)   =   Rm (x; ±)   ¡ C(±)x is concave and bounded on all x ¸
0. This is enough to guarantee the existence of a maximum, but for uniqueness we …rst show
that any x > xm
              b
              t
                is not a maximum of ¦m(x; c; ±). Suppose that x
                                                              e > xbm
                                                                    t
                                                                      is a maximum of
¦m (x; c; ±), then ¦m(e
                      x; c; ±) ¸ ¦m(xm
                                     b
                                     t
                                       ; c; ±), which is the same expression as R m(e
                                                                                    x; ±) ¡ C(±)e
                                                                                                x¸
Rm (xm
     b
     t
       ; ±)¡C(±)(xm
                  b
                  t
                    ). Note that Rm (e
                                     x; ±) = Rm (xm
                                                  b
                                                  t
                                                    ; ±), thus that cost function must be such that
    x · C(±)xm
C(±)e        b
             t
               . This is a contradiction because, C(±)x is an increasing function.

    The monopoly capacity choice problem can be reduced to

                                               ©                        ª
                             xm(c; ±) = arg max ¦m(x; c; ±)jx 2 [0; xm
                                                                     b
                                                                     t
                                                                       ]  .

On x 2 [0; xbm
             t
               ], ¦m(x; c; ±) is strictly concave and the constraint de…nes a convex and compact
(closed and bounded subset of R) set. Therefore, the maximum xm(c; ±) is unique, and from the
initial argument of the proof, there is a unique monopoly price determined by xm (c; ±), pm
                                                                                          t (c; ±) =

 t (x (c; ±)) for all t.
pm   m




10.2    Most-collusive equilibrium

In this section, we characterize the optimal symmetric collusive capacities and prices of the two
…rms.
                                                                                                       33


10.2.1    Symmetric capacities

Throughout the paper the analysis is restricted to the case of symmetric capacities. This is done
primarily because, it is not obvious how to establish a focal most-collusive price when capacities are
asymmetric without the explicit use of a collusive demand rationing rule. In the case of symmetric
capacities, when the collusive price is such that D(p t; µt ) < 2x, an implicit assumption is that half of
the demand is given to each …rm; a standard assumption of collusive models. When capacities are
asymmetric there are many collusive demand rationing rules that reduce to Di(pt ; µ t) = D(p t ; µt )=2
for symmetric capacities. One example, without loss of generality take x1 ¸ x2, …rm 2’s demand is
                                           8
                                           < D(p ; µ )=2 if x ¸ D(p ; µ )=2
                                                t t          2     t t
                           D2 (p t; µt ) =
                                           : x2          otherwise

and while the demand of …rm 1 is
                             8
                             < D(p ; µ ) ¡ D (p ; µ ) if x ¸ D(p ; µ ) ¡ D (p ; µ )
                                  t t       2 t t         1     t t       2 t t
              D1(pt ; µ t) =                                                        .
                             : x1                     otherwise

The above collusive rationing rule reduces to the one half-one half rule when x1 = x2. The problem
is that under this rule the two …rm can most often disagree on the pro…t maximizing collusive price.
There is only one rule that reduces to the one half-one half rule, when capacities are symmetric,
where the optimal collusive price is always the same for both …rms. The demand is giving to the
colluding …rms proportionally to their capacities:
                                        8
                                        <     xi
                                                                  if xi ¸     xi
                                            x1 +x 2 D(pt ; µ t)             x1+x 2 D(pt ; µ t)
                       Di(pt ; µ t) =                                                            :
                                        : xi                      other wise


10.2.2    Characterization of optimal price choice


Denote by Pt , the Borel probability measures on the price space [0; P(µt )], which are endow with
the topology of weak convergence. Denote by P , the cross product of the mixed strategy spaces
               Q
for each t, P = 1t=1 P t and denote by ¾, an element of the set P. We de…ne the set of prices that
satisfy the constraint set at a given capacity and discount factor as ¢(x; ±). Formally,

                        8                                                          9
                        <               u                 o
                                 min fGt (¾t ; x; x)(i); Gt (¾t ; x; x)(i)g        =
               ¢(x; ±) = ¾ 2 P j                                                     :                (9)
                        :        · Lt (¾; x; x; ±)(i) 8i = f1; 2g 8t = f1; 2; :::g ;
                                                                                                      34


We assume that randomization devices are not publicly observable ex post and that …rms only utilize
trigger strategies where selecting price outside the support of the most-collusive pricing strategy is
considered a cheat. This e¤ectively eliminates mixed strategies as optimal choices unless they are
non-cooperative equilibrium of that periods stage game.


Proposition 5 8x 2 [0; X] and 8± 2 (0; 1), there exists a unique most-collusive pricing solution
¾c (x; ±) = (pct (x; ±))1
                        t=1 such that

                                        ½                           ½             ¾¯             ¾
                    c
                                              1
                                              P        t¡1              D(¾t; µt ) ¯¯
                  ¾ (x; ±) = arg max
                                            t=1
                                                   ±         ¾t (min x;
                                                                           2        ¯ ¾ 2 ¢(x; ±) .

                                                       n              o
Proof. Existence: First note that each function ¾t (min x; D(¾2t ;µt ) is both bounded and contin-
uous on P t. Then, 8± 2 (0; 1) the function
                                                               ½               ¾
                                        1
                                        P         t¡1              D(¾t ; µ t)
                                              ±         ¾t (min x;
                                        t=1                           2

is bounded and continuous on P. The set of probability measures on a compact metric space is
compact, hence each set Pt is compact . By Tychono¤’s product theorem the set P is compact.
The constraints are continuos in ¾ 2 P , hence the constraint set ¢(x; ±) is closed. By construction
¢(x; ±) is a subset of the space P. ¢(x; ±) is a closed subset of a compact space and therefore is
compact. Since (p nt(x))1
                        t=1 2 ¢(x; ±), the set ¢(x; ±) is non-empty. A continuous function on a
non-empty compact set always attains a maximum, therefore ¾c(x; ±) exists.

    Uniqueness: Note that based on Proposition 4 the revenue function for each t has the unique
maximum pm
         t (2x). Also note that for any x 2 [0; X],

                   ½               ¾          ½               ¾
                       D(¾t ; µt )      0         D(¾0t; µt )      ¾0t < ¾t · p m
                                                                                t (2x) or
             ¾t(min x;               > ¾t (min x;               i¤
                          2                          2              ¾0t > ¾t ¸ pmt (2x).


Now suppose that there are multiple maximizers. Denote by Pb the set of maximizers and by Pbt
the set of all prices for period t that are part of a maximizing price vector 8t = f1; 2; :::g. Denote
    pt )1
by (b   t=1 the price vector where each p
                                        bt is de…ned by
                                              ½           ½             ¾¯         ¾
                                                              D(¾t; µt ) ¯¯      b
                            pbt = arg max          ¾t (min x;
                                                                 2        ¯ ¾t 2 Pt .

The higher the price is in the subgame at time t the harsher the loss from defection is in every
                                        pt )1
other pricing period. The price vector (b   t=1 yields the at least as much future loss 8t = f1; 2; :::g
                                                                                                            35


of all the price vectors in Pbt, and hence the incentive constraints for each t must hold 8¾ 2 P,
                                                                                               b
           pt )1
therefore (b   t=1 2 ¢(x; ±). By the construction of (b      pt )1
                                                                 t=1, the total revenue in each period is
                   b
maximal among Pt because the functions are single peaked and strictly decreasing away from the
                     n              o         n             o
peak. Thus, pbt (min x; D(bp2t ;µt ) > ¾t (min x; D(¾2t;µ t) 8¾t 2 Pbt r pbt . Therefore, the total revenue
    p t)1 exceeds that of any other ¾ 2 Pb :
of (b t=1
                                 ½               ¾                ½               ¾
         1
         P                           D(b
                                       pt ; µ t)     P1               D(¾t ; µ t)
               ±   t¡1
                         pbt (min x;               >      t¡1
                                                         ± ¾t (min x;                          pt )1
                                                                                    8¾ 2 Pb r (b   t=1 .
         t=1                            2            t=1                 2

                                                                      b
This contradicts the optimality of any non-singular set of strategies P.


10.2.3      Characterization of optimal capacity choice

                                   £    ¤
The capacity pure strategy space is 0; X , where X = maxµ2£ X (µ). The most-collusive capacity
incentive compatibility constraint is:
                                      ½                                                 ¾
                                          £    ¤
                             ©(c; ±) = » 2 0; X j ¦c (»; c; ±) ¸ max f¦ni (xi; »; c; ±)g .                 (10)
                                                                             xi


The most-collusive must be a solution to the constrained maximization problem,

                                            »c (c; ±) 2 arg max f¦c (»; c; ±) j » 2 ©(c; ±)g.


We denote by xc (c; ±) the most-collusive capacity choice; which is the smallest capacity in the set
»c (c; ±) when it is not a singleton.


Proposition 6 If ©(c; ±) non-empty, then a solution xc (c; ±) exists.

                                                                                              £    ¤
Proof. Based on Proposition 5 we know that for any ± 2 (0; 1), ¾c(x; ±) is a function on 0; X .
                                                                           £    ¤
The …rst step is to prove that the function ¾c (x; ±) is continuous in x on 0; X . A function p(x) is
continuous at x if whenever xk ! x, pk = p(xk ) for all k and p = limk!1 pk , we have that p 2 p(x).
To verify the continuity of each function ¾c(x; ±) in x, we suppose that there is a sequence xk ! x
and a sequence pk = ¾c(xk ; ±) for all k such that pk ! pe and pe 6= ¾c (x; ±). Because the constraints
hold for all k, taking the limit as k ! 1 we can conclude that , pe 2 ¢(x; ±). Thus, pe is a feasible
price choice. However, since it is not an optimal choice in this set it must be that there exists p
such that                                         ½               ¾                 ½               ¾
                            1
                            P        t¡1              D(pt ; µ t)     P1
                                                                           t¡1          D(e
                                                                                          pt ; µ t)
                                 ±         pt (min x;               >     ± pet (min x;
                           t=1                           2            t=1                  2
                                                                                                                         36

                                                                   1
                                                                   P                n              o
and p 2 ¢(x; ±). By the continuity of the function                       ±t¡1p t(min x; D(p2t ;µ t) there is a ½ arbitrarily
                                                                   t=1
close to p such that ½ 2 ¢(x; ±). If k is large enough, then ½ 2 ¢(xk ; ±), and it must be the case
that                               ½                ¾                  ½               ¾
                  1
                  P                    D(pkt ; µt )     P1                 D(½t ; µt )
                      ±t¡1 pkt (min x;                >     ±t¡1½t (min x;
                  t=1                     2             t=1                   2

because, pk = ¾c(xk ; ±). Next we take the limit as k ! 1, and based on the continuity of the
revenue function it must be that
                                         ½               ¾                ½               ¾
                  1
                  P         t¡1              D(e
                                               p t; µt )     P1
                                                                  t¡1         D(½t ; µ t)
                        ±         e
                                  pt (min x;               >     ± ½t (min x;               .
                  t=1                           2            t=1                 2
                                                                                 £    ¤
This is a contradiction, so this establishes that ¾c (x; ±) is continuous in x on 0; X . The sum of
continuous functions is itself continuous and the cost function cx is continuous. Thus,
                                                        µ             ½                     ¾      ¶
                    c                   P
                                        1
                                                  t¡1     c               D(pct(x; ±); µt )
                   ¦ (x; c; ±) =              ±          pt (x; ±) min x;                     ¡ cx
                                        t=1                                      2
                                                                                              £    ¤
is continuous. Both ¦c(»; c; ±) and maxxi f¦ni(xi ; »; c; ±)g are continuous functions of » on 0; X .
                                   £    ¤                                £     ¤
Thus, ©(c; ±) is a closed subset of 0; X . By construction ©(c; ±) µ 0; X and hence is a closed
subset of a compact set, therefore ©(c; ±) is compact.                         A continuous function on a non-empty
compact set attains a maximum; if ©(c; ±) 6= ?, then xc(c; ±) exists.



11     Appendix III: Methodology for calculations

The problem is estimated using a backward induction approach. The most-collusive equilibrium
pricing solution does not have a closed form when the capacity is not given a speci…c value. There-
fore, at each discount factor a discrete grid of capacities is used and the most-collusive prices are
found for each capacity. In the capacity stage the problem is a discrete maximization subject to
the capacity incentive constraint.


11.1    Pricing stage
                                ¡            ¢
Given a …xed discount factor ± 2 (±(c); ±(c)) we use a discrete grid of capacities between one half
the monopoly capacity at ± and 200.
                                                                                                          37


   De…ne the terms
                                     µ      ½                    ¾¶
                                               µ t ¡ 400pt
                           zt   = pt min                     ;x        for t = 1; :::; 8;
                                                     2
                           yt   = pt (min fµt ¡ 400pt ; xg) for t = 1; :::; 8;
                                  8
                                  >                if x ¸ µt
                                  < 0
                                  >
                                      (µt ¡x)2
                           rt   =       1600       if x 2 [ µ3t ; µt ] .
                                  >
                                  >
                                  : (µt ¡2x)               µt
                                        400 x if x · 3


For each capacity in the grid we solve the constrained optimization problem using penalty functions
in the objective
                                            ½         µ        µ                           ¶¶ ¾
                                                P
                                                8                         P s¡t
                                                                          t+8
        (pct)8t=1   = arg Q8 max                        t¡1
                                                       ± zt ¡ f yt ¡ zt ¡     ± (zs ¡ rs )      .        (11)
                                l m             t=1                                  s=t+1
                           t=1[pt;pt (x)]



Where f (¢) is a convex penalty function, with f (0) = 0 . The price plt is the pure strategy price
that give the same expected revenue as the non-cooperative equilibrium pricing in period t. In the
case that pct = plt the program is re-run substituting rt for both yt and zt and only optimizing in
terms of the other period prices. We denote by Rc (x; ±), the revenue that comes from the solution
of the program (11). This program is solved for the entire grid of capacities.


11.2    Capacity stage

For the same ± and a given cost c, we take the discrete set of capacities and solve the following
problem. De…ne Rn(z; x; ±) as the non-cooperative equilibrium for a …rm when it plays z and its
rival plays x. Denote the most-collusive pro…t for the …rst cycle by

                                                                       P8
                                     ¦c8(x; c; ±) = Rc(x; ±) ¡            t=1 ±
                                                                                  t¡1
                                                                                        cx:

Denote the maximal deviation non-cooperative pro…t for the …rst cycle by
                                                            ½                     ¾
                            b n (x; c; ±) = max               n            P
                                                                           8
                                                                              t¡1
                            ¦ 8                              R (z; x; ±) ¡   ± cz :
                                                z2[0;200]                      t=1


The most collusive capacity solves the discrete maximization problem:
                                                    n                ¯                             o
                                                                     ¯ c             b
                      ¦c (c; ±) =      max           ¦c8 (x; c; ±)     ¦
                                                                     ¯ 8 (x; c; ±) ¸ ¦ n
                                                                                       8 (x; c; ±)   :
                                    x2f0;:::;200g
                                                                                                  38


The method here is to run a program that starts at the most pro…table symmetric capacity pair
and checks if it is incentive compatible, then moves to the next most pro…table capacity pair and so
on. The …rst capacity pair that is incentive compatible is the most-collusive equilibrium capacities.
                                                                               39


A        Figures and Tables

A.1      Figures

 d
     1
               In all periods prices are at constrained
               monopoly levels




                         In some periods prices are below
                         constrained monopoly levels




                                    Non-cooperative equilibrium
                                    outcomes

 0.5
                                                                           c

 Figure 1: Basic most-collusive pricing regions, by discount and cost.


Gain     2.5



          2



         1.5



          1



         0.5



          0
               0           2.5           5            7.5             10

                                                   Demand Parameter


Figure 2: The immediate gain from a defection with capacity …xed.
                                                                           40



Loss     1.25



           1



         0.75



          0.5



         0.25



           0
                0         2.5          5           7.5            10

                                               Demand Parameter


Figure 3: The single period loss after a defection with …xed capacity.

 d
     1
                                  No simple pricing pattern
          Prices are lower in recessions




                                      Prices are lower in booms



 0.5
                                                                       c

          Figure 4: An example of most-collusive pricing patterns.
                                                                                                   41


         0.3




        0.25




         0.2
                                                                                         0.64
                                                                                         0.62
                                                                                         0.6
Price




        0.15                                                                             0.58
                                                                                         0.56
                                                                                         0.54
                                                                                         0.52
         0.1




        0.05




           0
               1         2       3      4                5       6       7       8
                                                Period


        Figure 5: Most-collusive equilibrium pricing for low costs, c = 0:000001.

        0.35



         0.3



        0.25

                                                                                            0.92
         0.2
                                                                                            0.88
                                                                                            0.84
Price




                                                                                            0.82
                                                                                            0.8
        0.15
                                                                                            0.78
                                                                                            0.76
         0.1



        0.05



          0
               1         2       3          4                5       6       7       8
                                                 Period


                   Figure 6: Most-collusive pricing for high costs, c = 0:05.
                                                                                      42


         0.3




        0.25




         0.2
                                                                               0.76
                                                                               0.72
Price




                                                                               0.68
        0.15
                                                                               0.64
                                                                               0.60
                                                                               0.56
         0.1




        0.05




           0
                  1      2      3      4            5   6    7      8
                                           Period


               Figure 7: Most-collusive pricing for median costs, c = 0:001.
                                                                                            43


A.2    Tables

      Table 1: Relative Expected Pro…ts for Low Capacity Costs
                                                   Collusion with
      Discount   Monopoly   Most-Collusive   Non-cooperative capacities   Non-cooperative
        0.64         1             1                   0.959                   0.569
        0.62         1           0.995                 0.935                   0.559
        0.60         1           0.976                 0.920                   0.548
        0.58         1           0.959                 0.892                   0.537
        0.56         1           0.934                 0.841                   0.525
        0.54         1           0.896                 0.514                   0.514
        0.52         1           0.825                 0.501                   0.501



      Table 2: Relative Expected Pro…ts for High Capacity Costs
                                                   Collusion with
      Discount   Monopoly   Most-Collusive   Non-cooperative capacities   Non-cooperative
        0.92         1           0.982                 0.945                   0.839
        0.88         1           0.977                 0.941                   0.839
        0.84         1           0.961                 0.935                   0.839
        0.82         1           0.947                 0.928                   0.840
        0.80         1           0.937                 0.918                   0.840
        0.78         1           0.903                 0.903                   0.842
        0.76         1           0.849                 0.845                   0.845


      Table 3: Relative Expected Pro…ts for Medium Capacity Costs
                                                   Collusion with
      Discount   Monopoly   Most-Collusive   Non-cooperative capacities   Non-cooperative
        0.76         1           0.998                 0.998                   0.637
        0.72         1           0.998                 0.997                   0.624
        0.68         1           0.996                 0.987                   0.614
        0.64         1           0.988                 0.956                   0.597
        0.60         1           0.970                 0.917                   0.580
        0.56         1           0.924                 0.837                   0.564
                                                                                              44


References

 [1] Abreu, D. “Extremal Equilibria of Oligopolistic Supergames.” Journal of Economic Theory,
    Vol. 39 (1986), pp. 191-225.

 [2] Abreu, D. “On the Theory of In…nitely Repeated Games with Discounting.” Econometrica,
    Vol. 56 (1988), pp. 383-396.

 [3] Bagwell, K. and Staiger, R. “Collusion over the Business Cycle.” RAND Journal of Economics,
    Vol. 28 (1997), pp. 82-106.

 [4] Benoit, J. and Krishna, V. “Dynamic Duopoly: Prices and Quantities.” Review of Economic
    Studies, Vol. 54 (1987), pp. 23-35.

 [5] Besanko, D. and Doraszelski, U. “Capacity Dynamics and Endogenous Asymmetries in Firm
    Size.” RAND Journal of Economics, v 35, (2004), pp. 429-451.

 [6] Borenstein, S. and Shepard, A. “Dynamic Pricing in Retail Gasoline Markets.” RAND Journal
    of Economics, Vol. 27 (1996), pp. 82-106.

 [7] Brock, W. and Scheinkman, J. “Price Setting Supergames with Capacity Constraints.” Review
    of Economic Studies, Vol. 52 (1985), pp. 371-382.

 [8] Compte, O., Frédéric, J. and Rey, P. “Capacity Constraints, Mergers and Collusion.” European
    Economic Review, Vol. 46 (2002), pp. 1-29.

 [9] Dasgupta, P. and Maskin, E. “The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontinuous Economic Games,
    I: Theory.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 53 (1986), pp.1-26.

[10] Dasgupta, P. and Maskin, E. “The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontinuous Economic Games,
    II: Applications.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 53 (1986), pp. 27-41.

[11] Davidson, C. and Deneckere, R. “Long-Run Competition in Capacity, Short-Run Competition
    in Price, and the Cournot Model.” RAND Journal of Economics, v 17 (1986), pp. 404-415.

[12] Davidson, C. and Deneckere, R. “Excess Capacity and Collusion.” International Economic
    Review, Vol. 31 (1990), pp. 521-541.

[13] Fabra, N. “Collusion with Capacity Constraints over the Business Cycle.” International Jour-
    nal of Industrial Organizations, Vol. 24 (2006), pp. 69-81.
                                                                                               45


[14] Green, E. J. and Porter, R. H. “Non-cooperative Collusion Under Imperfect price Information.”
    Econometrica, Vol. 52 (1984) , pp. 87-100.

[15] Haltiwanger, J. and Harrington, J. “The Impact of Cyclical Demand Movements on Collusive
    Behavior.” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 22 (1991), pp. 89-106.

[16] Kandori, M. “Correlated Demand Shocks and Price Wars During Booms.” Review of Economic
    Studies, Vol. 58 (1991), pp.171-180.

[17] Kreps, D. and Scheinkman, J. “Quantity Precommitment and Bertrand Competition Yield
    Cournot Outcomes.” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 14 (1983), pp. 326-337.

[18] Lambson, V. E. “Optimal Penal Codes in Price-setting Supergames with Capacity Con-
    straints.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 54 (1987), pp. 385-398.

[19] Lepore, J. J. “Capacity Competition with Uncertain Demand followed by Price Competition”
    Mimeo, University of California, Davis, 2006.

[20] Levitan, R. and Shubik, M. “Price Duopoly and Capacity Constraints.” International Eco-
    nomic Review, Vol. 13 (1972), pp. 111-122.

[21] Osborne, M. and Pitchik, C. “Price Competition in a Capacity-Constrained Duopoly.” Journal
    of Economic Theory, Vol. 38 (1986), pp. 238-260.

[22] Rosenbaum, D. I. and Sukharomana, S. “Oligopolistic pricing over the deterministic market
    demand cycle: some evidence from the US Portland cement industry.” International Journal
    of Industrial Organization, Vol. 19 (2001), pp. 863-884.

[23] Rotemberg, J. and Saloner, G. “A Supergame-Theoretic Model of Price Wars during Booms.”
    American Economic Review, Vol. 76 (1986) , pp. 390-407.

[24] Scherer, F.M., Ross, D. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, Houghton
    and Mi-in Company: Boston, MA, 1990.

[25] Staiger, R. W. and Wolak, F. A. “Collusive Pricing with Capacity Constraints in the Presence
    of Demand Uncertainty.” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 23 (1992), pp. 203-220.
