NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE HETEROGENEITY OF DOWRY MOTIVES
Raj Arunachalam
Trevon D. Logan
Working Paper 12630
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12630

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

We are grateful for helpful comments from Pranab K. Bardhan, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Jennifer Johnson-Hanks,
Lung-Fei Lee, Ronald D. Lee, David I. Levine, Ian McLean, Manisha Shah, and seminar participants
at UC Berkeley and Ohio State University. We would particularly like to thank J. Bradford DeLong,
Audrey L. Light, and Edward Miguel for several useful discussions and encouragement throughout.
Hao Shi and Ranjan Shrestha provided excellent research assistance. Corresponding author: Raj Arunachalam,
Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley, 549 Evans Hall #3880, Berkeley, CA
94720-3880. Email: arunacha@econ.berkeley.edu The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Raj Arunachalam and Trevon D. Logan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

On the Heterogeneity of Dowry Motives
Raj Arunachalam and Trevon D. Logan
NBER Working Paper No. 12630
October 2006
JEL No. C5,D1,J12
ABSTRACT
Dowries have been modeled as pre-mortem bequests to daughters or as groom-prices paid to in-laws.
These two classes of models yield mutually exclusive predictions, but empirical tests of these predictions
have been mixed. We argue that the heterogeneity of findings can be explained by a heterogeneous
world--some households use dowries as a bequest and others use dowries as a price. We estimate a
model with heterogeneous dowry motives and use the predictions from the competing theories in an
exogenous switching regression to place households in the price or bequest regime. Our empirical
strategy generates multiple, independent checks on the validity of regime assignment. Using retrospective
marriage data from rural Bangladesh, we find robust evidence of heterogeneity in dowry motives in
the population; that bequest dowries have declined in prevalence and amount over time; and that bequest
households are better off compared to price households on a variety of welfare measures.
Raj Arunachalam
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
arunacha@econ.berkeley.edu
Trevon D. Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu

1

Introduction

In the last decade a sharp debate has emerged over the predominance of dowry in
South Asia. With the historical knowledge that dowries tend to disappear as societies
modernize, the persistence of substantial bride-to-groom marriage transfers has long
been a puzzle for social scientists. Recently, in the wake of increasingly male-favored
sex ratios, and with dowries in South Asia currently representing upwards of several
multiples of a bride’s family’s annual income (Suran, Amin, Huq, and Chowdury,
2004; Rao, forthcoming), accounting for dowry has attained a new urgency for scholars
and policy-makers alike. Attempts to explain this puzzle have centered on the very
understanding of what dowry represents: a price or a bequest.
First formalized by Becker (1981), the price model sees dowries as transfers between families, in which brides do not directly benefit. Such transfers may be necessary for a number of reasons. Cultural factors such as hypergamy (women marrying
“up” the social ladder) or tendency for brides to marry older men (in the context
of population growth) may create a perpetual scarcity of grooms, such that dowry
emerges to draw high-quality men into the marriage market (Rao, 1993; Anderson,
2003). Else, if rules for division of household output are inflexible, and a woman’s
shadow price in the marriage market exceeds her share of income, dowry will emerge
as an upfront transfer to equilibriate the marriage market (Botticini and Siow, 2003).
Finally, greater heterogeneity in market earnings among men than among women may
produce dowry as a mechanism by which brides attract high-quality grooms (Anderson, 2004). Regardless of their differences, these explanations share one feature: they
are grounded in a model of dowry as a price that clears the marriage market.
A competing set of answers to the dowry puzzle, only recently formalized in the
economics literature, views dowry as bequests, in which parents transfer their inheritance to daughters at the time of marriage. If there are institutional or legal barriers to
women’s ability to inherit property, particularly in virilocal societies (where daughters
leave their natal household at marriage), dowry may emerge as a culturally-sanctioned
method of bequest (Zhang and Chan, 1999). Alternatively, in virilocal societies, a
pre-mortem bequest to daughters may emerge as a method of maintaining sons’ incentive to exert full effort in maintaining their parents’ estate (Botticini and Siow,
2003). Finally, if such societies are marked by poor protection of women in their
in-laws’ households, dowry may improve brides’ outside option in a bargaining set-

2

ting, and thus mitigate the incidence of domestic violence and other forms of abuse
(Brown, 2003). All of these explanations view dowry as a transfer to the daughter,
and under her control, at the time of marriage.
The policy implications of this debate are critical: if dowries are bequests, they
should be protected, as they represent culturally-sanctioned access to property for
women (Kishwar, 1989; Goody, 1998). More generally, dowry as bequest can improve
brides’ consumption within in-laws’ households, thereby improving women’s welfare.
If dowries are a groom-price, the practice of dowry should arguably be banned, particularly in South Asia, as it increases the perceived cost of raising daughters and
thus may contribute to worsening sex ratios through selective abortion, infanticide,
and differential child mortality by gender. To date, bans of dowry have taken the
form of largely ineffectual “paper laws,” but momentum is gaining among activists
and policy-makers to make the prohibition of dowries bite, by publicizing regulations,
increasing the penalties for violations, and making reporting to authorities more attractive (Setalvad, 1988; Menski, 1998; Basu, 2005).
With the stakes set so high, the empirical evidence is mixed. To date, no largesample survey in South Asia directly asks respondents to identify the recipient of
the dowry transfer, since groom-prices are technically banned. Researchers must
therefore use indirect measures to assess the function of dowry. Such indirect tests,
in South Asia and elsewhere, have yielded contrary results, sometimes within the
same paper (see Table 1). Meanwhile, drawing on village case studies, historians and
anthropologists have argued that the system of dowry in India and Bangladesh has
transformed over the recent decades from bequest to price—yet their reliance on small
samples and sparse archival records renders the generalizability of such conclusions
suspect (Lindenbaum, 1981; Ahmed and Naher, 1987; Sharma, 1984).
We propose a simple explanation for the mixed results in the literature: heterogeneity in dowry motives, and develop a theoretical and empirical strategy to deal
with this heterogeneity. All prior large-sample studies take a particular model of
dowry as given, regress dowry amounts on bride, groom and marriage market characteristics, and infer support for the model from the sign of estimated coefficients on
theoretically “important” variables. In the presence of heterogeneity, however, such
a strategy is misguided, precisely because average coefficients are uninformative as
to the actual functioning of dowry. By acknowledging instead that both models may
hold—for different subsets of the population—we use their theoretical predictions to

3

structure a switching regression model with unknown sample separation to sort the
marriage market into “bequest households” and “price households.” More precisely,
we use the theories to help predict households’ probability of regime membership and
estimate a probability-weighted dowry function for each regime.
There are four central findings. First, using retrospective data from the 1996
Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Survey, we find substantial evidence of two dowry
regimes in rural Bangladesh. In particular, of marriages from 1920 to the present in
which a dowry was given, more than a quarter used dowry as bequest. Second, the
function mapping bride household, groom household, and marriage market characteristics to dowry amounts (the dowry function) differs significantly between regimes.
Third, dowries increasingly serve as a groom-price, and while bequest dowries are
falling in size, price dowries are rising. We fail, however, to find evidence of a “marriage squeeze” driving dowry inflation. Finally, bequest households are considerably
better off—in schooling, assets, and other measures of welfare—than price households.
Beyond its contribution to the literature on dowries, our paper presents a general
methodology that can be fruitfully adopted in other debates where there is more than
one model and no clear victor. We offer three methodological advances on similar
papers which proactively use theory in a switching regression framework in order
to locate sources of heterogeneity.1 First, rather than rely on a single characteristic as the predictor of regime membership, we utilize a number of predictions from
the competing theories—thus enabling each estimate to serve as a validity check on
the others. Second, we generate a novel type of prediction of regime membership:
a “non”-membership prediction, which indicates the likelihood that an observation
does not fall within a given regime. As such, we offer a new method of classifying
regime membership which may be more readily derived from economic models than
“membership” predictions. Finally, employing these non-membership predictions (in
the switching equation) as well as predictions regarding regime specifications (in the
regime equations) allows us multiple robustness checks by relaxing different assumptions. Our strategy may prove of interest in areas as wide-ranging as unitary vs.
non-income-pooling households, separability vs. non-separability of household production and consumption, strategic vs. altruistic bequests, and the permanent income
1

Two recent examples of this approach are Kopczuk and Lupton (forthcoming), which investigates
heterogeneity in bequest motives of the elderly, and Vakis, Sadoulet, de Janvry, and Cafiero (2004),
which looks at heterogeneity in the separability of household consumption from production.

4

hypothesis, by offering empirical researchers new strategies for using theory to locate
sources of heterogeneity.

2

Two Theories of Dowry

In this section we reformulate existing price and bequest theories in a framework
that highlights the salient distinctions between the two classes of models, and extract
predictions for regime membership which we exploit in the empirical analysis.

2.1

Price Model

Since Becker (1981) broke open the economic modeling of marriage payments and
offered the first formal statement of the price model, a number of authors have developed various theoretical predictions for aspects and effects of dowries (Rao, 1993;
Grossbard-Shechtman, 1993; Sen, 1998; Mukherjee, 2003; Dasgupta and Mukherjee,
2003; Anderson, 2003, 2004; Dalmia, 2004; Tertilt, 2005; Mukherjee and Mondal,
2006). The model presented below highlights the shared properties of these models
while generating a number of useful predictions which we take to the data. The critical feature of price models, for our purposes, is that the dowry is transferred from
the bride’s family to the groom’s family to equilibriate the marriage market. As such,
the model yields a dowry function that maps characteristics of the bride, groom, and
their respective families, as well as underlying features of the marriage market, to a
dowry amount.
Marriage decisions are made by the parents (the “family”) of each spouse. Each
family chooses a spouse for their child to maximize utility. The groom’s family
(indexed by G) has utility UG = UG (cG , wS , wD ), where cG is parental consumption and wS is the son’s wealth. The groom’s parents choose wD , the wealth of
their desired daughter-in-law, to maximize utility subject to the budget constraint
cG = wG + τ (wD ; wS , R), taking wG (the groom’s parents’ pre-transfer wealth), wS ,
R, and τ (·) as given. R is a shifter of the dowry function that is not related to the
individual bride or groom’s household (for example, sex ratio, year of marriage, region, etc.). Here, τ (·) is a function mapping each prospective bride to a transfer that
sustains the match, given wS and R. The solution to this problem yields a schedule

5

of transfers, DG , that sustain each bride-groom pairing acceptable to the groom’s
parents (analogous to an inverse demand function): DG = DG (wD , wS , wG , R). The
bride’s family (indexed by P ) faces a similar problem, except that they pay the transfer. They choose wS to maximize their utility UP = UP (cP , wD , wS ) subject to the
budget constraint cP = wP − τ (wS ; wD , R), taking wP , wD , R and τ (·) as given.
Again, the solution yields a schedule of transfers that sustain each bride-groom pairing acceptable to the bride’s parents: DP = DP (wD , wS , wP , R).
In equilibrium, the marginal utility of the spouse traits to consumption, for both
bride and groom families, will be equal:
∂UG
∂wD
∂UG
∂cG

=

∂UP
∂wS
∂UP
∂cP

At any given value of R, a bride-groom pairing can only be sustained in equilibrium when DG = DP . This gives us a dowry function—a schedule mapping each
bride-groom pair to an equilibrium transfer: D∗ = D∗ (wD , wS , wP , wG , R). In this
setting, every bride-groom combination is feasible given a transfer of the right amount,
since we have not restricted transfers to be non-negative. Figure 1 demonstrates this
graphically—a woman of wealth wD can match with any man, given the appropriate
dowry.
We now summarize two key predictions of the price model of dowry that we will
use to identify regime membership in the empirical section. First, the dowry that
sustains any particular couple is determined by the characteristics of the bride and
her family (a vector W ), the groom and his family (a vector H), and a vector R of
parameters such as sex ratio that “shift” the dowry function. In reduced form, we
can write:
DΠ = gΠ (H, W, R)
(1)
where D is dowry amount, g(·) is the dowry function, and Π indexes the price regime.
Second, we have a non-membership prediction for marriages in the price regime which
should see no dowry transferred:
• DΠ = 0 in a love (or “self-arranged”) marriage.2
2
This prediction has a long history in the literature on marriage transfers, going back to Goode
(1963) and Becker (1981) and recently discussed by Dasgupta and Mukherjee (2003) and Edlund
and Lagerlöf (2004). First, and most simply, in a love marriage the selection of the spouse is made

6

Furthermore, a number of authors have made clear predictions about the dowry
function itself. We refer to these as testable predictions—rather than taking them as
given, we will empirically test their substantive significance:
• Ceteris paribus, dowry amount moves inversely with bride’s “positive” characteristics (or “quality”) and positively with groom’s “positive” characteristics. These features may include human capital attainment, ability to make
economic contributions to groom’s household (Becker, 1981; Behrman, Foster,
Rosenzweig, and Vashishtha, 1999), and non-economic characteristics such as
caste (Anderson, 2003). In short, attributes substitute for dowry amount.
• Ceteris paribus, dowry amount moves inversely with the male-to-female sex
ratio (Grossbard-Shechtman, 1993) or age-adjusted sex ratio (Rao, 1993). As
a transfer that equilibriates the marriage market, dowry is a function of excess
supply.

2.2

Bequest Model

The bequest theory does not merely view dowry as an intergenerational transfer—
the idea is that in dowry-giving societies, inheritance is given to a son at the time
of parents’ death but to a daughter upon her marriage. Key to such a model is
the notion that some friction prevents daughters from inheriting upon their parents’
death. Most scholars stress the combination of virilocality and poor property rights:
since women face barriers to inheriting after moving to their in-laws’ household, they
must receive their inheritance at the time of marriage.3
While the bequest explanation has a long tradition in anthropology (Tambiah,
1973, for example), only recently have economists developed the notion that dowry
functions as pre-mortem inheritance into models that can be estimated (Zhang and
Chan, 1999; Edlund, 2001; Botticini and Siow, 2003; Suen, Chan, and Zhang, 2003;
by bride and groom, not by their parents, as the price model requires. Second, such a marriage will
not be under the same market pressures present in the implicit dowry market. Another way to put it
is that a model of dowry as price assumes that dowry allows parents of daughters to secure alliances
with high-quality in-laws. Thus, love marriages, where parents are not the decision-makers, should
see no dowry transferred.
3
Botticini and Siow (2003) maintain the assumption that virilocality is crucial to the existence of
dowry, but posit that parents’ inability to monitor their son’s effort forces them to make an inefficient
pre-mortem bequest to their daughter in order to properly incentivize the son’s management of the
household estate.

7

Brown, 2003). Of these papers, only Botticini and Siow (2003) develops the idea that
a model of dowry as bequest must be nested within a marriage market—and that
a premarital transfer to their daughter automatically improves the groom she will
attract. We draw from this insight in constructing the model below.
Using subscripts P for bride’s parents, D for the bride, and S for the son-in-law,
the bride’s parents derive utility UP from her marriage such that: UP = U (cP , cD , cS ),
a function increasing and concave in all arguments. Here, cP is consumption of the
parents; cD is the “marital wealth” of the daughter (the wealth that she brings into
her marriage), and cS is the marital wealth of the son-in-law. Parents maximize
utility by choosing the size of the dowry transfer τ , which is made to the daughter.
The parental budget constraint is: cP = wP − τ , where wP is the parent’s pre-transfer
wealth, and τ is constrained to be non-negative.4
Now we turn to the daughter. The first key feature of the model is the assumption,
following Lam (1988); Peters and Siow (2002) and Botticini and Siow (2003), that a
bride’s characteristics, such as age, education, and number of siblings, are exogenously
mapped by the marriage market to a scalar which we call “pre-marital wealth”. This
allows us to write: wD = f (XD ), where wD is her pre-marital wealth and XD is a
vector of characteristics. This mapping allows us to state the “marital wealth” cD
that the daughter brings into her marriage as: cD = wD + τ .
Finally we consider the son-in-law. The second key feature of the model is that
we nest the choice of dowry amount within a assortative matching framework. Since
brides and grooms can be ranked by marital wealth, each woman of marital wealth
cD attracts a groom of marital wealth cS = h(cD ), where the existence of the weaklymonotonic mapping h(·) follows from assortative mating.5 Substituting, the bride’s
parents choose τ to maximize: UP = U (wP − τ, wD + τ, h(wD + τ )). In the interior,
the optimal τ ∗ gives:
∂U
∂U
∂U
=
=
∗
∗
∂(wP − τ )
∂(wD + τ )
∂(h(wD + τ ∗ ))

(2)

In addition, the non-negativity constraint on τ yields a possible corner solution τ ∗ = 0.
By the monotonicity of h(·), equation (2) identifies τ ∗ . In other words, since
4

While we do not formally model the source of the non-negativity constraint on bequests, it
arises naturally out of capital market imperfections which prevent daughters from borrowing before
marriage. Baland and Robinson (2000) make this point in a different context.
5
Existence of equilibrium in wealth matching models is shown in Peters and Siow (2002).

8

son-in-law’s marital wealth is simply a function of the daughter’s marital wealth, the
choice of dowry amount will not depend on the son-in-law’s wealth. We can thus write
a schedule of optimal dowry amounts τ ∗ as a function only of parents’ and daughter’s
pre-marital wealth: τ ∗ (wP , wD ) = τ ∗ (wP , f (XD )).
In this setting, unlike in the price model, dowry cannot substitute for groom’s
characteristics. The intuition is straightforward: since the transfer can only be made
to daughters, any attempt to improve parental utility by securing a superior son-in-law
can only occur by improving the daughter’s marital wealth ranking among prospective
brides. We demonstrate this graphically in Figure 2. Vertical axes represent the
marital wealth of brides and grooms. A bride of pre-marital wealth wD will marry
a groom of marital wealth h(wD + τ ), where τ is chosen by the bride’s parents to
maximize parental utility, so that the thick line represents the range of possible grooms
a bride may match with.
This result gives us a valuable “reduced-form restriction” which we use in the
estimation:
DB = gB (W )
(3)
where B indexes the bequest regime and gB (•) is the dowry function. That is, the
dowry amount in the bequest regime depends solely on W , the vector of characteristics
of the bride and her family (including XD and wP ). To put it another way, once the
bride’s characteristics and the dowry amount are known, the knowledge of groom’s
characteristics do not add any additional information, and should be excluded from
the estimation.
Furthermore, the logic of the bequest theory yields a number of non-membership
predictions that describe the characteristics of families who will not give a dowry as
bequest:
• DB = 0 if the bride remains within the household after marriage. Virilocality
combined with the cessation of daughters’ ability to inherit drive the pre-mortem
bequest.
• DB = 0 if the bride’s parents have died before her marriage. Again, since
daughters face no barriers to inheritance before moving away, they will have
already inherited.
• DB = 0 if the bride has been previously married, since she will have received

9

her bequest at the time of her first marriage.
• The Botticini and Siow (2003) model offers an additional prediction: DB = 0 if
the brides has no brothers of the age of majority at the time of marriage.6
The bequest theory also offers predictions about the dowry function in this regime:
• Ceteris paribus, dowry amount moves inversely with the bride’s number of
brothers of the age of majority. In the bequest theory, sons do not “attract”
dowry from their in-laws—thus, each brother represents another drain on the
inheritance pool.
• Ceteris paribus, a higher dowry improves the bride’s well-being, both by increasing her marital wealth and by improving the quality of her potential groom.

3

Heterogeneity in Dowry Motives

We argue in this section that the bulk of the historical and anthropological evidence
points toward two models of dowry: bequest and price.7 After a brief discussion of
previous empirical work, highlighting the pitfalls involved in imposing homogeneity of
dowry motive, we provide a simple model which relaxes this assumption. We consider
a bifurcated marriage market in which some unknown fraction of households only use
dowries as bequests (the “bequest regime”), and the rest use dowries as a price (the
“price regime”). This model, grounded in the theoretical predictions stated in the
previous section, serves as the basis for the empirical work that follows.

3.1

Historical and Anthropological Accounts

The earliest reference to dowry in South Asia dates almost two millenia ago—when
Manu decreed stridhan [dowry] to represent the “sixfold property of a woman” (Oldenburg, 2002). The origins of dowry in South Asia almost certainly lie in a system
6

If a bride has no brothers (or if her brothers are below the age of majority at the time of her
marriage), the incentive problem that forces an inefficient pre-mortem bequest is vitiated. Any
bequest will be given upon her parents’ death or at the time when any brother reaches the age of
majority and assumes responsibility for managing the parents’ estate.
7
This discussion serves as motivation, but in the empirics we do not require that both regimes
exist—on the contrary, the switching regression approach allows us to explicitly test whether the
two-regime model fits the data better than a single-regime model.

10

of premortem inheritance, but most scholars document a gradual transformation of
dowry from bequest to price beginning sometime in the late nineteenth century (Tambiah, 1973; Srinivas, 1984; Banerjee, 1999).8 At any given point in time, however,
there is evidence of heterogeneity of opinion about dowry. Some nineteenth century
observers viewed dowry as an unambiguous bequest: “[I]f the daughter receives something at the time of her marriage,” a Bengali defender of dowry wrote in 1887, “then
is that not a good thing? When the father is compelled to spend money for his daughter, and that sum accrues to the in-laws or to the bridegroom, in the ultimate analysis
the daughter is the principal beneficiary” (cited in Majumdar (2004, pgs. 445-446)).
In precisely the same period, critiques of dowry began to proliferate, particularly in
Calcutta, all citing the language of the marketplace to describe the increasing “price”
of grooms (Majumdar, 2004).
Anthropologists’ accounts, generally drawing from long-term fieldwork in a small
number of villages, likewise reflect considerable heterogeneity in dowry motives, both
in the assessment of scholars and in the views of their informants. One anthropologist
who conducted fieldwork in Himachal Pradesh and Punjab during the late 1970s reported that her informants (mostly Hindu) saw dowry as a pre-mortem inheritance to
daughters, yet her own observations led her to conclude that dowry amounts moved as
a price in a marriage market (Sharma, 1984, pg. 351). Another, conducting fieldwork
in the 1980s among urban Protestants in Madras, found that respondents overwhelmingly perceived dowry as a groom-price, noting that dowry amounts fell with aspects
of a bride’s perceived quality (Caplan, 1984).9 As with the historical evidence, anthropological accounts almost universally document a transformation of dowry from
bequest to price. This trend is evident in Comilla, the district of Bangladesh from
which our survey data comes. As early as the 1950s, a new form of marriage transfer
emerged in which potential grooms detailed the list of items they would accept in
8

Considerable evidence from other dowry-giving societies around the world similarly points to
the coexistence of bequest and price dowries, and the transformation from bequest dowries to price
dowries over time (Kaplan, 1985; Nazzari, 1991).
9
Such discussions abound in South Asian literature. For instance, early in Kamala Markandaya’s
1954 Nectar in a Sieve, a South Indian mother assesses potential grooms for her daughter: “At last
we found one who seemed to fulfill our requirements: he was young and well favoured, the only son
of his father from whom he would one day inherit a good portion of land.
‘They will expect a large dowry,’ I said regretfully. ‘One hundred rupees will not win such a
husband, we have no more.’
‘She is endowed with beauty,’ Old Granny said. ‘It will make up for a small dowry—in this case.’
” (New York, John Day, pgs. 39-40).

11

exchange for marriage—these payments were often called by the English word “demand,” reflecting the price motive of the dowry (Lindenbaum, 1981; Kabeer, 2001).
Concomitant with the transition in the function of dowry, anthropological work
indicates a change in the form of payment. As bequest dowry declined in prevalence,
dowries increasingly began to be paid in cash, over which brides rarely exercised
control in their in-laws’ household (Sharma, 1984; Caplan, 1984). While the data we
use does not include information about respondents’ control over different types of
dowry, survey data from elsewhere in South Asia support this generalization.10
In sum, a survey of the historical and anthropological evidence on dowry points
not only to heterogeneity of dowry motives, but establishes that there are two (and
only two) predominant explanations for the function of dowry, which correspond to
our price and bequest models. Furthermore, the literature provides two claims we
use as checks to the validity of our empirical results:
• Dowry as bequest has been declining in prevalence over time.
• Dowries as bequests are less likely to be cash-only, since cash is not a resource
over which brides exercise control within the in-laws’ household.

3.2

Previous Empirical Work

Contrary to the evidence presented above, most empirical studies of dowry proceed
by taking either the price or bequest model as given. There are two central problems
with this strategy. First, in the presence of heterogeneity, testing each theory’s predictions about the specific nature of the dowry function is only feasible once regime
membership has been determined—a point we develop below. Second, tests often
rest on predictions common to both models. Previous tests of the bequest model
adopt a “welfare” approach, focusing on the prediction that ceteris paribus, higher
dowries increase bride’s welfare. Accordingly, the strategy has been to regress measures of bride’s welfare on dowry amount and a number of controls (Zhang and Chan,
10

The Survey on the Status of Women and Fertility in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu (Smith,
Ghuman, Lee, and Mason, 2000) asked randomly-sampled brides about the control they exercise
over different forms of dowry. In marriages where cash dowry was given as dowry, fewer than 10%
of respondents reported that they had the “major say” in how the cash was spent, and more than
70% reported that they had no say at all. In marriages where jewelry, gold, or silver was given,
more than 47% of respondents reported that they had the major say in how it was used or whether
it could be sold, while fewer than 25% reported that they had no say at all.

12

1999; Brown, 2003; Suran, Amin, Huq, and Chowdury, 2004; Esteve-Volart, 2004).11
However, this is not a viable test of the bequest model. Indeed, we generated above
the price model’s prediction that, ceteris paribus, higher dowry attracts higher quality grooms. If, for example, we accept Zhang and Chan’s (1999) hypothesis that
husbands’ willingness to help with the chores is valued by brides’ families (and thus
improve when her threat point improves), then such measures would also increase the
price of a groom in the price model. As such, a confirmation of the bequest model
using the “welfare” approach is no more than a confirmation that either the price or
bequest theory holds. Our approach is therefore to avoid direct measures of welfare,
instead focusing on the aspects of the theories in which their predictions diverge.
Two recent papers share our concern for considering heterogeneity of dowry motives, but attack the problem differently: both posit historical reasons for taking
the sample separation as known (Anderson, 2004; Esteve-Volart, 2004).12 We view
our contribution as complementary but methodologically distinct. First, our framework allows us to test for the very existence of two dowry functions, by comparing
the two-regime specification to one in which all households are pooled. Second, our
placement of marriages into regimes is grounded in theory, rather than in historical
evidence, allowing us to use historical predictions as separate validity checks on our
results. Third, by sorting households based on observed behavior, we can examine
the characteristics of households in each regime, rather than assigning households to
regimes by construction. This allows us to test, for example, the claim of opponents
to dowry bans that bequest households are poorer than price households.

3.3

Marriage Market Heterogeneity

We propose a simple model of a bifurcated marriage market which nests these previous
approaches as a special case. Consider a marriage market in which a fraction α of
11

The reasoning, although not always explicitly stated, is that dowry improves the bride’s welfare
by increasing the overall amount of resources available to her (new) family, as well as by improving
her threat point or bargaining position within the marriage. Zhang and Chan (1999) uses whether
a husband helped with the chores as a measure of wife’s welfare; Brown (2003) expands the indices
of welfare to include household consumption of women’s goods; Esteve-Volart (2004) tests Becker’s
(1981, pg. 28) observation that one function of dowry is to protect women from divorce; and Suran,
Amin, Huq, and Chowdury (2004) looks at levels of reported domestic violence.
12
Anderson (2004) separates the sample of Pakistani households into rural and urban; EsteveVolart (2004), using the same dataset as the one used in our paper, separates the sample into Hindu
and Muslim. Both papers estimate separate dowry functions by subsample, and conclude on the
basis of parameter estimates that dowry indeed functions differently in the groups.

13

households only give dowry as a bequest to brides. In this group, the dowry of
each household is given by the function gB (•) given in equation (3), which maps the
household’s characteristics to a dowry amount. The rest of the households, fraction
1 − α, never give a bequest to the daughter at the time of marriage—among these
households, if dowry is given, it serves as a transfer that equilibriates the marriage
market. The function gΠ (•) given in equation (1) maps the characteristics of both
sides, and of the marriage market as a whole, to a dowry amount. Without knowledge
of “regime membership”, any estimate of the dowry function will be biased—indeed,
the estimated coefficient on any given regressor may lie outside the range of true
coefficients in both regimes (Morduch and Stern, 1997).
There are two important restrictions placed by this model. First, there are only
two dowry functions. Here, we note that the price and bequest models represent
the only major theories of dowry in the anthropological, historical, and economics
literature—furthermore, these two explanations subsume all explanations given by
participants in the dowry system. Dowries cannot simply be explained as traditional
behavior, since dowry amounts fluctuate dramatically over time, and since in many
places (including Matlab, as noted above) dowry is a recent phenomenon, emerging
only within the last few decades. Likewise, unlike wedding celebrations (Bloch, Rao,
and Desai, 2004), in rural Bangladesh dowry transactions are made privately and
amounts are often kept fairly secret (Suran, Amin, Huq, and Chowdury, 2004), so
that status is an unlikely candidate to explain dowry amounts.
Second, we restrict any given dowry to fall within one regime. The theoretical justification follows from our characterization of the regimes: the key difference between
price households and bequest households is that the latter face a constraint in securing property of inheritance for daughters. It stands to reason that a similar problem
would emerge if a bequest household arranged a match with a price household—how
would bequest parents be assured that the part of the dowry earmarked as bequest
is not expropriated? Under the reasonable assumption that in-laws discuss dowry
before the match, bequest parents will take care to match with other households in
the bequest regime. The threat of social sanctions in the context of a rural marriage
market lends weight to the claim that bequest dowries were not “transformed” into
price dowries by the groom’s family.13
13

There is some evidence of a rise in post-marital extortion of dowry beginning around the late
1990s—after our 1996 survey (Suran, Amin, Huq, and Chowdury, 2004), a practice which may have

14

4

Empirical Strategy

The goal of our empirical strategy is to answer four questions regarding heterogeneity
in dowry motives. First, are there both bequest and price households in the data?
Second, how many households use dowry as bequest versus as price? Third, what
characteristics can identify whether a given household uses dowry as bequest versus
as price? Fourth, what are the dowry functions, which map characteristics to dowry
amounts, in each regime?
The econometric model we employ is an exogenous switching regression with unknown sample separation. Switching regressions were introduced to economics by
Quandt (1958) and have been refined subsequently (Goldfeld and Quandt, 1976;
Dickens and Lang, 1985; Lee and Porter, 1984). If subsets of the data are produced
by distinct but unknown data generating processes, switching regressions are used
to classify the observations into their respective regime. We write a three-equation
system that involves two regime equations (one for bequest and one for price), and
a switching equation that assigns to each household a probability of being in each
regime. The system is solved using a maximum likelihood procedure.
Ultimately, the switching regression approach allows us to address our central empirical questions. First, the estimated coefficients in the switching equation identify
characteristics that place households in each regime. Second, we use the estimated
probability of regime membership to slice the sample into “more likely bequest” and
“more likely price” households and then compare their characteristics. Finally, the estimated coefficients in the regime equations identify a dowry function for each regime,
using all observations in the sample (where each observation is weighted by its estimated probability of membership in that regime).
Our methodological innovation lies in the way we use theory to structure the
switching regression model. An advantage of the plenitude of predictions given by
the theoretical models is that we can use several separate predictions at once, thereby
simultaneously estimating the model and assessing the validity of regime placement.
In so doing, we hope to address a common skepticism levied at switching regressions
as asking too much of the data when sample separation is unknown. We use a
specification that draws on the most information from theory. We restrict the sample
to positive dowries, which justifies including the non-membership prediction variables
spread from India (Bloch and Rao, 2002).

15

in the switching equation. Simultaneously, we draw from the reduced form theoretical
result that, in bequest households, marriage market and groom-side variables do not
affect the dowry amount. Marriage market as well as bride and groom characteristics
(as well as characteristics of their families) enter the switching and price equations,
but only bride family characteristics enter the bequest equation. We check our results
against the historical and anthropological predictions that bequest dowries are on the
decline and are less likely to be given as cash-only. Finally, we relax the theoretical
restrictions to gauge the robustness of the results.

4.1

Empirical Specification

We represent dowry amount in the price regime as DΠ and in the bequest regime as
DB . The vector x ≡ {H, W, R} contains all characteristics of the marriage that are
theorized to affect dowry amount: characteristics of the bride and her family (W );
characteristics of the groom and his family (H); and features of the marriage market
at the time of marriage (R). The econometric model is a three-equation system:
Price regime:

DΠ = xΠ βΠ + Π

Bequest regime:

DB = xB βB + B
λ∗ = zβλ + λ

Switching equation:

The parameter vectors of interest are βΠ , βB , and βλ . Here, DΠ , DB , and λ∗ are
latent. Only the dowry amount D is observed, given by:
(
D=

if λ∗ < 0
if λ∗ ≥ 0

DΠ
DB

We will turn to the identification of the model in a moment. First, let us consider
the variables that enter each equation. In the price regime, groom-side, bride-side,
and marriage market characteristics enter the dowry function. However, using the
reduced-form restrictions derived from theory, we constrain the bequest regime equation to include only bride-side variables. This approach of applying theoretical constraints to one regime mirrors the identification strategy adopted by Vakis, Sadoulet,

16

de Janvry, and Cafiero (2004). This gives:
xΠ = {H, W, R} = x
xB = {W }
Moving to the switching equation, in addition to the variables in x, we include the nonmembership variables K in the switching equation, to exploit the non-membership
predictions. In form, this strategy resembles that of Lee and Porter (1984) and
Kopczuk and Lupton (forthcoming), with one key difference: our switching equation
identifies the non-membership of marriages within a regime given their existence in
the restricted sample of strictly positive dowries. The idea is that certain households
should not be observed giving dowry if the predictions of one of the theories holds.
Thus, if the household is observed giving dowry, it is more likely to be in the other
regime. In essence, we are identifying household regime by drawing from theoretical
predictions about specific households’ non-participation in the dowry system, due to
their participation in the dowry system.
The logic behind the strategy is as follows. In the theoretical section, we generated
predictions about who will not pay dowries in each regime. Specifically, positive
dowries will not be observed in the “price regime” in a love marriage. As such, if we
observe a love marriage with a dowry, theory would tell us that this is not a price
dowry.14 Similarly, positive dowries will not be observed in the “bequest regime” in a
number of cases: if the bride has no brothers, if a bride marries within the household,
or if a bride’s parents have died. Thus we have:
z = {H, W, R, K}
where K represents variables that identify regime membership but are uncorrelated
with the errors in the regime equations. From the theoretical predictions, we have
a number of such variables: (1) whether the bride had male siblings of the age of
majority at the time of marriage; (2) whether the bride’s parents were alive at the
time of marriage; (3) whether the marriage was self-arranged (a love marriage); and
(4) whether the bride married within the household. Including these variables in
the switching equation allows us to infer (ex post) from the sign of the estimated
14

More precisely, throughout, we assume that such marriages in which positive dowry is given
more likely to be in the other regime.

17

coefficients which regime is which. This in turn gives us an instant validity check on
the outcome of the regression: if the signs of the estimated coefficients “disagree”—in
the sense that if the sign on “bride had brothers of the age of majority at marriage”
points to the second regime as being the bequest regime, while the sign on “bride
married within household” points to the first as being the bequest regime, we will
not be able to identify the regimes.
Is it plausible to exclude all of these variables from the regime equations? The
number of brothers should directly affect a family’s ability to pay a high dowry, particularly in the price regime, where each brother brings in an amount that may be used
for his sister’s marriage. To deal with this issue, we include the number of brothers
in both the switching and regime equations. Our reasoning here is that the dummy
variable “no brothers” captures the absence of bequest motive, while the number
of brothers will capture the income effect that enters the dowry equation in both
regimes. Similarly, the dowry function remains unchanged in either regime regardless of whether the bride’s parents are alive at the time of marriage or whether the
bride marries within the household—theory predicts only that the variables capture
the absence of bequest motive. Finally, “love marriage” is only relevant insofar as it
eliminates the recipient of the transfer in the price regime, and thus a positive dowry
should only be observed in love match if the household is in the bequest regime.
To identify the model, we must place some restrictions on the error terms (Maddala, 1983). We assume that Π , B , and λ are i.i.d. normal, mean-zero disturbances
with variances σΠ2 , σB2 , and σλ2 respectively, and we normalize σλ = 1. A randomlyselected marriage i has probability 1−λ = Φ(−xi βλ ) of belonging to the price regime,
and probability λ of being in the bequest regime. The probability density function of
observed dowry amounts is therefore a mixture of two distributions:
f (Di ) = (1 − λ)φΠ (Di − xΠi βΠ ) + λφB (Di − xBi βB )
Here, φΠ and φB are the probability distributions of Π and B . For a sample of
N marriages, the likelihood function becomes:

L(βΠ , βB , βλ , σΠ , σB ) =

N
Y

f (Di )

i=1

There are two points of note about this function. First, if φΠ = φB and βΠ =

18

βB , then Π = B so that the likelihood function reduces to the standard normal
density. Thus, the whole sample specification (no sample separation) is nested in the
unknown sample separation specification, and the log-likelihoods of the two can be
directly compared using a likelihood ratio test (Dickens and Lang, 1985). Second,
the log-likelihood function contains the log of the sum of likelihoods rather than the
sum of log-likelihoods; this additive inseparability renders the problem analytically
intractable. Fortunately, the parameters can be estimated by maximum likelihood
using the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster, Laird, and Rubin,
1977; Hartley, 1978).

5

Data and Results

We estimate the model using data from 1996 Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Survey (MHSS) in rural Bangladesh.15 We have 5,328 marriages in this dataset in which
year of marriage is reported (or can be constructed from age and age at marriage)
and a total of 1,869 marriages in which dowry was reported. To deflate dowries, we
follow Khan and Hossain (1989) and Amin and Cain (1998) and use the price of rice.
Examining the summary statistics for the whole sample (Table 2), we observe that the
data fits what we would expect given the historical and anthropological evidence: the
proportion of the sample that is Hindu is relatively small, a small share of marriages
are self-arranged, and the majority of husbands and wives have no formal schooling.
There is a significant age differential between husbands and wives—the mean age at
marriage for women is almost ten years younger than for men.16
Before turning to the empirical results, we assess our restriction to positive dowries.
Should positive-dowry-giving marriages be considered within the same model as all
marriages? A priori, we have no sense of whether this should be the case. Our
marriage market model is completely general—yet dowry is an institution that most
households in the world do not adopt, so that we might think that even within a
dowry-giving society, households which use dowry are different in kind from those
which do not. We report kernal density estimates of the probability density function
for dowries in Figure 3, where we label “no dowry given” as zero dowry. As the
15

Further discussion of the data construction is in the Data Appendix.
For this reason, we use the eligible sex ratio to test the ”marriage squeeze” hypothesis of (Rao,
1993). . See the Appendix for details of the construction of the series.
16

19

figure shows, there is no left censoring of dowries—furthermore, there are very few
households that give small dowries. Thus, the distribution of dowries in itself justifies treating non-dowry households separately from dowry-giving households, both in
theory and in empirical estimation.
We now turn to the estimation results. With our specification, we present results
for the pooled regression, where we estimate a dowry function analogous to the existing empirical scholarship. In terms of our model, this is equivalent to restricting
α, the fraction of bequest households, to be either 1 or 0.17 While the central claim
of this paper is that the results from such a regression are misspecified, we reproduce
them for three reasons: first, to check whether our data resembles that used in other
studies; second, to serve as a point of departure for the two-regime results; and third,
we use the estimated coefficients from the whole sample regression as starting values
for coefficients in the regime equations in the EM procedure.

5.1

Empirical Estimates of Dowry Heterogeneity

Table 3 reports the estimation results. The dependent variable in the switching
equation (Column 2) is the probability of being in the first regime (Column 3). Here,
since we have restricted the second regime (Column 4) to exclude groom-side and
marriage market variables, this means that the first regime is by construction the
price regime, and the second is the bequest regime, as labeled in the table. We begin
by comparing the switching regression results to those of the pooled regression. This
is our first check on the validity of the results: does our model capture the data better
than the pooled model? The brief answer is yes: at any conventional significance level,
a conservative log-likelihood test indicates that the distribution is indeed a mixture.18
Recall that this specification uses two types of theoretical restrictions to improve
17

This is the empirical strategy implicitly adopted by Rao (1993); Edlund (2001) and Brown
(2003). In Rao’s case, α is set to 0, while Edlund and Brown both set α to 1.
18
The log-likelihood from the pooled regression is -1690, while the log-likelihood from the switching
regression is -1560. Twice the difference between log-likelihood for the pooled and mixture models
is 260. As discussed in the previous section, a comparison of log-likelihoods is feasible because the
pooled specification is nested in the likelihood function for the mixture. However, when the switching
model is constrained to yield the pooled model—that is, when the regime parameters are restricted
to be equal—several parameters are unidentified. Monte Carlo results indicate that a conservative
likelihood ratio test can be constructed by using the χ2 distribution and setting the degrees of
freedom equal to the number of unidentified parameters plus the number of constraints (Goldfeld
and Quandt, 1976). For this specification, we have 67 degrees of freedom; at 1% significance level
this yields a critical value of 96.83, well below our likelihood ratio statistic.

20

the sorting of households into regimes. An especially attractive feature of this framework is that the restrictions can be checked against each other: the reduced form
restrictions require the second regime to be the bequest regime, but the coefficients on
the non-membership predictions—the K variables in Column 2—are not constrained
to match. Thus, we have a validity check on the quality of sorting—if the coefficients
on the non-membership variables point to the “wrong” regime as the bequest regime,
we cannot trust that the procedure is correctly placing marriages, or more precisely
we cannot be assured that the regimes that have been identified correspond to a price
and a bequest regime.
We find that this is not the case. Examining the coefficients on the K variables in
the switching equation: “wife has no brothers over 15 at marriage”; “love marriage”;
“husband from same household”; and “wife’s parents died before marriage,” we find
that all are statistically significant and correspond with Column 4 being the bequest
regime. In the theoretical section, we found that if a bride has no brothers over
15 at the time of marriage, and yet a dowry is exchanged, the household is more
likely to be in the price regime. The coefficient on this variable in the switching
equation is positive (0.126), which points to the first regime (Column 3) as the price
regime. The same logic applies to the estimated coefficients on “husband from the
same household” (0.931) and “wife’s parents died before marriage” (0.176): both are
positive and significant. Likewise, we found that if the marriage is a love marriage,
and yet a dowry is exchanged, it is more likely to be in the bequest regime. The
coefficient on love marriage is negative (-1.121), which points to the second regime
(Column 4) as the bequest regime. The signs on the four variables in the switching
equation therefore identify the first regime as the price regime, and the second regime
as the bequest regime—independent of the reduced-form restriction. That is, the
coefficients all “agree” in the sense that each sign points to the second regime being
the bequest regime, and yet this is not by construction. This is heartening evidence
that the switching regression is correctly identifying regimes.
Second, examining the coefficients on the switching equation (Column 2), we see
that more recent marriages are more likely to be in the price regime (the coefficient
on year of marriage is positive and statistically different from zero). We can be even
more precise; controlling for other variables, each year corresponds to an additional
4.5% probability of being in the price regime. Again, this finding is in accordance with
the overwhelming anthropological and historical evidence of a shift in dowry motive

21

from bequest to price over the last few decades. We find that Hindu marriages are
more likely to be in the bequest regime, a finding that corresponds to the historical
evidence. Relative to being nonliterate, we find that women with some literacy or
some primary education are more likely to be in the price regime, but that more
educated women are more likely to be in the bequest regime. Polygynous marriages
are more likely to use dowry as price.
Third, the coefficients in the regime equations give two separate dowry functions.
The dependent variable in the regime equations is log real dowry. Controlling for
other variables, we see that dowries are rising by 4.5% a year in the price regime, but
are falling by 5.3% a year in the bequest regime. Controlling for other variables, the
older a woman is at the age of marriage, the lower the dowry amount in the price
regime. In contrast, a woman’s age at marriage does not affect the amount of her
dowry in the bequest regime. In the price regime, the coefficient on the number of
the wife’s brothers is positive and marginally significant; this accords with the notion
that households that use dowry as price see sons as an asset—a woman’s brothers
bring in dowries, which then can be used to pay higher dowries in her marriage. In the
bequest regime, in contrast, the number of a woman’s brothers significantly decreases
her bequest amount: as parents divide their bequest among their children, having
more brothers results in a smaller bequest. Finally, the coefficient on the eligible sex
ratio in Column 3 is positive and not significant. Since this variable is measured as
the fraction of eligible men to women, a negative coefficient would indicate evidence
of a marriage squeeze. Although we should be wary of over-interpreting the point
estimate due to lack of precision, this result corroborates Edlund (2000); Rao (2000);
Dalmia (2004) and Esteve-Volart (2004) in finding no evidence of a marriage squeeze
driving dowry amounts.
We now split the sample by the estimated probability of membership in the bequest regime to compare the characteristics of households in each regime. First, as
reported in Table 4, we find that 29% (355 of 1220) of positive-dowry marriages use
dowries as bequests.19 This is in accordance with the bulk of evidence discussed
above, which identifies considerable heterogeneity in dowry motive. Examining Table
4 further, we see that real dowries are substantially higher in the bequest regime (see
19

Here, we are following Hartley (1978) in assigning regime membership using the cutoff probability
of 0.5. That is, bequest regime households are those 355 of 1220 households that have a probability
of greater than 0.5 of being in the bequest regime.

22

also Figure 4). The mean year of marriage is 1975 in the bequest regime, and 1985
in the price regime—a more straightforward way of seeing this is in Figure 5. More
educated individuals (both the bride and groom and their parents) use dowries as
bequests. Bequest households also tend to be wealthier (as measured by value of total assets) and live in better-off circumstances (as measured by whether the village is
electrified and the number of rooms in the household). The general finding, therefore,
is that poorer, less-educated households are the ones using dowries as a price.
Finally, we can compare our results to claims in the historical literature. One advantage of using the predictions of the theoretical model, rather than claims grounded
in historical evidence (as in Esteve-Volart (2004) and Anderson (2004)) to sort marriages into regimes is precisely that we can now use historical literature as a validity
check on our results. Figure 5 demonstrates the first claim, that dowry as bequest is
on the decline. The second claim, that dowries as bequest are less likely to be cashonly, is supported by Figure 6, which clearly recovers the pattern in Figure 4. More
precisely, under 16% of bequest households used cash-only dowries, while over 30%
of price households used cash-only dowries; this difference is statistically significant
at the 1% level.
In sum, our results confirm that there is considerable heterogeneity of dowry motives. The multiple theoretical predictions all agree in assigning regime membership,
evidence that we are properly sorting households into regimes. Consistent with the
theory, the dowry functions of the two regimes differ in important ways, and the average characteristics of price and bequest households indicate that bequest households
are better off than price households. Finally, our findings confirm the claims in the
historical and anthropological literature: bequest dowries are declining in prevalence
over time, and bequest dowries are much less likely to be cash-only.

5.2

Robustness: Relaxing the Theoretical Restrictions

Our primary specification used two types of theoretical predictions to identify regimes.
Both types yielded restrictions, about characteristics that predict the non-membership
of a household in a given regime conditional on a positive dowry being given, or about
which variables influence the amount of a bequest dowry. Our robustness checks assess
the sensitivity of our results to these predictions, by using strictly less information
to identify regimes than that given by theory. We relax both restrictions in turn:

23

the first check relaxes the non-membership predictions, so that regimes are identifed
solely by their dowry functions, and second check relaxes the reduced form restrictions on the dowry function, so that regimes are identified solely by the information
in the switching equation.
5.2.1

Removing the Non-Membership Predictions

In removing the non-membership predictions from the switching equation, regimes
are identified using only the reduced form restrictions on the dowry functions. One
advantage of this specification is that it does not depend on assumptions about excludability of additional variables in the switching equation. A disadvantage is that
we have no independent verification of the validity of the sorting. Our system becomes:
Price regime:

DΠ = xβΠ + Π

Bequest regime:

DB = xβB + B

Switching equation:

λ∗ = zβλ + λ

Again, DΠ , DB , and λ∗ are latent. Only the dowry amount D is observed, given by:
(
D=

if λ∗ < 0
if λ∗ ≥ 0

DΠ
DB

Here, we have:
xΠ = {H, W, R} = x
xB = {W }
z = {H, W, R} = x
Table 5 reports the estimation results. Identification is given by the dowry
functions—as before, Column 4 is by construction the bequest regime, which contains only bride-side characteristics. Overall, the results agree with our primary
specification. The sign and magnitude of almost all estimated coefficients in the
regime equations are similar to those in our primary specification. Also, the regime
assignment closely approximates that in our primary specification: the correlation of
the estimated switch point between the two specifications is very high (.958). This

24

robustness check corroborates the existence of heterogeneity of dowry motives; even
without the additional information available to us from the theory, the switching regression places households into two separate dowry regimes. As such, our results are
not sensitive to the assumptions allowing the inclusion of additional variables in the
switching equation.
5.2.2

Relaxing the Reduced Form Restriction

As a second robustness check, we drop the reduced form restriction, so that both
dowry functions include the same variables, but maintain the non-membership predictions in the switching equation. Here, the only method of identifying the regimes
is by examining the sign of the variables K, which are excluded from the regime
equations. The purpose of this exercise is to examine the robustness of our results
to different theoretical assumptions; here, we are addressing the robustness of our
results to a breakdown of the assortative matching which allowed us to constrain the
bequest regime. Our three-equation system becomes:

Price regime:

DΠ = xβΠ + Π

Bequest regime:

DB = xβB + B

Switching equation:

λ∗ = zβλ + λ

Again, DΠ , DB , and λ∗ are latent. Only the dowry amount D is observed:
(
D=

if λ∗ < 0
if λ∗ ≥ 0

DΠ
DB

Here, we have:
xΠ = {H, W, R} = x
xB = {H, W, R} = x
z = {H, W, R, K}
Table 6 reports the estimation results. As before, the dependent variable in the
switching equation (Column 2) is the probability of being in the first regime (Column
3). However, since here we impose no reduced form constraints, we must identify

25

the regime from the coefficients on the non-membership K variables in the switching
equation. In this instance, following the logic we used in the main specification, the
coefficient estimates identify the first regime (Column 3) as the bequest regime.20
We see that the sorting remains similar: comparing the estimates to those of the
original specification, we see that all are of the same sign and are again statistically
significant. The sorting is not perfect, however, as seen in the non-zero coefficients on
the groom variables in the bequest regime. Otherwise, the estimated coefficients in
Table 6 all point to qualitatively similar results as those in the original specification.
Another measure of the quality of the fit is the correlation of the estimated switch
point between the primary specification and this one, which is again high (0.87).21
Thus, our results are robust to relaxing the reduced form restriction—we are able to
identify two separate dowry regimes even though they share the same dowry function.

6

Conclusions

Is dowry a bequest or a price? We tackle this question in a novel way, using the
predictions of competing economic theories to investigate the existence and nature
of heterogeneity in dowry motives. We find considerable evidence of heterogeneity—
in every specification, we reject the null hypothesis of a single dowry function. In
particular, we find that more than a quarter of marriages in the sample use dowries
as bequests. We also find that each regime yields a dowry function consistent with
the predictions of our model of a bifurcated marriage market. Interestingly, we find
little evidence that price dowries are driven by a “marriage squeeze,” a subject of recent debate among economists (Rao, 1993; Anderson, forthcoming; Maitra, 2006b,a),
suggesting instead that changes in bride and groom characteristics may be more important factors in driving up price dowries over time. Our findings are consistent
with broad patterns claimed by observers of the history of dowry in South Asia—in
particular, our predicted bequest dowries are much less likely to involve cash-only
transfers, which anthropologists have argued are rarely under the control of brides.
Underlying the empirical results in this paper is an ongoing debate between defenders of dowry as bequest against an increasingly large group of critics who see dowry
20

In Table 6 we label the regimes as “price” and “bequest” for convenience.
Also, in this robustness check and the previous one, the likelihood ratio test reveals that the
mixture model out-performs the pooled regression.
21

26

as a transaction between households in which brides do not directly benefit—and
who blame the dowry system for increasing the perceived cost of daughters and contributing to sex selective abortion, female infanticide and “dowry murders.” Rather
than enter this debate, we offer evidence indicating a broad shift in dowry motive
that derives directly from the bequest theory. As women’s access to inheritances
improves due to stronger property rights, we should expect a decline in the prevalence and size of bequest dowries. Corroborating the wealth of anthropological and
historical evidence, we find that this is indeed the case: dowry increasingly functions
as a price rather than a bequest, and while price dowries reflect “dowry inflation”,
bequest dowries have decreased in amount over time. At the same time, we find
that households that use dowry as bequest are better off as measured by a variety
of socioeconomic indicators, including education and assets. While we have not attempted to generate policy implications, our results, taken together, stand against
the principal claims of opponents to dowry bans.
Finally, our methodology can be applied to a broad range of economic problems
where heterogeneous motives are important. Empirical work typically involves pitching one model against another, whereas there are often reasons to think that conflicting theories hold for different groups in the population. Our strategy of using theory
to develop multiple predictions to simultaneously separate the sample and validate
the separation can be applied to a wide range of critical debates in economics.

References
Ahmed, R., and M. S. Naher (eds.) (1987): Brides and the Demand System in
Bangladesh. Centre for Social Studies, Dhaka University, Dhaka.
Amin, S., and M. Cain (1998): “The Rise of Dowry in Bangladesh,” in The Continuing
Demographic Transition, ed. by G. W. Jones, R. M. Douglas, J. C. Caldwell, and R. M.
D’Souza. Oxford University Press.
Anderson, S. (2003): “Why Dowry Payments Declined with Modernization in Europe but
Are Rising in India,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(1), 269–310.
(2004): “Dowry and Property Rights,” BREAD Working Paper No. 080.
(forthcoming): “Why the Marriage Squeeze Cannot Cause Dowry Inflation,” Journal of Economic Theory.
Baland, J.-M., and J. A. Robinson (2000): “Is Child Labor Inefficient?,” Journal of
Political Economy, 108(4), 663–679.

27

Banerjee, K. (1999): “Gender Stratification and the Contemporary Marriage Market in
India,” Journal of Family Issues, 20(5), 648–676.
Basu, S. (ed.) (2005): Dowry and Inheritance. Zed Books, London.
Becker, G. S. (1981): A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Behrman, J. R., A. D. Foster, M. R. Rosenzweig, and P. Vashishtha (1999):
“Women’s Schooling, Home Teaching, and Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(4), 682–714.
Bloch, F., and V. Rao (2002): “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case Study of
Dowry Violence in Rural India,” American Economic Review, 92(4), 1029–1043.
Bloch, F., V. Rao, and S. Desai (2004): “Wedding Celebrations as Conspicuous Consumption: Signaling Social Status in Rural India,” Journal of Human Resources, 39(3),
675–695.
Botticini, M. (1999): “A Loveless Economy? Intergenerational Altruism and the Marriage
Market in a Tuscan Town, 1415-1436,” Journal of Economic History, 59(1), 104–121.
Botticini, M., and A. Siow (2003): “Why Dowries?,” American Economic Review,
93(4), 1385–1398.
Brown, P. H. (2003): “Dowry and Intrahousehold Bargaining: Evidence from China,”
William Davidson Institute Working Paper 608.
Caplan, L. (1984): “Bridegroom Price in Urban India: Class, Caste and ‘Dowry Evil’
Among Christians in Madras,” in Family, Kinship and Marriage in India, ed. by
P. Uberoi, pp. 357–382. Oxford University Press 1993, Delhi.
Dalmia, S. (2004): “A Hedonic Analysis of Marriage Transactions in India: Estimating
Determinants of Dowries and Demand for Groom Characteristics in Marriage,” Research
in Economics, 58, 235–255.
Dasgupta, I., and D. Mukherjee (2003): “Arranged Marriage, Dowry and Female
Literacy in a Transitional Society,” CREDIT Research Paper 03/12, University of Nottingham.
Dempster, A., N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin (1977): “Maximum Likelihood from
Incomplete Data via the EM Algorithm,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, B(39),
1–38.
Dickens, W. T., and K. Lang (1985): “A Test of Dual Labor Market Theory,” American
Economic Review, 75(4), 792–805.
Edlund, L. (2000): “The Marriage Squeeze Interpretation of Dowry Inflation: Comment,”
Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 1327–1333.

28

(2001): “Dear Son—Expensive Daughter: Do Scarce Women Pay to Marry?,”
Working Paper, Columbia University.
Edlund, L., and N.-P. Lagerlöf (2004): “Implications of Marriage Institutions for
Redistribution and Growth,” Working Paper, Columbia University.
Esteve-Volart, B. (2004): “Dowry in Rural Bangladesh: Participation as Insurance
against Divorce,” Working Paper, London School of Economics.
Goldfeld, S. M., and R. E. Quandt (1976): “Techniques for Estimating Switching
Regressions,” in Studies in Non-Linear Estimation, ed. by S. M. Goldfeld, and R. E.
Quandt, pp. 3–35. Ballinger, Cambridge.
Goode, W. J. (1963): World Revolution and Family Patterns. Free Press, New York.
Goody, J. (1998): “Dowry and the Rights of Women to Property,” in Property Relations:
Renewing the Anthropological Tradition, ed. by C. M. Hann, pp. 201–213. Cambridge
University Press.
Grossbard-Shechtman, S. (1993): On the Economics of Marriage: A Theory of Marriage, Labor, and Divorce. Westview, Boulder, CO.
Hartley, M. J. (1978): “Estimating Mixture of Normal Distributions and Switching
Regressions: Comment,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 73(364), 738–
741.
Kabeer, N. (2001): “Ideas, Economics and the Sociology of Supply: Explanations for
Fertility Decline in Bangladesh,” Journal of Development Studies, 38(1), 29–70.
Kaplan, M. A. (ed.) (1985): The Marriage Bargain: Women and Dowries in European
History. Institute for Research in History: Haworth Press, New York.
Khan, A. R., and M. Hossain (1989): The Strategy of Development in Bangladesh.
Macmillan and OECD Development Centre.
Kishwar, M. (1989): “Dowry and Inheritance Rights,” Economic and Political Weekly,
pp. 587–588.
Kopczuk, W., and J. P. Lupton (forthcoming): “To Leave or Not to Leave: The
Distribution of Bequest Motives,” Review of Economic Studies.
Lam, D. (1988): “Marriage Markets and Assortative Mating with Household Public Goods:
Theoretical Results and Empirical Implications,” Journal of Human Resources, 23(4),
462–487.
Lee, L.-F., and R. H. Porter (1984): “Switching Regression Models with Imperfect
Sample Separation Information—With an Application on Cartel Stability,” Econometrica, 52(2), 391–418.

29

Lindenbaum, S. (1981): “Implications for Women of Changing Marriage Transactions in
Bangladesh,” Studies in Family Planning, 12(11), 394–401.
Maddala, G. S. (1983): Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Cambridge University Press.
Maitra, S. (2006a): “Can Population Growth Cause Dowry Inflation: Theory and the
Indian Evidence,” Working Paper, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
(2006b): “Population Growth and Rising Dowries: The Mechanism of a Marriage
Squeeze,” Working Paper, Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Majumdar, R. (2004): “Snehalata’s death: Dowry and women’s agency in colonial Bengal,” Indian Economic and Social History Review, 41(4), 433–464.
Menski, W. (ed.) (1998): South Asians and the Dowry Problem. Trentham, London.
Morduch, J. J., and H. S. Stern (1997): “Using Mixture Models to Detect Sex Bias in
Health Outcomes in Bangladesh,” Journal of Econometrics, 77, 259–276.
Mukherjee, D. (2003): “Human Capital, Marriage, and Regression,” Discussion Paper
2003-15, Economic Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata.
Mukherjee, D., and S. S. Mondal (2006): “Dowry Revisited: A Human Capital Approach,” in Gender Disparity: Manifestations, Causes and Implications, ed. by
P. Bharati, and M. Pal, pp. 278–297. Anmol Publications, New Delhi.
Nazzari, M. (1991): Disappearance of the Dowry: Women, Families, and Social Change
in São Paulo, Brazil (1600-1900). Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
Oldenburg, V. T. (2002): Dowry Murder: The Imperial Origins of a Cultural Crime.
Oxford University Press.
Peters, M., and A. Siow (2002): “Competing Premarital Investments,” Journal of
Political Economy, 110(3), 592–608.
Quandt, R. E. (1958): “The Estimation of the Parameters of a Linear Regression System Obeying Two Separate Regimes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
53(284), 873–880.
Rao, V. (1993): “The Rising Price of Husbands: A Hedonic Analysis of Dowry Increases
in Rural India,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(4), 666–677.
(2000): “The Marriage Squeeze Interpretation of Dowry Inflation: Response,”
Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 1334–1335.
(forthcoming): “The Economics of Dowries in India,” in Oxford Companion to
Economics in India, ed. by K. Basu. Oxford University Press.

30

Sen, B. (1998): “Why does dowry still persist in India? An economic analysis using
human capital,” in South Asians and the Dowry Problem, ed. by W. Menski, pp. 75–95.
Trentham, London.
Setalvad, A. M. (1988): “Paper Laws,” in 10 Daniel Thorner Memorial Lectures: Land,
Labour & Rights, ed. by A. Thorner, pp. 58–69. Tulika Books 2001, New Delhi.
Sharma, U. (1984): “Dowry in North India: Its Consequences for Women,” in Family,
Kinship and Marriage in India, ed. by P. Uberoi, pp. 341–356. Oxford University Press
1993, Delhi.
Smith, H. L., S. J. Ghuman, H. J. Lee, and K. O. Mason (2000): “Status of Women
and Fertility,” Machine-readable data file.
Srinivas, M. N. (1984): Some Reflections on Dowry. Centre for Women’s Development
Studies, Delhi.
Suen, W., W. Chan, and J. Zhang (2003): “Marital transfer and intra-household allocation: a Nash-bargaining analysis,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
52, 133–146.
Suran, L., S. Amin, L. Huq, and K. Chowdury (2004): “Does Dowry Improve Life for
Brides? A Test of the Bequest Theory of Dowry in Rural Bangladesh,” Policy Research
Division Working Paper 195, Population Council.
Tambiah, S. J. (1973): “Dowry and Bridewealth and the Property Rights of Women in
South Asia,” in Bridewealth and Dowry, ed. by J. Goody, and S. J. Tambiah, pp. 59–169.
Cambridge at the University Press.
Tertilt, M. (2005): “Polygyny, Fertility, and Savings,” Journal of Political Economy,
113(6), 1341–1371.
Vakis, R., E. Sadoulet, A. de Janvry, and C. Cafiero (2004): “Testing for separability in household models with heterogeneous behavior: A mixture model approach,”
University of California, Berkeley, CUDARE Working Paper 990.
Zhang, J., and W. Chan (1999): “Dowry and Wife’s Welfare: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 107(4), 786–808.

31

wd

ws

Bride’s
Wealth

Groom’s
Wealth

Figure 1: Matching in the Price Regime
(Note: The thick line indicates the potential mates for the bride given her wealth)

h(wd + τ)

wd + τ

wd

h(wd)

Bride’s
Wealth

Groom’s
Wealth

Figure 2: Matching in the Bequest Regime
(Note: The thick line indicates the potential mates for the bride given her wealth and
parental transfer τ)
32

.5
.4
.3

Density
.2
.1
0

0

10
5
Log real dowry (rice kg), log 0 set to 0

Figure 3: Kernel Density of Log Real Dowry

33

15

Log real dowry (rice kg, only >0 dowries)
4
6
8
10
12
2

40

20

60
Year of marriage (19−−)

Bequest

100

80

Price

0

Fraction of dowries that are bequest
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure 4: Log Real Dowry by Regime

0

20

60
40
Year of Marriage (19−−)

80

Figure 5: Bequest Dowries on the Decline

34

100

Log real dowry (rice kg, only >0 dowries)
4
6
8
10
12
2

20

40

60
Year of marriage (19−−)

Not Cash−Only

80

Cash−Only

Figure 6: Cash-only vs. Non-cash-only Dowries

35

100

Table 1: Some Recent Empirical Findings
For Price
Against Price
For Bequest
Rao (1993),
Edlund (2000): India
Edlund (2001): India
Dalmia (2004): India
Anderson (2004):
Anderson (2004):
Urban Pakistan
Rural Pakistan
Brown (2003): Rural
China
Zhang and Chan (1999):
Taiwan
Esteve-Volart (2004):
Esteve-Volart (2004):
Rural Bangladesh
Rural Bangladesh
Botticini (1999):
Botticini (1999):
Tuscany 1415-1436
Tuscany 1415-1436

36

Against Bequest

Suran et al. (2004):
Rural Bangladesh

Table 2: Summary statistics
Variable
Year of marriage (19–)
Wife’s age
Wife’s age at marriage
Husband’s age
Husband’s age at marriage
Wife’s BMI
Wife is underweight
Wife is normal weight
Wife is overweight/obese
Husband’s BMI
Husband is underweight
Husband is normal weight
Husband is overweight/obese
Wife’s school (years)
Wife did not attend school
Wife attended some primary school
Wife attended some low secondary school
Wife attended some high secondary school
Husband’s school (years)
Husband did not attend school
Husband attended some primary school
Husband attended some low secondary school
Husband some high secondary school
Hindu
Love marriage
Wife’s number of brothers of majority at marriage
Wife had no brothers of majority at marriage
Husband’s father was richer than wife’s father
Wife’s mother’s school (years)
Wife’s father’s school (years)
Husband’s mother’s school (years)
Husband’s father’s school (years)
Wife’s parents own land
Wife’s parents’ land value (1996 takas)
Husband’s parents own land
Husband’s parents’ land value (1996 takas)
Wife was previously married
Wife’s parents died before her marriage
Dowry given at marriage
Nominal dowry (takas)
Real dowry (rice kg)
Real dowry (rice kg, only > 0 dowries)
Log real dowry (rice kg, only > 0 dowries)

37

Mean
69
42.3
15.3
47.87
24.91
18.71
0.51
0.46
0.02
18.61
0.52
0.46
0.01
1.68
0.62
0.29
0.07
0.02
3.22
0.64
0.2
0.09
0.07
0.1
0.01
1.05
0.43
0.38
0.61
2.2
0.13
0.88
0.25
58607.66
0.37
81824.98
0.14
0.03
0.3
2451.73
581.27
1939.28
6.62

Std. Dev.
16.36
14.73
3.99
14.23
6.47
2.85
0.5
0.5
0.15
2.44
0.5
0.5
0.1
2.71
0.49
0.45
0.25
0.16
3.82
0.48
0.4
0.28
0.26
0.3
0.11
1.26
0.5
0.49
1.71
3.48
0.77
2.26
0.43
152758.26
0.48
166599.15
0.34
0.18
0.46
6331.31
4285.52
7659.17
1.12

N
5703
5703
5703
4181
3758
5023
5023
5023
5703
3502
3502
3502
5703
5616
5703
5703
5703
5703
3760
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5689
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5703
5701
5685
5685
1704
1704

Table 3: Pooled and Switching Regression Results
Year of marriage (19–)
Wife’s age at marriage

Pooled
(1)
-.022

(.004)∗∗∗

-.017
(.011)

Wife’s BMI

.008
(.011)

Hindu
Wife is literate but did not attend school

.767

(.081)∗∗∗

-.356
(.259)

Wife attended some primary school

.093
(.066)

Wife attended some low secondary school
Wife attended some high secondary school
Wife’s parents’ land value (1996 takas, ’000s)
Wife’s mother’s school (years)

.289

(.113)∗∗

.490

(.247)∗∗

.001

(.000)∗∗

.021
(.018)

Wife’s father’s school (years)

.004
(.010)

Wife was previously married
Wife’s number of brothers of majority at marriage

.192

(.095)∗∗

.008
(.021)

Husband’s age at marriage
Husband’s BMI

-.011

(.005)∗∗

.022
(.014)

Husband is literate but did not attend school
Husband attended some primary school
Husband attended some low secondary school
Husband some high secondary school
Husband’s parents’ land value (1996 takas, ’000s)

.735

(.289)∗∗

.227

(.069)∗∗∗

.275

(.093)∗∗∗

.699

(.118)∗∗∗

.000
(.000)

Husband’s mother’s school (years)

.025
(.033)

Husband’s father’s school (years)
Husband is polygynous
Eligible sex ratio (males/females)
Village is electrified

.089

(.004)∗∗∗

.033

(.004)∗∗∗

-.199

(.028)∗∗∗

-1.072

(.090)∗∗∗

.473

(.023)∗∗∗

.122

(.040)∗∗∗

-3.074

(.086)∗∗∗

.000
(.000)

-.071

(.006)∗∗∗

.032

(.003)∗∗∗

-.067

(.033)∗∗

-.040

(.010)∗∗∗

-.013

(.002)∗∗∗

-.040

(.005)∗∗∗

-.963

(.100)∗∗∗

-.466

(.024)∗∗∗

-.575

(.032)∗∗∗

-1.568

(.041)∗∗∗

.000

(.000)∗∗∗

-.374

(.011)∗∗∗

(.005)∗∗∗

-.034

(.011)∗∗∗

.450

(.075)∗∗∗

-.040
(.239)

.106

(.057)∗

.145
(.092)

1.204

(.185)∗∗∗

.000

(.000)∗∗

.711

(.222)∗∗∗

.108

(.059)∗

-1.460

(.077)∗∗∗

-.458

(.021)∗∗∗

1.076

(.093)∗∗∗

-.984

(.203)∗∗∗

.129

(.076)∗

.353

(.161)∗∗

.701

(.188)∗∗∗

.001

(.000)∗∗∗

-.003
(.021)

-.013
(.008)

.110
(.078)

.035

(.018)∗

.035

(.013)∗∗∗

.544

(.129)∗∗∗

-.080

(.025)∗∗∗

-.016

(.004)∗∗∗

.012
(.013)

.900

(.201)∗∗∗

.126

(.057)∗∗

.272

(.092)∗∗∗

1.008

(.130)∗∗∗

.000
(.000)

-.207

(.078)∗∗∗

-.010

1.432

.006
(.014)

-.002

(.011)

(.067)∗∗∗

-.029

(.014)∗∗

(.022)

-.003

-.538

(.005)∗∗∗

.022

(.004)

(.194)∗∗∗

Bequest
(4)
-.053

(.009)∗∗

-.014

-.263
(.192)

.019
(.272)

-.004
(.054)

-1.121

(.087)∗∗∗

.931

Husband from same household

(.041)∗∗∗

.176

Wife’s parents died before her marriage

(.080)∗∗

Wife had no brothers of majority at marriage

Obs.
Log-likelihood (Pooled)
Log-likelihood (Mixture)
R2
F statistic

(.001)∗∗∗

Price
(3)
.045

(.012)

Love marriage

Constant

Switching
(2)
.045

.126

(.028)∗∗∗

6.921

-2.671

2.036

10.824

(.427)∗∗∗

(.150)∗∗∗

(.470)∗∗∗

(.446)∗∗∗

1220
-1690.289

1220

1220

1220

-1559.652
.227
14.049

509.848

20.256

38.363

Note: Dependent variable in columns (1), (3), and (4) is log real dowry in rice kg (sample
mean is 6.165). Dependent variable in column (2) is the probability of being in column (3).
Statistical significance: ∗ 10% ; ∗∗ 5% ; ∗∗∗ 1%.

38

Table 4: Household Characteristics by Predicted Regime
Variable
Mean Price
Real dowry (rice kg, only > 0 dowries)
552.68
Cash-only dowry
0.30
Year of marriage (19–)
84.79
Wife’s age at marriage
17.27
Wife’s BMI
18.94
Hindu
0.14
Wife’s school (years)
1.90
Wife’s parents’ land value (1996 takas)
53122.9
Wife’s mother’s school (years)
0.55
Wife’s father’s school (years)
2.13
Wife was previously married
0.11
Wife’s number of brothers of majority at marriage
1.25
Husband’s age at marriage
24.62
Husband’s BMI
18.66
Husband’s school (years)
2.16
Husband’s parents’ land value (1996 takas)
86049.96
Husband’s mother’s school (years)
0.02
Husband’s father’s school (years)
1.13
Husband is polygynous
0.03
Village is electrified
0.30
Rooms
2.75
Love marriage
0.01
Husband from same household
0.07
Wife’s parents died before her marriage
0.01
Value of all wife’s assets (1996 takas)
40287.32
Value of wife’s land assets (1996 takas)
24179.53
Value of all husband’s assets (1996 takas)
80773.38
Value of husband’s land assets (1996 takas)
65789.37
Obs. in Predicted Regimes
Note: Statistical significance:

∗

865
10% ;

∗∗

5% ;

∗∗∗

1%.

39

Mean Bequest
2238.93∗∗∗
0.17∗∗∗
74.73∗∗∗
14.65∗∗∗
19.06
0.23∗∗∗
2.46∗∗∗
66310.52
1.12∗∗∗
3.25∗∗∗
0.11
1.37
25.02
18.98∗∗
5.64∗∗∗
135329.45∗∗∗
0.59∗∗∗
1.85∗∗∗
0.01∗∗∗
0.50∗∗∗
3.12∗∗∗
0.03∗
0.03∗∗∗
0.02
20290.13
11453.41
220820.64∗∗
134998.54∗∗∗
355

Table 5: Robustness Check 1: Removing the Non-Membership Predictions
Pooled
(1)
-.022

Year of marriage (19–)

(.004)∗∗∗

Wife’s age at marriage

-.017
(.011)

Wife’s BMI

.008
(.011)

Hindu

.767

(.081)∗∗∗

Wife is literate but did not attend school

-.356
(.259)

Wife attended some primary school

.093
(.066)

Wife attended some low secondary school

.289

(.113)∗∗

Wife attended some high secondary school

.490

(.247)∗∗

Wife’s parents’ land value (1996 takas, ’000s)
Wife’s mother’s school (years)

.0005

(.0002)∗∗

.021
(.018)

Wife’s father’s school (years)

.004
(.010)

Wife was previously married

.192

(.095)∗∗

Wife’s number of brothers of majority at marriage
Husband’s age at marriage

.735

(.289)∗∗

.227

(.069)∗∗∗

Husband some high secondary school

.275

(.093)∗∗∗

.699

(.118)∗∗∗

Husband’s parents’ land value (1996 takas, ’000s)

-.0002
(.0002)

Husband’s mother’s school (years)

.025
(.033)

Husband’s father’s school (years)

-.014
(.012)

Husband is polygynous

-.538

(.194)∗∗∗

Eligible sex ratio (males/females)

.711

(.222)∗∗∗

Village is electrified

-.244

(.029)∗∗∗

-.885

(.091)∗∗∗

.246

(.023)∗∗∗

-.096

(.040)∗∗

-3.756

(.087)∗∗∗

-.0001

(.00007)∗∗

-.042

(.006)∗∗∗

.047

(.003)∗∗∗

-.077

(.033)∗∗

.012

.022

Husband attended some low secondary school

.024

(.004)∗∗∗

(.007)

(.014)

Husband attended some primary school

.099

(.004)∗∗∗

.008
-.011

Husband is literate but did not attend school

(.001)∗∗∗

(.021)
(.005)∗∗

Husband’s BMI

Switching
(2)
.037

.108

(.059)∗

-.013

(.002)∗∗∗

-.038

(.005)∗∗∗

-.643

(.102)∗∗∗

-.471

(.024)∗∗∗

-.628

(.033)∗∗∗

-1.400

(.041)∗∗∗

.0006

(.00006)∗∗∗

-.364

(.012)∗∗∗

-.011

(.004)∗∗∗

1.222

(.068)∗∗∗

-1.258

(.078)∗∗∗

-.290

(.021)∗∗∗

Price
(3)
.044

(.005)∗∗∗

-.035

(.011)∗∗∗

.019

(.009)∗∗

.442

(.075)∗∗∗

-.239
(.232)

Bequest
(4)
-.059

(.005)∗∗∗

-.020
(.014)

.009
(.014)

.991

(.088)∗∗∗

-.985

(.216)∗∗∗

.091

.059

(.057)

(.076)

.147
(.093)

1.045

(.252)∗∗∗

.0005

(.0002)∗∗∗

.296

(.154)∗

.644

(.192)∗∗∗

.0007

(.0002)∗∗∗

-.002

.001

(.022)

(.020)

-.011
(.008)

.118
(.078)

.039

(.018)∗∗

.042

(.013)∗∗∗

.533

(.130)∗∗∗

-.038
(.023)

-.015

(.004)∗∗∗

.010
(.013)

.871

(.209)∗∗∗

.148

(.055)∗∗∗

.255

(.092)∗∗∗

.971

(.128)∗∗∗

.00006
(.0002)

-.201

(.077)∗∗∗

-.012
(.011)

-.293
(.193)

.007
(.271)

.013
(.054)

Love marriage
Husband from same household
Wife’s parents died before her marriage
Wife had no brothers of majority at marriage
Constant

6.921

(.427)∗∗∗

-2.153

(.150)∗∗∗

2.257

(.476)∗∗∗

11.088

(.435)∗∗∗

Obs.
1220
1220
1220
1220
Log-likelihood (Pooled)
-1690.289
Log-likelihood (Mixture)
-1563.822
R2
.227
F statistic
14.049
483.223
12.924
38.743
Note: Dependent variable in columns (1), (3), and (4) is log real dowry in rice kg (sample
mean is 6.165). Dependent variable in column (2) is the probability of being in column (3).
Statistical significance:

∗

10% ;

∗∗

5% ;

∗∗∗

1%.

40

Table 6: Robustness Check 2: Relaxing the Reduced Form Restrictions

Year of marriage (19–)
Wife’s age at marriage

Pooled
(1)
-.022

(.004)∗∗∗

-.017
(.011)

Wife’s BMI

.008
(.011)

Hindu
Wife is literate but did not attend school
Wife attended some primary school

.767

(.081)∗∗∗

Wife attended some high secondary school
Wife’s parents’ land value (1996 takas, ’000s)
Wife’s mother’s school (years)

Wife’s number of brothers of majority at marriage

Husband’s BMI

.093
.289

(.113)∗∗

.490

(.247)∗∗

.0005

(.0002)∗∗

.021
.004
.192

(.095)∗∗

.008
-.011

(.005)∗∗

.022
(.014)

Husband is literate but did not attend school
Husband attended some primary school
Husband attended some low secondary school
Husband some high secondary school
Husband’s parents’ land value (1996 takas, ’000s)
Husband’s mother’s school (years)

.735

(.289)∗∗

.227

(.069)∗∗∗

.275

(.093)∗∗∗

.699

(.118)∗∗∗

Eligible sex ratio (males/females)
Village is electrified

.0001

(.00007)∗∗

.043

(.006)∗∗∗

-.017

(.003)∗∗∗

-.126

(.033)∗∗∗

-.469

(.010)∗∗∗

.023

(.002)∗∗∗

.021

(.005)∗∗∗

.819

(.099)∗∗∗

.318

(.024)∗∗∗

.508

(.032)∗∗∗

1.121

(.041)∗∗∗

-.004
(.014)

.891

(.087)∗∗∗

-.044

(.011)∗∗∗

.024

(.009)∗∗∗

.512

(.078)∗∗∗

-1.114

.017

(.186)∗∗∗

(.266)

-.055

.091

(.079)

(.057)

.497

.072

(.129)∗∗∗

.621

(.182)∗∗∗

.0007

(.0002)∗∗∗

(.102)

-2.299

(.232)∗∗∗

.0004

(.0002)∗∗

-.014

.020

(.019)

(.020)

.039

-.014

(.014)∗∗∗

(.009)

.721

.124

(.144)∗∗∗

.045
(.029)

-.027

(.005)∗∗∗

(.079)

.037

(.019)∗

-.009

(.005)∗

.049

.015

(.015)∗∗∗

.346
(.254)

.167

(.088)∗

.243

(.115)∗∗

.414

(.118)∗∗∗

(.013)

.789

(.199)∗∗∗

.153

(.054)∗∗∗

.260

(.093)∗∗∗

.718

(.159)∗∗∗

-.00007

-.0002

.00008

(.0002)

(.0002)

.025
-.014
-.538

(.194)∗∗∗

.711

(.222)∗∗∗

.108

(.059)∗

.332

(.011)∗∗∗

.054

(.004)∗∗∗

-1.454

(.067)∗∗∗

1.795

(.077)∗∗∗

.229

(.021)∗∗∗

-.025

.009

(.029)

(.048)

-.044

-.002

(.011)∗∗∗

.419
(.328)

(.012)

-.332

(.193)∗

.069

-.207

(.235)

(.288)

.089

.011

(.069)

(.054)

1.598

(.087)∗∗∗

-.700

Husband from same household

(.041)∗∗∗

-.201

Wife’s parents died before her marriage

(.079)∗∗

Wife had no brothers of majority at marriage

Obs.
Log-likelihood (Pooled)
Log-likelihood (Mixture)
R2
F statistic

2.152

(.086)∗∗∗

.007
(.015)

(.005)∗∗∗

(.00006)

Love marriage

Constant

-.243

(.039)∗∗∗

(.006)∗∗∗

Price
(4)
-.070

-.0002

(.012)

Husband is polygynous

-.212

(.023)∗∗∗

Bequest
(3)
.046

(.0002)
(.033)

Husband’s father’s school (years)

.335

(.028)∗∗∗

.003

(.021)

Husband’s age at marriage

-.019

(.004)∗∗∗

(.089)

(.010)

Wife was previously married

-.116

(.004)∗∗∗

-.356

(.018)

Wife’s father’s school (years)

(.001)∗∗∗

(.259)
(.066)

Wife attended some low secondary school

Switching
(2)
-.034

-.751

(.028)∗∗∗

6.921

2.527

11.268

2.023

(.427)∗∗∗

(.149)∗∗∗

(.513)∗∗∗

(.491)∗∗∗

1220
-1690.289

1220

1220

1220

-1547.500
.227
14.049

485.459

28.345

Note: Dependent variable in columns (1), (3), and (4) is log real dowry in rice kg (sample
mean is 6.165). Dependent variable in column (2) is the probability of being in column (3).
Statistical significance: ∗ 10% ; ∗∗ 5% ; ∗∗∗ 1%.
41

18.403

Data Appendix
A.1

Matlab Data

The complete dataset is described in Rahman, Menken, Foster, and Gertler (1999).
There are 5312 women for whom year of marriage is reported or can be reconstructed
from age and age at marriage. In addition, we have 391 previous marriages reported,
giving a total of 5703 marriages. Of these, 1731 women report a positive dowry at
the time of marriage. In 562 marriages, the husband confirmed that a dowry was
given, and in 112 marriages, a husband reported a dowry even when the wife did
not.1 This gives a total of 1843 marriages in which dowry was reported. Of these, in
1704 marriages the wife reports the dowry amount (including the value of goods at the
time of marriage). In addition, we have 663 marriages in which the husband reports
the dowry amount but the wife does not. In 556 marriages we have two reports of
dowry; for the results reported, we take the average of the reports.2 All results are
qualitatively similar when we exclude husbands’ dowry reports. Due to other missing
covariates for some marriages, the estimation sample uses 1220 marriages.
Some additional notes on variable construction:
• We use height and weight to calculate Body Mass Index (BMI) and categorize
individuals as underweight, normal weight, or overweight/obese using World
Health Organization guidelines. The vast majority of the sample (97% of women
and 98% of men) have a BMI that is classified as normal or underweight.
• Level of school attainment (primary, low secondary, or high secondary) are assigned from the years of schooling, in accordance with Rahman, DaVanzo, and
1

In many instances husbands were not interviewed in the survey.
Reported dowry amounts between husband and wife are reasonably correlated; the Pearson
correlation coefficient is 0.62.
2

42

Razzaque (2003). The omitted category in the regression results is “wife/husband
did not attend school.”

A.2

Rice Prices

No single source contains rice prices for the entire period, so we constructed a series using the Statistical Abstracts for British India 3 for the period 1910-1946; the
Pakistan Central Statistical Office’s Statistical Yearbook 1955 for 1949; the Pakistan
Central Statistical Office’s 20 Years of Pakistan in Statistics for 1950-1967; and the
Statistical Yearbooks of Bangladesh for 1965-1996.4 Duplicate observations for the
years 1964 to 1967 were used to convert between takas and rupees, and overlapping
medium and common rice prices for the years 1950 to 1967 are used to convert between
rice qualities. We used a linear interpolation to cover the missing years (1947-1948).
Real dowries are expressed in (medium quality) rice kilograms.

A.3

Sex Ratio

Constructing a sex ratio time series has proven treacherous in previous dowry work
(Edlund, 2000; Rao, 2000). We adopt a simple approach that takes account of the
mortality trajectory in the years between Census records. We calculate the sex ratio
from the Census Records of India (1931, 1941), Pakistan (1951, 1961), and Bangladesh
(1974, 1984). Where possible, we use the lowest level of geographic detail to correspond with the district in the Matlab study, although this was not possible for early
years of the Census records, particularly the Indian Census records. Taking the count
of males and females in the Census year, we construct the adjusted sex ratio as de3

Volumes compiled before partition but published afterward are simply called Statistical Abstract,
India.
4
Details of the sources as well as unit conversions are given in Table A.

43

scribed by Rao (1993), where the adjusted sex ratio gives the number of males aged
20-29 divided by the number of females aged 10-19. We calculate the relevant ratio
for each age group, from ages 10 to age 90, using the same ten year differential.
For the years between the Census years, the cohorts’ age and mortality, particularly child mortality in the earlier years of our records, is pronounced, so the relevant
sex ratio for each age must be adjusted for mortality each year. We use the actual
number of males and females in the Census year, and then use the period lifetable
constructed with the Census records to derive an estimate of survivorship to the next
age (n qx ). Since these values will differ for both men and women, the sex ratio will
change for the years between Censuses. For example, males aged 20-29 in 1961 will be
aged 25-34 in 1966, and the best available estimate for the fraction of men surviving
to that age would be the period survival rate for men aged 25-34 in 1961. For the
final Census we use, we create a quasi-synthetic cohort and assume that the course
of mortality over the subsequent years will be the same as for the later cohorts whose
mortality trajectory is recorded in the Census.

Appendix References
Edlund, L. (2000): “The Marriage Squeeze Interpretation of Dowry Inflation: Comment,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 1327–1333.
Rahman, M., J. DaVanzo, and A. Razzaque (2003): “When Will Bangladesh
Reach Replacement-level Fertility? The Role of Education and Family Planning
Services,” Working Paper.
Rahman, O., J. Menken, A. Foster, and P. Gertler (1999): “The Matlab
Health and Socioeconomic Survey: Overview and User’s Guide,” DRU-2018/1,
RAND, Santa Monica, CA.
Rao, V. (1993): “The Rising Price of Husbands: A Hedonic Analysis of Dowry
Increases in Rural India,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(4), 666–677.
(2000): “The Marriage Squeeze Interpretation of Dowry Inflation: Response,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 1334–1335.

44

Table A: Rice Price Sources
Years covered

Source

Details

1910-1929

Statistical Abstract for British India 1931

No. 300, pg. 671 [Variations in Average Annual
Retail Prices Current of Food Grains in British
India]. Common rice in Dacca, rupees per maund
(base year: 1873= 100 rupees).

1912-1932

Statistical Abstract for British India 1934

No. 301, pgs. 764-765 [Average Annual Retail
Prices Current of Food Grains in British India].
Common rice in Dacca, rupees per maund.

1930-1939

Statistical Abstract for British India 1941

No. 164, pg. 445 [Average Annual Retail Prices
Current of Food Grains in British India].
Common rice in Dacca, rupees per maund.

1942-1946

Statistical Abstract, India 1949

No. 165, pg. 1238 [Average Annual Retail Prices
Current of Food Grains in British India].
Common rice in Dacca, rupees per maund.

1949

Statistical Yearbook 1955,
Pakistan Central Statistical Office

No. 67, pg. 105 [Average (Annual) Retail Prices
of Important Articles Consumed by the Industrial
Workers at Dacca]. Medium rice, rupees per seer.

1950-1967

20 Years of Pakistan in Statistics,
Pakistan Central Statistical Office

Table 11.7 [Average Retail Prices of Basic
Articles of Consumption in East Pakistan].
Common and medium rice in Dacca, rupees per
seer.

1965-1967

Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh 1975

Table 8.1 [Annual Average Retail Price of
Selected Consumer Goods in Dacca, pg. 195].
Medium rice, takas per maund.

1968-1978

Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh 1979

Table 10.6 [Annual Average Retail Price of
Selected Consumer Goods in Dhaka, pg. 374].
Medium rice, takas per maund.

1978-1988

Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh 1989

Table 10.16 [Annual Average Retail Price of
Selected Consumer Goods in Dhaka, pg. 448].
Medium rice, takas per seer.

1987-1996

Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh 1997

Table 10.16 [Annual Average Retail Price of
Selected Consumer Goods in Dhaka, pg. 477].
Medium rice, takas per kilogram.

Unit conversions (2000 Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh, pgs. 645-650):
1 kilogram = 1.071 seer = .0267 maund.

45

