                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  REVEALING THE SECRETS OF THE TEMPLE:
    THE VALUE OF PUBLISHING CENTRAL BANK INTEREST RATE PROJECTIONS

                                        Glenn D. Rudebusch
                                         John C. Williams

                                        Working Paper 12638
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12638


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




For helpful comments, we thank Lars Svensson, Marvin Goodfriend, Oistein Roisland, and colleagues
throughout the Federal Reserve System. Vuong Nguyen provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed in this paper are our own and not necessarily those of others at the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Glenn D. Rudebusch and John C. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Revealing the Secrets of the Temple: The Value of Publishing Central Bank Interest Rate
Projections
Glenn D. Rudebusch and John C. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 12638
October 2006
JEL No. E43,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

The modern view of monetary policy stresses its role in shaping the entire yield curve of interest rates
in order to achieve various macroeconomic objectives. A crucial element of this process involves guiding
financial market expectations of future central bank actions. Recently, a few central banks have started
to explicitly signal their future policy intentions to the public, and two of these banks have even begun
publishing their internal interest rate projections. We examine the macroeconomic effects of direct
revelation of a central bank's expectations about the future path of the policy rate. We show that, in
an economy where private agents have imperfect information about the determination of monetary
policy, central bank communication of interest rate projections can help shape financial market expectations
and may improve macroeconomic performance.

Glenn D. Rudebusch
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research, MS 1130
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105-9967
glenn.rudebusch@sf.frb.org

John C. Williams
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Research Department
MS 1130
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
john.c.williams@sf.frb.org
1. Introduction

The modern approach to monetary policy stresses the importance of guiding and inﬂuencing
the public’s expectations about future central bank actions. In this forward-looking view of
monetary policy, the current setting of the policy interest rate, which is an overnight or very
short-term rate, is on its own of little importance for private agents’ decisions about consump-
tion, investment, labor supply, and price setting. Instead, those decisions are more importantly
driven by expectations of future short rates, especially as embodied in longer-term interest rates
and other asset prices (along with the appropriate adjustments for risk). That is, the current
policy rate is most relevant to the extent it conveys information about future policy settings
and inﬂuences longer-maturity interest rates. Accordingly, at its core, monetary policy can be
considered a process of shaping the entire yield curve of interest rates in order to achieve various
macroeconomic objectives.
   The crucial role that private sector interest rate expectations play in macroeconomic stabi-
lization naturally raises the question: How can central banks best guide private expectations of
future monetary policy actions? In the past, central bankers typically assumed that the accu-
mulated record of their past policy actions was the best means of such communication. In this
view, actions spoke louder than words, and private agents, by examining past policy behavior,
could uncover a systematic policy pattern or rule that would be useful in predicting future policy
actions. Recently, however, there is a new appreciation of the value of good communication as
an accompaniment to good policy actions, and as a result, some central banks have started to
place more importance on signaling their intentions for future policy. In practice, much of this
central bank signaling of future policy intentions is implicit or indirect–essentially, a process
of suggesting the future policy path by revealing information other than the future policy path.
For example, some inﬂation-targeting central banks provide descriptions of their macroeconomic
models and objectives as well as their current assessments of the state of the economy, but it
is left to the public to infer the future policy path that is consistent with this information. A
common such communication strategy is to publish an economic projection that is based on the
assumption that the policy interest rate will not change in the future from its current setting.
Private agents must then compare this constant-interest-rate projection to the announced eco-
nomic objectives in order to back out the actual expected policy rate path. For example, if,
at some future date, the published constant-interest-rate inﬂation projection is higher (lower)


                                                 1
than the inﬂation target, then, in general, private agents should infer that the policy rate is
likely to increase (decrease). This implicit signaling procedure has been criticized for supplying
a circuitous, vague, and potentially confusing expression of the central bank’s actual views of
the likely path of policy.1 Despite these criticisms, a published constant-interest-rate economic
projection remains a key component of many central bank communication strategies.
    Implicit signaling remains widespread among central banks because nearly all of them are
extremely reluctant to directly reveal their views on likely future policy actions. Indeed, one
of the strongest central banking taboos is the prohibition against talking publicly about future
interest rates (Faust and Leeper 2005). This taboo largely arises from the belief that ﬁnancial
markets would tend to interpret any central bank statements about the likely future path of
policy as commitments to future action, as opposed to projections based on existing information
and subject to considerable change. Thus, many central banks will at best only give indirect
hints or use coded language about policy inclinations in order to retain a plausible deniability
in case markets are disappointed as the future unfolds.
    Although the expected future path of the policy rate remains a closely guarded secret at
most central banks, a few have recently provided some direct signals to the public about their
policy intentions. Notably, in 2003, the U.S. Federal Reserve, or more speciﬁcally the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC), started to issue statements commenting on the future path
of its policy rate. These verbal forward-looking policy inclinations, including, for example, the
famous phrase, “policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured,”
have been considered in central banking circles unusually explicit statements about the future
path of policy, even though the phrasing is far from unambiguous. A much bolder step than
the FOMC’s direct verbal signaling has been taken by the central banks of New Zealand and
Norway (the RBNZ and the Norges Bank, respectively), which now publish numerical forecasts
of the future path of the policy interest rate. These public quantitative policy rate projections
represent a dramatic change from the past communication practices of central banks. However,
while direct signaling of policy inclinations–whether verbal or quantitative–has been more
prevalent in recent years, its future use remains quite contentious and uncertain. Indeed, as a
practical matter, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis President William Poole (2005a) has stated
that “the most important communications issue facing the FOMC currently is whether and how
   1
     For discussion and critiques of this communication strategy, see Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), Goodhart
(2001), Leitemo (2003), Svensson (2005b), Faust and Leeper (2005), and Woodford (2005).



                                                     2
to continue to provide forward guidance on policy decisions.”
       More broadly, among central bank and academic researchers, there is an ongoing debate
about the value of greater transparency and especially the provision of direct signals of the
future interest rate path. There may be political beneﬁts obtained from such transparency,
such as greater accountability and legitimacy; however, the main argument in favor of directly
communicating the central bank’s view of the most likely future policy path is an economic
one that is based on the beneﬁts of sharing central bank information with private economic
agents. As the current Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke (2004) has suggested, “FOMC
communication can help inform the public’s expectations of the future course of short-term
interest rates, providing the Committee with increased inﬂuence over longer-term rates and hence
a greater ability to achieve its macroeconomic objectives.” This view is supported by research
that argues that FOMC statements do aﬀect ﬁnancial markets and can alter expectations about
the future course of policy (e.g., Kohn and Sack 2004, Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack 2004, and
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson 2005a). However, the large research literature on transparency
is only a partial buttress for this argument. The theoretical literature has obtained conﬂicting
results on the value of transparency depending on the exact details of the modeling speciﬁcation.2
In addition, this literature has not focused on the issue of the eﬀectiveness of explicit future policy
signals for enhancing macroeconomic stabilization.3 In the next section, we describe in more
detail the real-world direct signaling of policy inclinations by central banks and outline some of
the arguments for and against such transparency.
       The unresolved debate among central bankers and researchers about the value of the direct
signaling of policy intentions provides the key motivation for our formal analysis. In Sections 3
and 4, we examine the macroeconomic eﬀects of direct revelation of a central bank’s expectations
about the future path of the policy rate in a small theoretical model in which private agents have
imperfect information about the determination of monetary policy. In particular, we focus on
an issue that has received relatively little attention in the literature, namely, the desirability of
central bank transparency about the expected path of policy when the public is uncertain about
the central bank’s preferences and therefore the future path of policy. We show that publication
   2
     The literature on central bank transparency is summarized in Geraats (2002), Carpenter (2004), and Wood-
ford (2005). As discussed below, a key dissent on the value of transparency is Morris and Shin (2002, 2005) who
argue that, in certain circumstances, greater central bank transparency may lead to less private sector information
gathering and reduced welfare.
   3
     An important exception is Faust and Leeper (2005) who examine central bank interest rate projections. More
generally, Svensson (1997) and Geraats (2005) discuss the value of central bank inﬂation and output forecasts.



                                                        3
of interest rate projections better aligns the expectations of the public and the central bank
in the spirit of Bernanke’s quote above. Thus, publishing interest rate projections facilitates
the management of expectations and the yield curve. We then show that under reasonable
conditions, improving the alignment of expectations also helps the central bank better meet its
goals, providing support for full central bank transparency.


2. The Revelation of Policy Inclinations by Central Banks

As background for our formal analysis of direct central bank signaling of the likely future path
of the policy interest rate, it will be useful to describe brieﬂy some actual instances of such
central bank communication and consider the arguments that have been made for and against
the provision of these signals.


2.1. Recent Examples of Direct Policy Signaling by Central Banks

Some of the most intriguing direct signals of future policy inclinations have been contained in
statements issued by the Federal Reserve following FOMC meetings, and it is useful to describe
in detail some of this recent history. At times, the FOMC policy statements have provided
direct verbal indications of the expected path of policy, which is quite unusual given the Fed’s
historical secrecy about the setting of the policy rate. Indeed, it was just over a decade ago, in
July 1995, that the Fed ﬁrst even announced a contemporaneous numerical level for the target
federal funds rate.4 Another example of the Fed’s reticence to reveal policy rate information is
illustrated in its semiannual Monetary Policy Report. For over two decades, Fed policymakers
have been surveyed internally about the economic outlook on a semiannual basis and have been
asked to provide macroeconomic forecasts based on their individual views of an “appropriate”
(presumably an optimal) future path for the policy interest rate.5 The ranges and central
tendencies of the resulting inﬂation, output, and unemployment forecasts are released to the
public; however, the underlying conditioning policy paths are not published and, indeed, are
not even collected from the survey participants. A similar secrecy applies to forecasts prepared
   4
     The ﬁrst policy announcement following an FOMC meeting occurred in February 1994 and only vaguely
noted that “the FOMC decided to increase slightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions.” In July 1995, the
policy statement noted that the decrease in reserve pressures would also be reﬂected in “a 25 basis point decline
in the federal funds rate.” Rudebusch (1995) described some of the diﬃculties in inferring even the ex post level
of the federal funds rate target before 1994. Of course, changes in the discount rate, which is an administered
interest rate, have always been announced.
   5
      These economic forecasts are summarized in the Fed’s Monetary Policy Report to Congress, which was
orginally required by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978.


                                                       4
by the staﬀ of the Federal Reserve Board, which are distinct from the policymakers’ own views.
These detailed projections are circulated internally before each FOMC meeting in the so-called
Greenbook and are made public with a ﬁve-year lag. Still, although over one hundred economic
series are projected, the underlying staﬀ forecast for the policy rate (the federal funds rate) is
not tabulated.6
       In general, Fed policymakers’ views on the future policy path have been so closely guarded
that they were only rarely even discussed internally. One exception occurred from 1983 to
1999, when the FOMC voted not only on the current setting of the policy interest rate but
also on the expected direction of future changes in the stance of policy over the very near
term–strictly speaking, over the “intermeeting period,” the approximately six-week interval
until the next meeting.7 These future policy inclinations were known as the policy “tilt” or
“bias.” An “asymmetric bias” meant that the FOMC judged that a policy move in one direction
was more likely than in the other, while a “symmetric” judgment meant that the next policy
move was equally likely to be up or down. Information about the policy bias was contained
in the operational instructions or “domestic policy directive” sent to the trading desk at the
New York Fed. Before May 1999, each directive was only released to the public after the next
FOMC meeting, so, when released, the directive was, strictly speaking, outdated and of limited
use to markets.8 Following the FOMC meeting in May 1999, as well as after the subsequent
ﬁve meetings that year, the post-meeting policy statement explicitly announced the expected
future direction of policy as contained in the directive. The relevant forward-looking language
from these 1999 statements is shown in the ﬁrst several rows of Table 1. For example, after the
October 5, 1999, meeting, the policy statement noted that “the Committee adopted a directive
that was biased toward a possible ﬁrming of policy going forward.”
       The Fed’s ﬁrst attempt at directly signaling the direction of future policy in 1999 was,
in some sense, a straightforward and logical extension of the earlier transparency about the
contemporaneous policy setting that was initiated in July 1995. Essentially, since the FOMC
had been voting on both the current policy setting and a future policy inclination, it seemed
   6
      Similarly, the research staﬀ of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco frequently publish their forecasts
for various economic series but never for the federal funds rate.
    7
      Especially in the 1990s, the relevant horizon was often interpreted as a longer period, which, as noted below,
led to some confusion. Thornton and Wheelock (2000) provide a fascinating history of the policy bias and its
interpretation.
    8
      The secrecy of the directive was the subject of a famous Freedom of Information complaint that came before
the U.S. Supreme Court. As described by Goodfriend (1986, p. 71), one of the reasons given defending the need
for the secrecy of the directive was, “The FOMC does not wish to precommit its future policy actions and current
disclosure of the directive would tend to precommit the FOMC.”


                                                         5
natural to communicate both pieces of information to the public. At the FOMC meeting on July
1, 1998 (based on now-public transcripts), Don Kohn, who was then a Fed research director,
noted that an important rationale for releasing the directive stemmed “from a desire at times to
warn markets that a change might be forthcoming in order to reduce the odds on an overreaction
because of the surprise when policy tightening or easing actually occurred.” Any such ability
to shape market expectations of future policy by using the policy statement would seem to be
quite attractive.
   After the fact, however, the Fed policymakers were not pleased with the market reactions
to the policy statements in 1999, and there was anguished discussion in FOMC meetings that
year about the apparent confused reactions in ﬁnancial markets to the release of the forward-
looking language. At the start of 2000, given the FOMC’s unhappiness with market responses,
the direct signals of policy inclinations were replaced by implicit ones, speciﬁcally statements
about the “balance of risks” to achieving the Fed’s economic objectives. The formulaic balance
of risks language in the policy statement went as follows, with only one of the three sets of alter-
native bracketed words to be used depending on the circumstances: “Against the background
of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth and of the informa-
tion currently available, the Committee believes that the risks are [balanced with respect to
prospects for both goals][weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened in-
ﬂation pressures][weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness] in
the foreseeable future.” Of course, the three alternative balance of risks options could be roughly
mapped into the three earlier policy bias options of higher, unchanged, or lower future rates;
however, the looser linkage obtained by avoiding any references to future policy actions appeared
important. As Fed Governor Larry Meyer described the motivation for the balance of risks lan-
guage at the December 21, 1999, FOMC meeting: “The majority [in the FOMC] also wants to
change the language to focus on the balance of risks in the forecast in order to detach it from an
explicit reference to policy.” Indeed, at that meeting, there was a general agreement among the
participants at the FOMC meeting to re-establish the taboo against any direct forward-looking
signals about policy.
   In the event, the implicit balance of risks language was also an imperfect and short-lived
alternative. Its tight formulaic corset of a choice between “heightened inﬂation pressures” and
“economic weakness” was not able to capture the Committee’s worries in 2003 about a dis-



                                                 6
inﬂationary economic slowdown and the possibility of inﬂation falling too low. Instead, the
FOMC again decided that a direct statement about its future policy inclinations could be a
useful means to guide market expectations. Therefore, as shown in Table 1, in August 2003, the
FOMC introduced the following language into its public statement: “the Committee believes
that policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period.” This was a direct,
though not unambiguous, indication that the FOMC anticipated that the policy interest rate
could be kept low for some time. The balance of risks language also remained in the statement
in various forms, but it was essentially trumped by the direct forward-looking language. This
initial direct signal was followed by “the Committee believes that it can be patient in removing
its policy accommodation” in January 2004, and by “policy accommodation can be removed at
a pace that is likely to be measured” in May 2004, and by “some further policy ﬁrming is likely
to be needed” in December 2005, and by “further policy ﬁrming may be needed” in January
2006. Don Kohn (2005), as a member of the FOMC, described the underlying reasoning behind
this return to an explicit signal of future policy:
      The unusual situation at that time [in 2003] shifted our assessment of the balance
      of costs and beneﬁts in favor of a public statement about our expectations for the
      near-term path of policy. Markets appeared to be anticipating that inﬂation would
      pick up soon after the expansion gained traction, and therefore that interest rates
      would rise fairly steeply. This expectation was contrary to our own outlook. We saw
      economic slack and rapid productivity growth keeping inﬂation down for some time.
      Our expectations about policy also took account of the fact that the level of inﬂation
      was already low–lower than it had been for several decades. We thought that our
      reaction to a strengthening economy would be somewhat diﬀerent this time than it
      had been in many past economic expansions and unlike what the markets seemed to
      anticipate.

Furthermore, unlike in 1999, the direct verbal policy signaling begun by the Fed in 2003 was
viewed by many to have been useful in guiding ﬁnancial markets (as discussed below). However,
as noted in the introduction, its continued future use remains open to debate. Indeed, direct
interest rate guidance was removed from the policy statement released after the FOMC meeting
on June 29, 2006–the last entry in Table 1. At that meeting, the Fed returned to an indirect
indication of future policy inclinations by noting that “some inﬂation risks remain.”
    A few other central banks have also provided direct verbal signals about their future policy
inclinations.9 For example, in 1999, the Bank of Japan lowered its policy interest rate to zero
   9
     In 2006, the Bank of Canada telegraphed its intentions in policy statements that noted “some modest further
increase in the policy interest rate may be required to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and inﬂation
on target over the medium term.”


                                                       7
and announced its intention to maintain the zero rate “until deﬂationary concerns are dispelled.”
This verbal signal to the public that the Bank of Japan would maintain a zero policy rate into
the future–conditional on continued price deﬂation–was a key element of what was known
as the “zero interest rate policy” and later as “quantitative easing.” This signal, which tried to
persuade ﬁnancial market participants to lower their expectations of future short rates and hence
lower long rates, was part of an attempt to stimulate the economy and escape from deﬂation.
Just as in the U.S., however, the continued future use of such direct signals appears in doubt.
(See Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack 2004 and Oda and Ueda 2005.)
       In contrast to the signals given in the U.S. and Japan, which were verbal and appeared
to be transitory responses to special circumstances, two central banks–the RBNZ and the
Norges Bank–have been providing quantitative and ongoing guidance on the future policy rate
path.10 Indeed, the RBNZ has provided numerical policy interest rate projections that reﬂect
the policymaker’s views to the public since 1997 (Archer 2005). For example, Figure 1, which is
from the March 2006 RBNZ Monetary Policy Statement, contrasts the RBNZ’s expected path
for future policy over the next two years with the path expected by ﬁnancial markets.11 In this
Statement, the Governor of the RBNZ describes the expected policy path as follows: “As long as
these inﬂation risks remain under control, we do not expect to raise interest rates again in this
cycle. However given the time that it will take to bring inﬂation back towards the mid-point
of the [inﬂation] target band, we do not expect to be in a position to ease policy this year.
Any earlier easing would require a more rapid reduction in domestic inﬂation pressures than the
substantial slowing already assumed in our projections.” All in all, the RBNZ Monetary Policy
Statement provides a remarkably clear judgment on the most likely future path of policy.
       While the RBNZ has been a pioneer in the publication of quantitative projections of the
policy interest rate (and other economic variables), the Norges Bank has recently gone even
further, as described in Qvigstad (2005) and Svensson (2006b). Since 2005, the Norges Bank
has been providing not only the numerical expected future path of the policy interest rate, but
also conﬁdence intervals around this projection and state-contingent alternative scenarios. As
shown in Figure 2, which is from the November 2005 Norges Bank Inﬂation Report, the baseline
policy interest rate path rises steadily over the next three years. As described in the report, the
  10
      The Central Bank of Colombia also published quantitative interest rate forecasts in four inﬂation reports
from December 2003 to September 2004.
   11
      The policy rate of the RBNZ is actually an overnight Oﬃcial Cash Rate, but that is closely linked to the
90-day interest rate, which is displayed.



                                                      8
projections “indicate that the interest rate will increase by about 1 percentage point in the course
of next year, which is in line with expectations in the money and foreign exchange market. At
the two to three year horizon, we expect a further, gradual rise in the interest rate. Our interest
rate projections further out are somewhat higher than forward rates in the ﬁnancial market.”
The Norges Bank also provides a probability distribution or fan chart around its baseline interest
rate projection, as denoted by the shaded regions in Figure 2. By outlining the range of possible
monetary policy responses to unexpected macroeconomic disturbances, these conﬁdence intervals
highlight the conditional nature of the baseline projection. The conditionality of the interest rate
projection is further reinforced by two speciﬁc alternative scenarios that are displayed in Figure
2 and described in the Inﬂation Report. In one alternative, labeled “Stronger trade shifts,” the
greater pass-through of low import prices lowers inﬂation and the policy rate, while in the other,
labeled “Higher inﬂation,” a shock boosts inﬂation and the policy rate.


2.2. Assessments of Direct Signaling of Policy Inclinations

The above descriptions of various instances of direct policy rate signaling convey some of the
variety of the recent historical experience. The range of practice–from complete silence to ex-
plicit quarter-by-quarter numerical guidance–is breathtakingly wide. Such signaling has elicited
strong reactions, both pro and con, from central bankers and academic researchers. We will con-
sider two common practical objections to direct signals and then survey some of the research on
the eﬀects of transparency.
   The ﬁrst objection is an institutional one. Many have argued that forward-looking policy
signals are very diﬃcult, if not impossible, for monetary policymakers to produce; that is, a
committee of monetary policymakers may be unable to agree on a likely future path. This is
the view of Goodhart (2001), a former member of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of
the Bank of England, who notes, “it is hard to see how a committee could ever reach a majority
for any particular time path. A great advantage of restricting the choice to what to do now,
this month, is that it makes the decision relatively simple, even stark. Given the diﬃculties
involved already in achieving majority agreement in the MPC on this simple decision, the idea
of trying to choose a complete time path by discretionary choice seems entirely fanciful and
counterproductive.” Blinder (2004) and Mishkin (2004) essentially concur with Goodhart’s pes-
simistic assessment. Of course, as Blinder (1998) earlier bemoaned, it seems quite unsatisfactory



                                                 9
to ignore the fact that optimal policy in an economy with forward-looking agents will require at
least an implicit time proﬁle for future policy. Indeed, Svensson (2005b) has argued that con-
veying an understanding of the likely future path of the policy rate is crucial, and he suggests
obtaining consensus on a quantitative path with a fairly straightforward voting mechanism. In
this respect, the successful practical example of the Norges Bank, in which a seven-person Ex-
ecutive Board has been able to agree on and publish a quantitative future policy path, should
alleviate some concerns about the impracticality of obtaining agreement on future policy rate
signals.12 Below, in our formal modeling, we do not address the institutional dynamics of policy
committees but simply assume that the monetary authority can formulate a likely future path
for the policy rate.
       A second objection to direct signaling is that ﬁnancial market participants will inevitably
misinterpret the central bank’s signals.13 Policymakers often express the fear that ﬁnancial
markets will misconstrue statements of policy inclinations and, in particular, that the markets
will interpret them as essentially guarantees of future policy action.14 At the FOMC meeting
on July 1, 1998, Don Kohn noted that a forward-looking policy announcement “could lock in
market expectations and reduce ﬂexibility because it would set up situations in which the market
expected some action and the Committee would then have to worry about disappointing those
expectations.” In the event, of course, as noted above, such misunderstandings did occur. As
described in The Wall Street Journal (Schlesinger 2000), “When the Fed started revealing its
‘bias’ statements in May, ﬁnancial markets tended to treat the directives as a virtual guarantee
of the outcome of subsequent meetings–assuming a ‘bias’ toward tightening likely meant a rate
rise, and that a neutral bias likely meant no rate rise. That wasn’t what the Fed intended.
With markets ascribing greater clarity to Fed statements than the Fed did, oﬃcials at times felt
boxed in by extreme market reactions.” A similar view of the confusion resulting from the direct
signals was expressed in the oﬃcial postmortem assessment of the 1999 policy statements, titled
“Modiﬁcations to the FOMC’s Disclosure Procedures,” (released on January 19, 2000) which
  12
     Alternatively, the diversity of opinion about the future on a policy committee could be informative, and
Archer (2005) suggested publishing the “braid” of separate interest rate paths of individual committee members.
As noted by Archer (2005), the New Zealand experience is not informative on this issue, as the RBNZ has a single
monetary policymaker.
  13
     A related objection is that the presence of forward-looking policy signals may change the behavior of ﬁnancial
market participants so that ﬁnancial markets provide a less useful summary of private information for central
banks.
  14
     The Governor of the Bank of England (King 2006) recently noted that “trying to give direct hints on the
path of interest rates over the next few months risks deceiving ﬁnancial markets into believing there are deﬁnite
plans for the next few months when no such plans exist.”



                                                        10
noted that the direct forward-looking policy language “caused some unanticipated confusion. It
became apparent that the public was uncertain about the interpretation of the language used
to characterize possible future developments, about the time period to which it applied, and the
extent to which the announced changes in that language represented major shifts in the Com-
mittee’s assessment. Perhaps partly as a result, the announcement of a directive biased toward
tightening seemed to exaggerate the responses of ﬁnancial markets to subsequent information
bearing on the likely course of interest rates and monetary policy.”
       Of course, part of the confusion in 1999 stemmed from the particular language that was
used in the statement. In contrast, the direct verbal policy signals provided by the Fed in 2003
and thereafter have been generally viewed as successful. Kohn (2005), Bernanke (2004), and
Woodford (2005), for example, all argue that the language was properly interpreted and that
market rates were inﬂuenced in the right direction. This interpretation has garnered some sup-
port from empirical studies as well. Overall, for example, the incremental steps toward greater
openness and transparency that the Fed took throughout the 1990s and early 2000s appear to
have had important eﬀects on ﬁnancial markets. Indeed, as documented by Lange, Sack, and
Whitesell (2003) and Swanson (2006), ﬁnancial markets became much better at forecasting the
future path of monetary policy than they were in the 1980s and early 1990s and more certain
of their forecast ex ante, as measured by implied volatilities from options.15 Other studies that
have been more narrowly focused on the speciﬁc eﬀects of recent forward-looking Fed policy
statements, notably Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004) and Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson
(2005a), have supported the notion that these statements have been useful in suggesting to the
public a particular course of future action, although as described in Rudebusch (2006), any
improvement has been at a horizon of only a couple of months. The experience of the RBNZ,
which has given speciﬁc numerical policy guidance for over a decade, is generally positive. As
discussed by Archer (2005), ﬁnancial markets in New Zealand have reacted favorably to the
central bank’s interest rate forecasts, and understood their conditionality. Although the Norges
Bank has only a very brief track record of interest rate projections, the explicit conﬁdence bands
provided should reinforce forecast conditionality, and so far, its experience has been favorable.
       Of course, the counterfactuals in these cases cannot be observed, so it is diﬃcult to assess
  15
     Of course, this greater certainty about future rates may be precisely the worry of those opposing direct
guidance on interest rates, namely, that providing information about the ﬁrst moment of future interest rates–
the expected path–will distort the second moment of future rates, reducing the implied volatility or dispersion
of expected future rates in an unwarranted fashion.



                                                      11
deﬁnitely the eﬀectiveness of the recent direct interest rate communication. Indeed, some have
judged the recent U.S. episode far less favorably. As noted in Business Week (Miller 2005): “But
what started out as a well-meaning attempt to give investors a clear sense of where monetary
policy was headed has degenerated into a muddled message that has sown confusion in ﬁnancial
markets and helped fan fears of higher inﬂation among investors. That has raised questions inside
and outside the Fed about whether the central bank’s extraordinary strategy of mollycoddling
the markets has done more harm than good.” And the president of the European Central Bank
(ECB), Jean-Claude Trichet (2006), made it clear that the ECB would not be sending similar
direct signals about the likely path of its policy interest rate.16
    Even among those who judged the Fed’s direct signaling to have been useful, many consid-
ered it a one-time solution for a transitory deﬂationary risk. Notably, the signaling could be
considered a particular example of the strategy of stimulating the economy discussed by Reif-
schneider and Williams (2000) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), which provides assurances
when the current policy rate is close to or at its lower bound that future rates will also be kept
low. Indeed, as noted above, it appears unlikely that the Fed will employ an ongoing strategy
of direct signaling. For example, in the U.S., the minutes of the FOMC meeting of November
10, 2004, stated, “A few members felt that, because of greater uncertainties, it might become
appropriate eventually to move away from the recent practice of providing guidance about the
likely future path of policy, while others emphasized the desirability of continuing to be as in-
formative as possible about the Committee’s perceived outlook.” And, as noted above, direct
signals were discontinued in the June 2006 policy statement.17
    For some, given the sophistication of the ﬁnancial system, it is perhaps easy to dismiss at an
abstract level concerns about the inevitable breakdown of communication between central banks
and markets. However, there is still much unknown about the precise relationship between the
   16
      Trichet noted that “the ECB does not embark on a particular multi-monthly pre-commitment on interest
rates or on the path of future policy interest rates. As the Governing Council has decided to regularly consider
the most up-to-date information, such an unconditional commitment would limit the ability of the Governing
Council to react to changes in the economic situation and therefore hamper our credibility and our capacity to
preserve the solid anchoring of inﬂation expectations. This is, in particular, the reason why we refused to promise
to maintain interest rates at 2 percent for a ‘considerable period of time.’”
   17
      Poole (2005b) appears to express the view of at least a few FOMC members when he notes that “most of
the time the FOMC cannot provide accurate information to the market as to the probable course of the target
fed funds rate, in terms of a speciﬁc path measured in basis points. The future path will be conditional on future
information that cannot itself be predicted. Attempts to provide speciﬁc forward-looking guidance will prove
inaccurate and even misleading to the market. Moreover, the Fed could create a credibility problem for itself if
forward guidance is too speciﬁc. If the market acts on the guidance, and the Fed subsequently responds to new
information in a way that departs from the guidance, then the market will naturally feel that it has been misled.
But if the Fed fails to respond to new information that seems to demand a response, in the interest of doing what
it said it was going to do, then failure to respond may also damage credibility.”



                                                        12
revelation of information and market pricing, and this black box has long worried central bankers
(Goodfriend 1986). Perhaps the most subtle rendering by a policymaker of the diﬃculties
inherent in communicating with ﬁnancial markets is provided by Kohn (2005):

     In fact, economists do not fully understand how markets incorporate information.
     Herding behavior, information cascades, multiple equilibria, and the amount of in-
     vestment in ﬁnancial research all pose puzzles about markets and information. The
     situation is complicated still more when an important participant is seen as hav-
     ing superior information owing to its investment in research or its understanding of
     its own behavior. In such circumstances, certain types of central bank talk might
     actually impinge on welfare-enhancing market pricing by being misunderstood and
     receiving too much weight relative to private judgments.

Some of the research underlying this apprehension about transparency is by Morris and Shin
(2002), who provided a simple theoretical model in which the public revelation of policy infor-
mation can be bad for social welfare. This work has been widely cited and followed by a vigorous
debate introducing new theoretical modiﬁcations. For example, Svensson (2006a) argues that
the Morris and Shin result has been widely misinterpreted and that their anti-transparency
result is only obtained for a small set of unlikely parameter values, while various authors, in-
cluding Roca (2005) and Hellwig (2005), show that transparency can increase welfare in more
general models. Indeed, as is apparent in surveys by Geraats (2002), Carpenter (2004), and
Woodford (2005), many conclusions about the value of transparency appear to hinge on the
exact speciﬁcation of the theoretical models. However, with just a few exceptions, the literature
has not actually examined the eﬀects of the release of forward-looking policy information for
macroeconomic dynamics and stabilization. It is this is line of reasoning that we pursue in the
next two sections.


3. A Framework for Analyzing Central Bank Interest Rate Projections

In this section and the next, we analyze how publishing central bank interest rate projections can
aﬀect private expectations and macroeconomic performance in a simple model of the economy. In
this section, we describe our framework, which is a standard New Keynesian structure modiﬁed
to allow for asymmetric information sets for private agents and the central bank. In particular, in
our model, as described in detail in the next section, the central bank may have an informational
advantage over the public that reﬂects its better information regarding its policy intentions. At
the outset, note that we abstract from two issues that have been widely discussed in the past

                                                13
literature on central bank transparency. First, we assume that the central bank is able to
commit to future policy actions and therefore does not face a Barro-Gordon time inconsistency
problem. Second, we assume that the central bank’s provision of information does not aﬀect
a private agent’s collection or use of idiosyncratic information; thus, we ignore the strategic
complementarity highlighted in Morris and Shin (2002).


3.1. A Model of Interest Rates, Output, and Inflation

For our analysis, we use a standard log-linearized New Keynesian model (see Woodford 2003 for
further discussion). The output gap, yt , is determined by a forward-looking “IS curve” given by
the intertemporal saving decision:

                               yt = −(it − Et π t+1 − rt∗ ) + Et yt+1 ,                         (1)

where it is the nominal interest rate, π t is the inﬂation rate, rt∗ is the natural rate of interest
(which is assumed to follow a known stationary process), and Et denotes mathematical expecta-
tions conditional on the available time t information set. (Throughout our analysis, we abstract
from intercepts.) We have implicitly assumed log preferences so that the coeﬃcient on the in-
terest rate is unity. Solving this equation forward T -1 periods, we can express the output gap in
terms of the expected short-term real interest rate gaps over the next T periods and the output
gap T periods in the future:
                                     T
                                      −1
                                                              ∗
                          yt = −Et         (it+j − π t+j+1 − rt+j ) + Et yt+T .                 (2)
                                     j=0

This version of the IS curve illustrates a basic insight of modern macroeconomic theory: mone-
tary policy aﬀects output through the expected future path of real interest rates. Generalizations
of this model that incorporate a richer description of consumption, investment, and other com-
ponents of output leave this basic insight intact (see Woodford 2003 and Fuhrer and Rudebusch
2004 for discussion).
   It is useful to reformulate this condition in terms of bond yields. Denote the ex ante real T -
period bond rate by RT,t , which, abstracting from a term premium, equals the expected average
real interest rate over the next T periods:
                                                  T −1
                                                1 
                                RT,t ≡ −Et            (it+j − π t+1+j ).                        (3)
                                                T
                                                   j=0


                                                    14
     ∗ denote the expected average natural rate of interest over the next T periods :
Let RT,t

                                                          T −1
                                             ∗          1  ∗
                                            RT,t ≡ Et          rt+j .                                     (4)
                                                        T
                                                             j=0

Given these deﬁnitions, the IS curve can be represented by the following simple equation relating
the output gap to the real bond rate gap, which is the diﬀerence between the real bond rate and
the corresponding natural rate, plus the output gap expected T periods in the future (which,
for suﬃciently large values of T is approximately zero):

                                                       ∗
                                      yt = −T (RT,t − RT,t ) + Et yt+T .                                  (5)

This formulation makes evident the central role of long-term real interest rates for the conduct
of monetary policy (see McGough, Rudebusch, and Williams 2005).
      The inﬂation rate, π t , is given by the New Keynesian Phillips curve of the form:

                                         π t = β Et π t+1 + κ(yt + ut ),                                  (6)

where ut is a distortionary stationary shock to marginal cost, β is the rate of time preference,
and κ measures the sensitivity of inﬂation to the output gap. Solving this equation forward
yields the following equation for inﬂation in terms of expected real bond rates:
                                         ∞
                                         
                           π t = −κ Et         β j (RT,t+j − RT,t+j
                                                              ∗
                                                                    + yt+T − ut+j ).                      (7)
                                         j=0

As in the case of the output gap equation, this reformulation of the Phillips curve highlights the
central role of expected real bond rate gaps in determining current inﬂation. It is clear from
this representation that private agents, and by implication monetary policymakers who strive
to ensure macroeconomic stabilization, are interested in the whole future path of the short-term
policy interest rate.
      For our analysis below, we assume κ = 0.15 and β = 1. The value of κ is consistent with
Calvo price setting with one-quarter of all prices reoptimized each quarter, log utility from
consumption, and a 0.8 elasticity of disutility from work.18 We assume that the variance of the
markup shocks equals unity; shocks to the natural rate of interest play no part in our analysis
below. Our results are not qualitatively sensitive to these parameter assumptions.
 18
      We assume β = 1, so monetary policies can be easily evaluted in terms of unconditional variances.




                                                        15
3.2. Monetary Policy

As is standard in the literature, we assume that the central bank’s objective is to minimize the
weighted sum of the unconditional variance of the inﬂation gap, which is the diﬀerence between
the inﬂation rate and a time-varying target inﬂation rate π ∗t , and the unconditional variance of
the output gap. Speciﬁcally, the central bank loss, L, is given by:

                                    L = VAR (π t − π ∗t ) + λVAR (yt ),                                     (8)

where VAR(x) denotes the unconditional variance of a variable x and λ is the relative weight
on output gap variability.
    We allow for modest variation over time in the medium-term inﬂation rate that the central
bank attempts to achieve. Speciﬁcally, we assume that the inﬂation target is a mean zero
autoregressive process, subject to stochastic shocks:

                            π ∗t = δπ ∗t−1 + vt ,   δ ∈ (0, 1),   vt ∼ N (0, σ 2v ),                        (9)

where the inﬂation target innovation, vt , is assumed to be an i.i.d. normally-distributed random
variable. Note that the unconditional, or long-run, inﬂation target is assumed to be constant.
We assume that π ∗t is persistent, with δ = 0.9, but that its conditional variance is quite small,
with σ 2v = 0.01. Persistent target shocks can be justiﬁed by time variation in the factors that
inﬂuence the optimal choice of the inﬂation rate, including distortions to the economy, bias in
inﬂation measures, and structural changes that aﬀect the magnitude of the problems associated
with the zero lower bound on interest rates. In addition, the optimal strategy in the vicinity
of the lower bound is to implicitly target a higher rate of inﬂation than usual for a number of
years, as discussed in Reifschneider and Williams (2000) and Eggertson and Woodford (2003),
providing justiﬁcation for time variation in the medium-run inﬂation objective.19 Note that
the assumed implied unconditional standard deviation of the inﬂation target is only about 0.2
percentage point, which is plausibly modest. Indeed, much related recent macro-ﬁnance research
ﬁnds that the inﬂation target embedded in bond yields does move signiﬁcantly and persistently
over time (e.g., Kozicki and Tinsley 2001, Rudebusch and Wu 2004, 2006, Gürkaynak, Sack,
and Swanson 2005b, and Hördahl, Tristani, and Vestin 2006).20 In any case, the resulting
  19
     For example, one could interpret the recent heightened concerns about the possibility of deﬂationary stag-
nation in the United States as an episode of implicitly targeting a somewhat higher rate of inﬂation than usual
for a few years owing to concerns about the zero lower bound on interest rates.
  20
     More generally, in the United States, and in many other countries, there is considerable empirical evidence


                                                      16
unconditional variation ﬁts well inside the explicit inﬂation target ranges announced by many
central banks, which are typically a percentage point in width.
    As discussed in Woodford (2003), in this model optimal monetary policy under commitment
with complete information is implicitly described by the condition:

                                                         λ
                                           π t =π ∗t −     (yt − yt−1 ).
                                                         κ

In the following, we append a transitory policy shock, wt , to this optimality condition, so that
monetary policy is set according to:

                                                            λ
                                        π t =π ∗t + wt −      (yt − yt−1 ),                                 (10)
                                                            κ

where wt is assumed to be an i.i.d. normally-distributed random variables with variance σ 2w = 1.
Throughout the following, we assume that policy is set according to this equation and is not
recalibrated depending on the information assumptions that we make. We view the policy shocks
as representing the central bank’s response to transitory factors outside the model. Indeed, as
stressed by Svensson (2005a, b), good monetary policy in practice involves a vast amount of
subtle knowledge and judgment. In part, such information may reﬂect policymakers’ assessments
about asymmetric risks to the outlook that are not directly connected to the mean forecast for
inﬂation and output. For example, these asymmetric risks may reﬂect fears about fallout from
ﬁnancial instability, and the Fed has responded a number of times to threats to the ﬁnancial
system: in 1987, following the stock market crash, in 1998, when international ﬁnancial markets
threatened to freeze up, and in 2001, following the terrorist attacks on September 11. Finally,
it should be stressed that in real time the policymaker may not have a clear read on the data
and does not know the best way to minimize the loss function.
    Although the policy equation is written in an implicit form in terms of the inﬂation gap and
the change in output, it can be equivalently represented by an explicit interest rate reaction
function where the policy instrument, the short-term interest rate, is determined by variables in
the system. In such a formulation, the time-varying inﬂation target, π ∗t , and the policy shock,
wt , represent deviations by the central bank from its policy reaction function, similar to the
residuals of an estimated monetary policy rule (as in Svensson 2003 and Rudebusch 2002, 2005).
that persistent shocks to the inﬂation target have occurred, as exempliﬁed by the disinﬂations of the early 1980s
and again in the early 1990s, which suggest a gradual ratcheting down of the inﬂation target over time. See, for
example, Bomﬁm and Rudebusch (2000), Erceg and Levin (2003), and Cogley and Sbordone (2005).




                                                         17
4. The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Publishing Interest Rate Projections

In this section, we use the theoretical framework outlined above to analyze how publishing central
bank interest rate projections aﬀects macroeconomic behavior and the central bank calculation
of loss. A crucial aspect of our analysis is the structure of information: what the public knows
and doesn’t know. Because the focus of this paper is on the eﬀects of publishing interest rate
projections, in the following we focus on the eﬀects of incomplete knowledge on the part of
the public regarding the future path of policy that is ultimately due to uncertainty about the
future actions of the central bank. We abstract from information asymmetries regarding the
state of the economy, a topic analyzed in a recent paper by Walsh (2005). In particular, we
assume that the public and the central bank have identical and complete information about the
parameters describing the model economy and both observe the current shocks to the natural
rate of interest and the shock to marginal costs, rt∗ and ut , respectively.21 That is, the public
and the central bank are both assumed to know the structure and parameters of the equations
describing output, inﬂation, and the inﬂation target, and the functional form of the equation
describing monetary policy.
    We consider two illustrative examples where the public is imperfectly informed regarding
future policy actions and is uncertain how the central bank will respond in the future to economic
conditions. First, we analyze the case, which we refer to as “policy rule uncertainty,” in which
the public does not know the parameters of the policy rule. In this case, private agents must
estimate a policy rule using information from both past central bank actions and information
contained in published interest rate projections. The publication of central bank interest rate
projections may facilitate the public’s understanding of the policy rule and so improve their
predictions of future policy actions. In the second case, we examine an economy where the
public has imperfect knowledge of the central bank’s medium-run inﬂation target, π ∗t , which
we refer to as “inﬂation target uncertainty.” The public is assumed to infer the medium-run
inﬂation target from information contained in past policy actions and from central bank interest
rate projections. The publication of interest rate projections may improve the public’s estimate
  21
     This assumption seems appropriate for analyzing inﬂation targeting central banks, the majority of which
provide detailed information regarding their views on the economic outlook, conditional on some stipulated
path of policy (e.g., constant nominal rate or market expectations). For non-inﬂation targeting central banks,
communication of interest rate projections likely conveys useful information both about the central bank’s views
on the economy and about the policy response to the outlook. See Geraats (2005) for a discussion and references
to the literature on the eﬀects of transparency when the central bank has asymmetric information regarding the
economic outlook.



                                                      18
of the medium-run inﬂation target and thereby improve the public’s ability to forecast future
policy actions.


4.1. Policy Rule Uncertainty

We ﬁrst analyze an economy where the public knows the central bank’s inﬂation target but
is uncertain about the parameterization of the central bank’s policy rule. In this case, the
public forms its expectations about future policy and the economy using an estimated policy
rule.22 The assumption that the public is uncertain about the central bank’s reaction functions
seems realistic in light of the ongoing debate about the speciﬁcation and parameters of the
FOMC’s reaction function. More generally, given the limited available data from consistent
policy regimes, uncertainty about central bank reaction functions appears to be a pervasive
feature of the economic landscape.
    One could imagine a central bank publishing its policy rule and eliminating this type of
uncertainty. Indeed, Svensson (2005b) has argued that the central bank should publish its
objective function and model and thereby provide the public with all the information it needs
to form expectations of future policy actions. However, we view a central bank’s knowledge and
understanding of its own preferences, and by implication its policy strategy, as far too complex
and inchoate ever to be explicitly expressed to the public or, indeed, even written down within
the halls of the central bank. Not surprisingly, no central bank has yet put Svensson’s proposal
into practice. Still, based on the experiences discussed earlier in this paper, we do think that
the central bank can provide a potentially useful signal to the private sector of its plans for the
future setting of the policy rate.
    In the simpliﬁed model that we are using, there is only a single free parameter in the policy
rule to be estimated: the coeﬃcient in front of the change in the output gap, λ/κ. Assuming (as
we do) that the public knows the value of κ, uncertainty about the parameters of the monetary
policy rule is equivalent to uncertainty about the central bank’s preferences, in particular, the
penalty on output gap variability. We assume that private agents know the general formulation
of the policy rule and know the true inﬂation target, so that their estimation problem is far
simpler than that faced by the public in reality. In this way, our analysis likely understates
the eﬀects of publishing interest rate projections on public expectations and macroeconomic
  22
     A similar problem was studied by Orphanides and Williams (2005), but they did not consider the value of
interest rate projections in improving the public’s estimates of the policy rule.


                                                    19
performance. Nonetheless, the analysis of this simple problem nicely illustrates the qualitative
eﬀects of providing interest rate projections when the public is uncertain how the central bank
will react to economic conditions.
       Of course, in theory, if a policy regime were ﬁxed for all time, agents would gradually ac-
cumulate precise information regarding the policy rule from observed policy actions and the
uncertainty regarding the central bank’s preferences would vanish. In practice, however, agents
must form expectations having gathered only a ﬁnite set of observations of any given policy
regime. One could explicitly endogenize the choice of the data sample used in policy rule esti-
mation by allowing for time variation in the value of λ, but that would introduce a nonlinearity
into the model and signiﬁcantly complicate the analysis. Instead, for the present purpose, we
assume that the policy regime is ﬁxed and simply posit an environment where agents use only n
observations in estimating the monetary policy reaction function. We consider two illustrative
cases: in one, agents use the past 40 observations (10 years of data) in estimating the policy
rule; in the second, agents use 80 observations (20 years of data).
       We assume the central bank can choose to augment the public’s information regarding the
monetary policy rule through communication of its future policy intentions. Speciﬁcally, we
assume that each period, the central bank can provide a signal, denoted iPt+1|t , of its own internal
projection of the next period’s interest rate setting, denoted Et [it+1 |CB], where the conditioning
information set is clearly denoted as the central bank’s. (In the literature, these are often termed
“unconditional” forecasts.)23
       As discussed in Section 2, central bank communication of interest rate projections is often
verbal and imprecise in practice. Even if the central bank provides a numerical interest rate
projection, the manner in which it is constructed, say by taking a median vote, may create a
wedge between the published projection and the true expected path for interest rates. Therefore,
in our analysis, we allow for transmission noise in conveying the interest rate projection to the
public. This noise reﬂects the fact that the central bank may not be able to, or may not choose
to, send a perfectly clear signal of its expectation of future policy. In particular, we assume that
  23
     Note that in the simple model that we consider, the central bank could provide “unconditional” projections
of inﬂation or the output gap, meaning projections consistent with the projected future path of interest rates, and
the analysis and results would be the same as in the case of interest rate projections. This equivalency obtains
because all of these projections are linear combinations of the same state variables. This contrasts with the case
of central bank publication of forecasts of inﬂation and output conditional on an arbitrary assumed path of policy
with no explicit guidance on policy, as is typically done in many central banks. These conditional forecasts yield
no useful information regarding the nature of the shocks to the public in our model.




                                                        20
the central bank signal of its interest rate projection is given by:

                           iPt+1|t = Et [it+1 |CB] + zt ,   zt ∼ N (0, σ 2z ),                 (11)

where the transmission noise, zt , is assumed to be an i.i.d. normally distributed random variable
with variance σ 2z . The limiting case of σ z = ∞ corresponds to the central bank providing no
useful information to the public regarding the future course of policy. The opposite limiting case
of σ z = 0 corresponds to the central bank perfectly communicating to the public its expectation
of the interest rate path and thereby its policy rule. For intermediate cases, we interpret a
highly noisy signal, say σ z = 1, as corresponding to a central bank providing only qualitative
hints about the possible direction of future policy. A modestly noisy signal, say σ z = 0.1,
suggests a central bank providing fairly detailed, numerical information about its expectations
of the future path of policy.
   Note that for analytical convenience, we assume that all the information regarding the future
course of policy is contained in the central bank’s one-step-ahead projection of the interest rate.
In practice, a central bank is likely to communicate a forecast that covers several periods. In
our model, there is no additional information contained in the two-step-ahead forecast that is
not already contained in the one-step-ahead forecast. More generally though, we view providing
a multi-period forecast as a way to reduce the transmission noise relative to a one-step-ahead
forecast, so it can be analyzed in this framework as a reduction in the degree of transmission
noise.
   Given the past history of central bank signals and actions, private agents estimate the value
of λ on the basis of the policy equation. In particular, at the end of each period, agents run two
regressions using the most recent n observations of data. The ﬁrst is a regression of the observed
inﬂation gap on the observed change in the output gap. Because we assume the inﬂation target
is known, no intercept or other term is included in the regression. Note that the innovation to
this equation is the policy shock, wt . Because this equation involves endogenous variables on
both sides, estimation is done using instrumental variables, where the lagged output gap is the
instrument. The second is a regression of the expected one-period-ahead inﬂation gap on the
expected one-period-ahead change in the output gap consistent with the published central bank
interest rate projection. Estimation of this equation is likewise done using instrumental variables.
Note that the innovation in this case is the central bank transmission noise, zt . In both cases, we
impose the restriction that the estimated coeﬃcient be positive, consistent with the restriction

                                                  21
that the penalty on output gap variability be non-negative. For symmetry and to avoid an
upward bias in the estimates, we also impose the restriction that the estimated coeﬃcient be no
larger than twice the true value. Given the assumption that λ = 1, the estimates are constrained
to lie between 0 and 2, inclusive.
       Estimation of these two equations yields two point estimates of λ and estimates of the
variances of the residuals in the two equations. We assume that agents then form an estimate λ̂t
by taking a weighted average of the two point estimates, with the weights equaling the inverse
of the respective standard deviations of the regression residuals. In this way, agents take into
account the relative amounts of noise observed from the two sources of information regarding
the monetary policy rule.24 In the following period, agents compute expectations of future
variables conditional on λ̂t . Then, given the realized values of the innovations, the values of all
endogenous variables are computed. The process is then continued, with agents reestimating
the policy rule equations at the end of each period.25 We compute the statistics of interest for
these experiments using model stochastic simulations. We run each simulation 41,000 periods
and drop the ﬁrst 1,000 periods to minimize the eﬀects of initial conditions.
       Central bank publication of interest rate projections improves the public’s understanding of
the central bank’s policy rule. The solid line of Figure 3 shows the root mean squared error
(RMSE) of λ̂t (relative to the true value of λ = 1) over the simulations for various degrees
of transmission noise, as measured by σ z . As noted above, the solid line assumes that agents
estimate the policy rule using only 40 periods of data, but still the average estimation errors for λ̂t
are reasonably modest. As seen in the ﬁgure, clear communication of interest rate projections
facilitates the public’s ability to estimate the policy rule. With zero transmission noise, the
public’s estimate of the policy rule equals the true policy rule at all times. But, as the degree
of transmission noise rises, the accuracy of the public’s estimates of the policy rule diminishes,
and the public’s ability to predict future policy actions also deteriorates.
       Publication of interest rate projections is potentially useful at aligning private and central
bank expectations even if the public has a relatively long history of observations of policy actions.
The dashed line in Figure 3 shows the RMSE of λ̂t assuming that agents use 80 observations in
  24
     This method of combining estimates performs very well in terms of the resulting eﬃciency of the estimates
in the model simulations. An alternative approach of having agents apply maximum likelihood would likely yield
similar results, but at a much greater computational cost.
  25
     Technically, each period, we compute the rational expectations equilibrium consistent with the public’s
estimate of λ. We then compute residuals to the policy rule equation and to the equation describing the policy
projection that make the setting of policy and the expectation of policy consistent with the true value of λ and
the realized values of wt and zt .


                                                      22
estimating the policy rule.26 Not surprisingly, the eﬀect of publishing interest rate projections
(for a given transmission noise) is smaller when the public has a longer history of policy actions
on which to base their policy rule estimates. Nevertheless, even with 20 years of data, publication
of interest rate projections can have a potentially signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ability of the public
to predict future policy actions.
       This alignment of the public’s and the central bank’s expectations of future policy actions
reduces the magnitude of ﬂuctuations in output and the inﬂation gap and therefore on the
central bank loss. The solid line in Figure 4 shows the central bank loss for various degrees of
central bank transmission noise, σ z , when n = 40. For comparison, the loss assuming that the
central bank does not publish interest rate projections is about 1.03. The central bank loss is
minimized when the transmission noise is zero and rises as σ z increases. Even a noisy central
bank signal of policy intentions yields a noticeable improvement in macroeconomic performance
over that which would occur absent central bank publication of interest rate projections.
       The beneﬁts of central bank communication of interest rate projections are greatest when
the public has relatively little data. The dashed line shows the corresponding results for n =
80. The beneﬁts of communicating policy intentions are only about one-half as large as when
n = 40. Of course, in the limit as the sample size increases to inﬁnity, central bank interest rate
projections would be superﬂuous because the public would know the exact policy rule based on
past observations of policy actions.
       These results show that when the public is uncertain about how the central bank will respond
to economic conditions, publishing interest rate projections can help align private and public
expectations of future policy actions and thereby improve macroeconomic performance. This
ﬁnding conﬁrms that of Orphanides and Williams (2004), who, using a simple stylized model,
ﬁnd that the central bank loss is lower when the public knows the monetary policy rule than if
they have to estimate the policy rule based on limited data.
  26
      The √
          doubling of the number of observations would, all else equal, lead to a reduction in the RMSE by a
factor of 2. This is indeed approximately true for the results reported in Figure 3 when σz is 1/2 or smaller.
However, the restriction that λ̂t be between 0 and 2 reduces its RMSE, and this eﬀect is larger when the sample
size is small and when the magnitude of transmission noise is large. As a result, for values of σz above 1/2, the
RMSE curve for n = 40 lies below what would be expected based on the diﬀerence in sample sizes.




                                                       23
4.2. Inflation Target Uncertainty

The case of policy rule uncertainty provides a strong case for central bank transparency and the
potential value of publishing central bank interest rate projections. We now consider the case
where the public is uncertain regarding the true value of the medium-run inﬂation target.27 The
case of inﬂation target uncertainty is of particular interest for two reasons. First, this case is of
interest on its own merit. As discussed in Woodford (2005) and Williams (2006), a central bank
constrained by the zero lower bound on interest rates will want to engineer above-trend inﬂation
for a time; but, if the public has little experience with policy constrained by the zero bound,
private agents may not understand the central bank’s intentions. Second, this case is well suited
for analyzing the issue of the eﬀects of interest rate projections if the public ineﬃciently uses
the information contained in interest rate projections.
       In analyzing inﬂation target uncertainty, we assume as before that the public and the central
bank have complete information regarding the other aspects of the economy. We also continue
to assume that the central bank communicates in terms of a noisy one-period-ahead internal
forecast of the interest rate. And, to keep the analysis as simple as possible, we now assume
that the public knows the central bank’s preference parameter λ. Under these assumptions, the
public faces a standard signal extraction problem in order to try to disentangle the realizations
of the inﬂation target and the policy shock. One way to interpret the solution to this problem is
to consider what private agents will determine as the most likely value of the true inﬂation target
from realized policy actions and published central bank interest rate projections. We assume
that the central bank, but not the public, knows the realized values of the two policy-related
innovations, vt and wt . The public observes the current interest rate, from which it can infer
the sum, π ∗t + wt , but it cannot disentangle the current level of the inﬂation target and the
realization of the policy shock wt . Likewise, from the published interest rate projection, the
public can infer the sum, δπ ∗t + ψzt , where ψ measures the relationship between the inﬂation
target and the interest rate implied by the monetary policy rule, but it cannot disentangle the
expected level of the inﬂation target and the realization of the transmission noise shock, zt .
       Given the assumptions of independent Gaussian disturbances, the resulting optimal ﬁlter
estimate of the inﬂation target at time t, based on information available in period t, denoted by
  27
    For further discussion of target shocks in the context of public uncertainty of future policy actions, see Faust
and Svensson (2001) and Geraats (2005).




                                                        24
π̂ ∗t , is given by
                       π̂ ∗t = δπ̂ ∗t−1 + γ(π ∗t + wt − δπ̂ ∗t−1 ) + θ(δπ ∗t + ψzt − δπ̂ ∗t−1 ),               (12)

where the parameter γ ∈ [0, 1] is the gain associated with the revelation of the policy action
and the parameter θ ∈ [0, 1] is the gain associated with the central bank’s projection of the
interest rate in the next period. We initially assume that agents know the true values of the
variances of the diﬀerent shocks and ﬁlter the data optimally. Given that the shocks wt and zt
are independent, the signal-to-noise ratio of the combined two signals, denoted φ, is given by:


                                                      σ 2v   δ 2 σ 2v
                                                φ≡         +          .                                        (13)
                                                      σ 2w ψ 2 σ 2z
The optimal steady-state ﬁlter gains, γ ∗ and θ∗ , are given by the following two equations:


                                                           2
                        γ ∗ + θ∗ = 1 −                                      ,                                 (14)
                                                    2    2        2    2
                                          2 − (1 − δ − φ) + (1 − δ − φ) + 4φ

                                                       γ ∗ + θ∗ σ 2v
                                                γ∗ =                 .                                         (15)
                                                           φ σ 2w
The ﬁrst equation is the standard formula for a problem of two independent Gaussian latent
variables, where one follows an AR(1) and the other is serially uncorrelated (see Harvey 1989).
The second equation parses the sum of the two gains according to the relative signal-to-noise
ratios of the two processes.
    Private agents form expectations of future variables based on their resulting estimate of
the inﬂation target, and output, inﬂation, and interest rates are determined conditional on the
public’s estimate of the inﬂation target. Figure 5 displays the optimal ﬁlter gains associated with
the policy action, γ ∗ , and with the interest rate projection, θ∗ , respectively. Not surprisingly,
if the central bank signal of its policy intentions is highly noisy, the public mostly ignores the
signal and bases its beliefs primarily on policy actions. As the clarity of the central bank
projections improves, the public places greater weight on those projections and less weight on
the current policy setting. As the signal-to-noise goes to zero, the public optimally responds
only to published interest rate projections and not at all to policy actions.28
  28
     As in the case of policy rule uncertainty, if the central bank perfectly communicated its expectation of the
interest rate in the next period (σz = 0), this information would be suﬃcient for the public to completely ascertain
the inﬂation target. Additional information from the central bank about its projection of interest rates two, three,
or more periods in the future would be superﬂuous. However, as mentioned above, we interpret our analysis in
terms of providing signals on the projected path of interest rates over a few years.




                                                          25
   The public’s inaccurate assessments of the medium-run inﬂation target create persistent
discrepancies between the public’s estimate of the target and the target’s true value which distort
the paths of inﬂation and the output gap away from those desired by the central bank. Imperfect
public information about the inﬂation target aﬀects the responses to shocks to the policy rule and
the inﬂation target. Given the relatively small variance assumed for the inﬂation target shocks,
persistent shifts in the inﬂation target are relatively “rare,” so the public’s view of the inﬂation
target is not very sensitive to a surprising policy action. Indeed, in the absence of interest rate
projections, the optimal gain parameter for policy actions, γ, equals 0.043, indicating that the
public’s estimate of the inﬂation target initially would rise only by 4.3 basis points in the period
of a one percentage point shock to the actual target. The public’s misperception of the inﬂation
target gradually shrinks over time, both because the target itself is returning to baseline and
the public’s estimate is catching up with the target. With imperfect information, following a
positive shock to the inﬂation target, the public wrongly ascribes too much central bank behavior
to the transitory policy shock, so output rises more and inﬂation rises less than if the public
knew about the shift in the inﬂation target. The excessive rise in the output gap continues and
eventually causes the inﬂation rate to persistently overshoot the true target. As a result, the
loss associated with a shock to the inﬂation target is greater when the central bank does not
eﬀectively communicate its intentions.
   Although central bank communication helps improve the public’s understanding of the
medium-run inﬂation target, it also potentially introduces public expectational errors owing to
central bank transmission noise that otherwise would be absent. The noise in the interest rate
signal distorts the public’s expectations of future policy and is a source of aggregate variability.
The magnitude of these misperceptions depends on both the variance of the transmission noise
shocks and the ﬁlter gain applied by the public to central bank communication. We account
for this “cost” of noisy transmissions in our calculation of the eﬀects of publishing interest rate
projections.
   Publishing interest rate projections improves the public’s ability to discern the true medium-
run inﬂation target, leading to better macroeconomic outcomes. The solid line in Figure 6 shows
the central bank loss as a function of the degree of central bank communication transmission
noise, assuming that the public uses the optimal ﬁlter described above. An increase in trans-
parency achieves a better alignment of public expectations of future policy with those of the



                                                26
central bank. The improved management of expectations of future rates and thereby long-term
bond rates pushes the economy’s responses to the inﬂation target and policy shocks closer to
the complete transparency benchmark. On net, the beneﬁts of improved understanding of the
inﬂation target outweigh the costs of extra noise in the system resulting from central bank
communication noise, and the loss monotonically decreases as the quality of the signal about
the central bank’s interest rate projection improves. These results are robust to alternative
assumptions regarding the persistence of the inﬂation target shock. However, the beneﬁts of
transparency are larger when the inﬂation target shocks are more persistent. The smaller ben-
eﬁt of communication when the inﬂation target is not very persistent reﬂects the fact that in
this situation the responses of the economy to an inﬂation target shock and a transitory policy
shock are quite similar. Thus, the public’s parsing of the sources of the shock has little eﬀect
on inﬂation and output and therefore on the central bank loss.


4.3. Possible Public Confusion Regarding the Interest Rate Projections

One concern about central bank provision of interest rate projections is that private agents may
misconstrue the accuracy of these projections or view them as unconditional commitments of
future policy actions on the part of the central bank. If private agents underreact to interest rate
projections, the eﬀects and usefulness of those projections would be more muted than reported
above. A greater concern is that private agents might overreact to published statements of
central bank intentions and underreact to the information in policy actions, with potentially
deleterious eﬀects on the economy. Such misperceptions of the quality of the central bank
projections cannot be part of a long-run equilibrium because agents will eventually deduce the
true value of central bank information. Nonetheless, it is conceivable that misperceptions of the
noise in the central bank published projections could persist for a signiﬁcant period of time and
therefore be a problem during a transition period following the initial publication of interest
rate projections. For this reason, we consider the eﬀects of public confusion as to the degree of
transmission noise in central bank rate projections.
   If the public systematically underestimates the accuracy of the central bank interest rate
projections, then the beneﬁts of central bank communication are muted. The dashed line in
Figure 6 shows the central bank losses for diﬀerent degrees of noise in the central bank projec-
tions, where the public ﬁlters the incoming information from policy actions and interest rate



                                                27
projections and believes that the central bank is sending a signal with σ z = 0.25. The portion
of the curve corresponding to values of σ z between 0 and 0.25 is nearly ﬂat, indicating that
achieving the beneﬁts of central bank communication of rate projections depends critically on
the public’s believing in the quality of the signal.
       Interestingly, in the intermediate case where the public only moderately overestimates the
accuracy of the central bank’s signal, the central bank loss is actually lower than if the public
had correctly assessed the degrees of transmission noise. Thus, for a given degree of transmission
noise, the central bank loss is reduced when private agents ineﬃciently use information in forming
expectations. This ﬁnding illustrates the more general point that there does not exist an exact
universal correspondence between the alignment of private and public expectations and the
minimization of the central bank loss.29 Under certain conditions, systematic expectational
errors can be beneﬁcial to the achievement of the central bank’s goals, while in other cases such
errors can interfere with the achievement of those goals. Nonetheless, it is worth stressing that
in the examples considered here we ﬁnd that the central bank loss is minimized when the central
bank is perfectly transparent, that is, σ z = 0.
       If the public severely overestimates the accuracy of central bank signals, then publishing
interest rate projections can be counterproductive until private agents realize their misperception
of the accuracy of central bank signals. As seen in the ﬁgure, if the true value of σ z exceeds
about 1.25 while the public believes it to be 0.25, the central bank loss exceeds that which would
occur if the central bank did not publish interest rate projections at all. Under this condition,
the public’s excessive response to the central bank’s noisy signal introduces added noise to the
public’s estimate of the inﬂation target and this noise causes unwelcome ﬂuctuations in inﬂation
and output.
       The potential for misperceptions of the accuracy of the interest rate projections suggests
that an important part of such communication is to avoid sending highly noisy signals of future
policy intentions that confuse markets. Indeed, concern that communication of policy intentions
was doing more harm than good appears to have been behind the FOMC’s abandonment of
  29
     It is possible to devise other examples where an improved alignment of private and central bank expectations
increases the central bank loss. For example, if one allows for both a transitory shock to the true inﬂation
target that has a signiﬁcantly higher variance than either the persistent inﬂation target or the policy shocks,
then either partial transparency or even no transparency can be optimal. This occurs because the public puts
some probability that any realized shock is highly persistent, which causes inﬂation to rise more and the output
gap to move less than for a transitory shock, both desirable responses if the source of the shock is a transitory
disturbance to the inﬂation target. Such an example is not realistic, but illustrates the general point that has
been made repeatedly in the literature: transparency can be a double-edged sword.




                                                       28
policy guidance in 1999, as discussed above. But, in the cases of the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand and the Norges Bank, publication of interest rate projections has not led to excessive
or counterproductive market reactions. Moreover, as evidenced by the deviations of market
expectations from the RBNZ interest rate projections illustrated in Figure 1, it is clear that
market participants do not view the projections as unconditional commitments, nor do they
forsake independent analysis of economic conditions and forecasting of policy.


5. Conclusion

Indirect signaling of future policy intentions has been the overwhelming choice of central banks
in the past. Recently, however, some central banks, including the Fed, have revealed some
information to the public about their future policy intentions. However, only two central banks,
the RBNZ and the Norges Bank, have gone so far as to provide explicit quantitative forecasts
of the policy expectations. The existing theoretical literature has not focused on transparency
with regard to interest rate projections, nor has it reached ﬁrm conclusions regarding the optimal
degree of central bank transparency in general. In our theoretical analysis, we ﬁnd that central
bank communication of interest rate projections can better align the public’s and the central
bank’s expectations and this better alignment of expectations generally leads to improvements
in macroeconomic performance.
   Although our results provide some support for the argument that the better alignment of
expectations improves performance, our analysis also highlights some of the pitfalls that may
accompany publishing interest rate projections. An important concern is that the public would
misconstrue the central bank communication as providing an unconditional commitment or may
put too much weight on the information from the central bank communication relative to other
sources of information. We ﬁnd that the latter concern, if realized, could have costs in terms
of macroeconomic stabilization and could even cause performance to worsen relative to the
case of no central bank communication. These results underline the need for a well-developed
central bank communications strategy that mitigates such problems by highlighting both the
conditionality and uncertainty regarding interest rate projections.




                                               29
                                    Table 1
     Forward-Looking Language in Statements Issued after FOMC Meetings
                 (All FOMC meetings from May 1999 to June 2006)

 Date of     Funds
 meeting      rate           Forward-looking language in FOMC policy statement

05/18/1999   4.75      “. . . the Committee was concerned about the potential for a buildup
                     of inﬂationary imbalances that could undermine the favorable performance
                     of the economy and therefore adopted a directive that is tilted toward the
                     possibility of a ﬁrming in the stance of monetary policy.”
06/30/1999   5.00     “. . . the FOMC has chosen to adopt a directive that includes no
                     predilection about near-term policy action.”
08/24/1999   5.25     “. . . the directive the Federal Open Market Committee adopted is
                     symmetrical with regard to the outlook for policy over the near term.”
10/05/1999   5.25     “. . . the Committee adopted a directive that was biased toward a
                     possible ﬁrming of policy going forward. Committee members
                     emphasized that such a directive did not signify a commitment to
                     near-term action.”
11/16/1999   5.50     “. . . the directive the Federal Open Market Committee adopted is
                     symmetrical with regard to the outlook for policy over the near term.”
12/21/1999   5.50     “. . . the Committee decided to adopt a symmetric directive in order
                     to indicate that the focus of policy in the intermeeting period must be
                     ensuring a smooth transition into the Year 2000.”
02/02/2000   5.75      “. . . the Committee believes the risks are weighted mainly toward
                     conditions that may generate heightened inﬂation pressures in the
                     foreseeable future.”
03/31/2000   6.00     Same as 02/02/2000.
05/16/2000   6.50     Same as 02/02/2000.
06/28/2000   6.50     Same as 02/02/2000.
10/03/2000   6.50     Same as 02/02/2000.
11/15/2000   6.50     Same as 02/02/2000.
12/19/2000   6.50      “. . . the Committee consequently believes the risks are weighted
                     mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the
                     foreseeable future.”
01/03/2001   6.50     Same as 12/19/2000.
01/31/2001   5.50     Same as 12/19/2000.
03/20/2001   5.00     Same as 12/19/2000.
04/18/2001   4.50     Same as 12/19/2000.
05/15/2001   4.00     Same as 12/19/2000.

                                             30
06/27/2001   3.75    Same as 12/19/2000.
08/21/2001   3.50    Same as 12/19/2000.
09/17/2001   3.00    Same as 12/19/2000.
10/02/2001   2.50    Same as 12/19/2000.
11/06/2001   2.00    Same as 12/19/2000.
12/11/2001   1.75    Same as 12/19/2000.
01/30/2002   1.75    Same as 12/19/2000.
03/19/2002   1.75    “. . . the Committee believes that, for the foreseeable future, . . .
                    the risks are balanced with respect to the prospects for both goals.”
05/07/2002   1.75    Same as 03/19/2002.
06/26/2002   1.75    Same as 03/19/2002.
08/13/2002   1.75    “. . . the Committee believes that, for the foreseeable future, . . .
                    the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate
                    economic weakness.”
09/24/2002   1.75    Same as 08/13/2002.
11/06/2002   1.25    “. . . the Committee believes that . . . the risks are balanced with
                    respect to the prospects for both goals for the foreseeable future.”
12/10/2002   1.25    Same as 11/06/2002.
01/29/2003   1.25    Same as 11/06/2002.
03/18/2003   1.25     “In light of the unusually large uncertainties clouding the geopolitical
                    situation . . . the Committee does not believe it can usefully characterize
                    the current balance of risks . . . ”
05/06/2003   1.25    “. . . the Committee perceives that over the next few quarters the
                    upside and downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth are
                    roughly equal. In contrast, over the same period, the probability of an
                    unwelcome substantial fall in inﬂation, though minor, exceeds that of a
                    pickup in inﬂation from its already low level. The Committee believes
                    that, taken together, the balance of risks to achieving its goals is
                    weighted toward weakness over the foreseeable future.”
06/25/2003   1.00    Similar to 05/06/2003.
08/12/2003   1.00    “. . . the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
                    maintained for a considerable period.”
09/16/2003   1.00    Same as 08/12/2003.
10/28/2003   1.00    Same as 08/12/2003.
12/09/2003   1.00    Same as 08/12/2003.
01/28/2004   1.00    “With inﬂation quite low and resource use slack, the Committee
                    believes that it can be patient in removing its policy accommodation.”


                                              31
03/16/2004    1.00     Same as 01/28/2004.
05/04/2004    1.00     “. . . the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
                      removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.”
06/30/2004    1.25     Same as 05/04/2004.
08/10/2004    1.50     Same as 05/04/2004.
09/21/2004    1.75     Same as 05/04/2004.
11/10/2004    2.00     Same as 05/04/2004.
12/14/2004    2.25     Same as 05/04/2004.
02/02/2005    2.50     Same as 05/04/2004.
03/22/2005    2.75     Same as 05/04/2004.
05/03/2005    3.00     Same as 05/04/2004.
06/30/2005    3.25     Same as 05/04/2004.
08/09/2005    3.50     Same as 05/04/2004.
09/20/2005    3.75     Same as 05/04/2004.
11/02/2005    4.00     Same as 05/04/2004.
12/13/2005    4.25     “The Committee judges that some further policy ﬁrming is likely to be
                       needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic
                       growth and price stability roughly in balance.”
01/31/2006    4.50     “The Committee judges that some further policy ﬁrming may be
                       needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic
                       growth and price stability roughly in balance.”
03/28/2006    4.75     Same as 01/31/2006.
05/10/2006    5.00     “The Committee judges that some further policy ﬁrming may yet be
                       needed to address inﬂation risks . . . ”
06/29/2006    5.25     “. . . the Committee judges that some inﬂation risks remain.”



Note: The date of each FOMC meeting or conference call (or the second day of a two-day
meeting) is given along with the intended target level of the federal funds rate prevailing after
the meeting and the salient forward-looking language in the post-meeting statement about the
future policy inclination or the balance of economic risks.




                                               32
  References

Archer, David (2005), “Central Bank Communication and the Publication of Interest Rate
    Projections,” manuscript, Bank of International Settlements.
Bernanke, Ben (2004), “Central Bank Talk and Monetary Policy,” speech, October 7, 2004,
    Federal Reserve Board.
Bernanke, Ben, Vincent R. Reinhart and Brian P. Sack (2004), “Monetary Policy Alternatives
    at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
    2, 1-100.
Blinder, Alan S. (1998), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Blinder, Alan S. (2004), The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University
    Press, New Haven, CT.
Bomﬁm, Antulio, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2000), “Opportunistic and Deliberate Disinﬂation
   Under Imperfect Credibility,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, 707-721.
Carpenter, Seth (2004), “Transparency and Monetary Policy: What Does the Academic Lit-
    erature Tell Policymakers?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2004-35, Federal
    Reserve Board.
Cogley, Timothy, and Argia M. Sbordone (2005), “A Search for a Structural Phillips Curve,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Reports 203.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
    Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 193-233.
Erceg, Christopher J., and Andrew T, Levin (2003), “Imperfect Credibility and Inﬂation Per-
    sistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(4), 915-944.
Faust, Jon, and Lars E. O. Svensson (2001), “Transparency and Credibility: Monetary Policy
    with Unobservable Goals,” International Economic Review 42, 369-397.
Faust, Jon, and Eric M. Leeper (2005), “Forecasts and Inﬂation Reports: An Evaluation,” pre-
    pared for the Sveriges Riksbank conference “Inﬂation Targeting: Implementation, Com-
    munication and Eﬀectiveness,” June 11-12 2005.
Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2004), “Estimating the Euler Equation for Out-
    put,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1133-1153.
Geraats, Petra M. (2002), “Central Bank Transparency,” Economic Journal 112, 532-565.
Geraats, Petra M. (2005), “Transparency and Reputation: The Publication of Central Bank
    Forecasts,” Topics in Macroeconomics 5, 1-26.
Goodfriend, Marvin (1986), “Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking,” Journal of
   Monetary Economics 17, 63-92.
Goodhart, Charles A.E. (2001), “Monetary Transmission Lags and the Formulation of the
   Policy Decision on Interest Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review July/August,
   165-181.

                                            33
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson (2005a), “Do Actions Speak Louder
    than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,”
    International Journal of Central Banking 1, 55-93.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson (2005b), “The Sensitivity of Long-
    Term Interest Rates: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,” American
    Economic Review 95:1, 425-436.

Harvey, Andrew C. (1989), Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter,
    Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Hellwig, Christian (2005), “Heterogeneous Information and the Welfare Eﬀects of Public In-
    formation Disclosures,” manuscript, University of California, Los Angeles.

Hördahl, Peter, Oreste Tristani, and David Vestin (2006), “A Joint Econometric Model of
    Macroeconomic and Term Structure Dynamics,” Journal of Econometrics 131, 405-444.

King, Mervyn. 2006. Speech at the Lord Mayor’s banquet for bankers and merchants, London,
    England, June 21.

Kohn, Donald L. (2005), “Central Bank Communication” speech, January 9, Federal Reserve
   Board.

Kohn, Donald L., and Brian Sack (2004), “Central Bank Talk: Does It Matter and Why?” in
   Macroeconomics, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability, Bank of Canada.

Kozicki, Sharon, and Peter A. Tinsley (2001), “Shifting Endpoints in the Term Structure of
    Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 613-652.

Lange, Joe, Brian Sack and William Whitesell (2003), “Anticipations of Monetary Policy in
    Financial Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35:6, 889-909.

Leitemo, Kai (2003), “Targeting Inﬂation by Constant-Interest-Rate Forecasts,” Journal of
     Money, Credit and Banking 35, 609-626.

McGough, Bruce, Glenn D. Rudebusch, and John C. Williams (2005), “Using a Long-Term
   Interest Rate as the Monetary Policy Instrument,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52,
   855-879.

Miller, Rich (2005), “The Fed May Be Talking Too Freely,” Business Week, March 24.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2004), “Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far,” in The Future of
    Inﬂation Targeting, Reserve Bank of Australia, 48-66.

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin (2002), “Social Value of Public Information,” American
   Economic Review 92:5, 1521-1534.

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun S. Shin (2005), “Central Bank Transparency and the Signal Value
   of Prices,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1-66.

Oda, Nobuyuki, and Kazuo Ueda (2005), “The Eﬀects of the Bank of Japan’s Zero Interest Rate
    Commitment and Quantitative Monetary Easing on the Yield Curve: A Macro-Finance
    Approach,” Bank of Japan Working Paper No. 05-E-6.

                                           34
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, “Imperfect Knowledge, Inﬂation Expectations,
   and Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford (ed.) The Inﬂation-
   Targeting Debate, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005, 201-234.

Poole, William (2005a) “Communicating the Fed’s Policy Stance.” speech, November 30, Fed-
    eral Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Poole, William (2005b) “How Should the Fed Communicate?” speech, April 2, Federal Reserve
    Bank of St. Louis.

Qvigstad, Jan F. (2005), “When Does an Interest Rate Path ‘Look Good’ ? Criteria for an
    Appropriate Future Interest Rate Path — A Practician’s Approach,” Norges Bank Staﬀ
    Memo No. 2005/6.

Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a
     Low Inﬂation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32:4, 936-966.

Roca, Mauro (2005), “Transparency and Monetary Policy with Imperfect Common Knowl-
    edge,” manuscript, Columbia University.

Rudebusch, Glenn D. (1995), “Federal Reserve Interest Rate Targeting, Rational Expectations,
   and the Term Structure,” Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 245-274.

Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2002), “Term Structure Evidence on Interest Rate Smoothing and Mon-
   etary Policy Inertia,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 1161-1187.

Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2006), “Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact of Fiction?,” International Jour-
   nal of Central Banking, forthcoming.

Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Lars E.O. Svensson (1999), “Policy Rules for Inﬂation Targeting,”
   in John B. Taylor (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules, (Chicago: Chicago University Press),
   203-246.

Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Tao Wu (2004), “A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure,
   Monetary Policy, and the Economy,” Working Paper.

Rudebusch, Glenn D., and Tao Wu (2006), “Accounting for a Shift in Term Structure Behavior
   with No-Arbitrage and Macro-Finance Models,” manuscript, forthcoming in the Journal
   of Money, Credit, and Banking.

Schlesinger, Jacob M. (2000), “Fed Replaces ‘Bias’ Stance with ‘Risks’ Outlook,” Wall Street
    Journal, January 20, A2.

Svensson, Lars E. O. (1997), “Inﬂation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
    Inﬂation Targets,” European Economic Review 41, 1111-1146.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003), “What is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgement in Monetary
    Policy through Targeting Rules,” Journal of Economic Literature 41, 426-477.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2005a), “Monetary Policy with Judgment: Forecast Targeting,” Interna-
    tional Journal of Central Banking 1, 1-54.



                                            35
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2005b), “Optimal Inﬂation Targeting: Further Developments of Inﬂation
    Targeting,” manuscript, Princeton University.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2006a), “Social Value of Public Information: Comment: Morris and
    Shin (2002) Is Actually Pro Transparency, Not Con,” American Economic Review, 96:1,
    448-452.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2006b), “The Instrument-Rate Projection under Inﬂation Targeting: The
    Norwegian Example,” manuscript, Princeton University.

Swanson, Eric (2006), “Have Increases in Federal Reserve Transparency Improved Private
   Sector Forecasts of Short-Term Interest Rates?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
   forthcoming.

Thornton, Daniel L., and David C. Wheelock (2000), “A History of the Asymmetric Policy
    Directive,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review September/October, 1-16.

Trichet, Jean-Claude (2006), “The State of the Economy: Overcoming Key Challenges to
    Sustainable Economic Growth,” speech, February 6, European Central Bank.

Walsh, Carl E. (2005), “Optimal Transparency Under Flexible Inﬂation Targeting,” manu-
    script, University of California, Santa Cruz.

Williams, John C. (2006),“Monetary Policy in a Low Inﬂation Economy with Learning,” man-
    uscript Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
   Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Woodford, Michael (2005), “Central-Bank Communication and Policy Eﬀectiveness,” in The
   Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 399-474.




                                           36
          Percent                                                                          Percent
            9                                                                                9

                                                                             RBNZ
                                                                           Projection
            8                                                                                8



            7                                                                                7



            6                                                             Market-implied     6
                                                                          90-day rates



            5                                                                                5



            4                                                                                4
                 1999            2001             2003            2005            2007




Figure 1: RBNZ projection of short-term interest rate

Note: The solid line shows the historical data and the RBNZ’s March 2006 baseline projection
    for the 90-day interest rate (which is closely linked to the oﬃcial policy interest rate).
    The dashed line shows expected rates in ﬁnancial markets. Source: RBNZ March 2006
    Monetary Policy Statement, Figure 2.6




                                             37
                Percent                                                        Percent

                    7       30% 50% 70% 90%                                         7

                    6                                                               6

                    5                 Higher                                        5
                                      inflation
                    4                                                               4

                    3                                                               3

                    2                                                               2
                                           Stronger
                    1                                                               1
                                        trade shifts
                    0                                                               0
                     2004       2005        2006        2007        2008


Figure 2: Norges Bank projection of its policy interest rate

Note: The dark central line is the recent past and the Norges Bank’s November 2005 baseline
    projection of the policy interest rate (“sight deposit rate”) over the next three years.
    The shaded regions represent 30, 50, 70, and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals around the
    baseline projection. Projected policy rate paths under two separate alternate scenarios are
    also shown. Source: Norges Bank November 2005 Inﬂation Report, Chart 1.9a.




                                             38
                                    0.5
                                                    n = 40
                                   0.45             n = 80


                                    0.4


              RMSE of λ Estimate   0.35

                                    0.3

                                   0.25

                                    0.2

                                   0.15

                                    0.1

                                   0.05

                                     0
                                          0   0.2    0.4      0.6     0.8     1      1.2    1.4       1.6   1.8   2
                                                             Central Bank Transmission Noise ( σz )




Figure 3: Interest Rate Projections and Estimates of λ




                                                                   39
                    1.025
                                      n = 40
                                      n = 80



                     1.02
             Loss




                    1.015




                     1.01




                    1.005
                            0   0.2    0.4      0.6     0.8     1      1.2    1.4       1.6   1.8   2
                                               Central Bank Transmission Noise ( σz )




Figure 4: Interest Rate Projections and the Central Bank Loss




                                                     40
                          1
                                                           Gain associated with policy actions ( γ )
                         0.9                               Gain associated with policy projections ( θ )

                         0.8

                         0.7

                         0.6
           Filter Gain




                         0.5

                         0.4

                         0.3

                         0.2

                         0.1

                          0
                               0   0.2   0.4    0.6     0.8     1      1.2    1.4       1.6     1.8        2
                                               Central Bank Transmission Noise ( σz )



Figure 5: Inflation Target Uncertainty and the Optimal Use of Information




                                                     41
                     1.07
                                      Public knows σz
                                      Public believes σ = 0.25
                                                        z
                     1.06



                     1.05



                     1.04
              Loss




                     1.03



                     1.02



                     1.01



                       1
                            0   0.2    0.4    0.6     0.8     1      1.2    1.4       1.6   1.8   2
                                             Central Bank Transmission Noise ( σz )




Figure 6: Inflation Target Uncertainty and the Central Bank Loss




                                                   42
