                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WELFARE REFORM AND INDIRECT IMPACTS ON HEALTH

                                           Marianne Bitler
                                          Hilary W. Hoynes

                                        Working Paper 12642
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12642


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




This paper was prepared for the conference "Health Effects of Non-Health Policy" held in Washington,
DC on February 9-10, 2006. The data used herein are derived from data files made available to researchers
by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation (MDRC) and Mathematica Policy Research
(MPR). We thank MDRC and MPR for assistance with the public use data. The authors remain solely
responsible for how the data are used or interpreted. We thank Becky Blank, Jim House, George Kaplan,
Harold Pollack, Bob Schoeni, Neeraj Sood and conference participants for helpful comments, and
Peter Huckfeldt for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Marianne Bitler and Hilary W. Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Welfare Reform and Indirect Impacts on Health
Marianne Bitler and Hilary W. Hoynes
NBER Working Paper No. 12642
October 2006
JEL No. I1,I3

                                                ABSTRACT

The stated goals of welfare reform are to increase work, reduce dependency on welfare, reduce births
outside marriage, and to increase the formation of two parent families. However, welfare reform may
also have indirect impacts on health. We provide a comprehensive review of the literature on the impacts
of welfare reform on health. We illustrate the main findings from the literature by presenting estimates
of the impact of reform on health insurance, health utilization, and health status using data from five
state waiver experiments. The most consistent finding is that welfare reform led to a reduction in health
insurance coverage. The impacts on health care utilization and health status tend to be more mixed
and fewer are statistically significant. While the results are not conclusive, they suggest that welfare-to-work
programs need not have large negative health effects.

Marianne Bitler
Public Policy Institue of California
500 Washington Street, Suite 800
San Francisco, CA 94111
bitler@ppic.org

Hilary W. Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu
I. Introduction

        Beginning in the early 1990s, many states used waivers to reform their Aid to Families with

Dependent Children (AFDC) programs. This state experimentation resulted in landmark legislation

which in 1996 eliminated AFDC and replaced it with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).

TANF—like the earlier AFDC program—provides cash grants to low income families with children and

is a key element of the nation’s economic safety net. The roots of this reform lie in long time concern that

AFDC led to reductions in work, decreases in marriage, and increases in nonmarital births among low

income women.

        The stated goals of welfare reform are to increase work, reduce dependency on welfare, reduce

births outside marriage, and to increase the formation of two parent families. Evaluating the impacts of

state and federal welfare reform is the subject of a large and growing literature.1 In this paper, we

summarize what is known about the impacts of welfare reform on health insurance, health care utilization,

and health status.

        We begin, in the next section, with a description of the key policy changes over this period. The

central changes in the TANF program were aimed at increasing work and decreasing welfare dependence

and include: work requirements, lifetime time limits, financial sanctions, and enhanced earnings

disregards.2 In section III, we outline the pathways by which welfare reform may affect health. The

direct pathway is through health insurance—reform leads to reductions in welfare participation which is

expected to reduce health insurance coverage (employer-provided coverage may increase but by less than

Medicaid coverage declines). The other pathways are more indirect—for example welfare reform may

impact families’ economic resources, time endowment, and levels of stress which may then affect health

care utilization and health status.

        The early studies on this issue documented very low rates of health insurance coverage following

federal reform. For example, Bowen Garrett and John Holahan (2000) found that one year after leaving

welfare, one-half of women and almost one-third of children are uninsured.3 This “leaver” analysis

provides an important profile of the well-being of families departing the welfare rolls. However, an


                                                      1
analysis of welfare leavers is not appropriate for identifying the impact of welfare reform on health

insurance coverage. This important identification issue is assessed more fully in section IV where we

discuss the methodologies that have been used to estimate impacts of welfare reform.

        In section V, we provide a comprehensive review of the literature on the impacts of welfare

reform on health. The literature includes nonexperimental estimates (typically state-panel models using

variation in the timing and presence of reform across states) and experimental estimates (randomized

experimental evaluations of state waiver programs). To illustrate the main findings from the literature, in

section VI we present estimates of the impact of reform on health insurance, health utilization, and health

status using data from five state waiver experiments (Connecticut, Iowa, Florida, Minnesota, and

Vermont). As we discuss more fully below, only a limited number of states included health outcomes in

their experimental evaluations. Thus, our results reflect the specific policies that were implemented by

these states and do not necessarily reflect “average” TANF policies.

        The findings from the literature, illustrated using our experimental treatment effects, show that

welfare reform had modest and mixed impacts on health outcomes. While the results from the waivers

may not generalize to TANF, they suggest that welfare-to-work programs need not have large negative

health effects. The most consistent finding is that welfare reform led to a reduction in health insurance

coverage, or at least no substantial increase. For example, our analysis of the five waiver experiments

show that if we normalize the impact by the control group means, we find that reform led to no impact on

current coverage, or, in Connecticut a small increase, with the estimates ranging from -2 percent to 6

percent. Importantly, the range and magnitude of estimates both in the literature and in our exploratory

analysis is far smaller than the large reductions in health insurance found in the early leaver studies. The

impacts on health care utilization and health status tend to be more mixed and fewer are statistically

significant. Some studies find evidence of a modest decrease in utilization and small changes in health

behaviors. Our findings based on the analysis of five waiver states suggest no consistent impact on

utilization and perhaps improvements in child health status for children two to nine at the beginning of the

experiments.


                                                      2
II. Welfare Reform in the 1990s

         Beginning in the early 1990s, many states were granted waivers to make changes to their AFDC

programs. About half of the states implemented some sort of welfare waiver between 1993 and 1995

(Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, DHHS, 2001). Following this period of

state experimentation, PRWORA was enacted in 1996, replacing AFDC with TANF. PRWORA

originally indicated that all states had to have their TANF programs in place and have implemented

TANF by July 1, 1997, although subsequently this deadline was relaxed (Administration of Children and

Families, DHHS, 2002). All states implemented PRWORA in a seventeen month period between

September 1996 and January 1998 (Gil Crouse, 1999; Administration for Children and Families, DHHS,

1997).

         The main goals of welfare reform are to increase work, reduce dependency on welfare, reduce

births outside marriage, and to increase the formation of two parent families. While waiver and TANF

policies varied considerably across states, the reforms were generally welfare-tightening and pro-work.

More specifically, the welfare-tightening elements of reform include work requirements, financial

sanctions, time limits, family caps, and residency requirements.4 The loosening aspects of reform include

liberalized earnings disregards (which promote work by lowering the tax rate on earned income while on

welfare), increased asset limits, increased transitional Medicaid coverage, and expanded welfare

eligibility for two-parent families. Importantly, welfare reform—either the goals or resulting policies—

had little directly to do with health or health insurance.

         During this period of welfare reform, however, other policies were expanding public health

insurance for low-income families. Historically, eligibility for Medicaid for the non-elderly and non-

disabled was tied directly to receipt of cash public assistance. In particular, the AFDC income eligibility

limits adopted by a state would also be used for Medicaid, and AFDC conferred automatic eligibility for

Medicaid. Thus, a family that received AFDC benefits would also be eligible for health insurance

through Medicaid. Conversely, if a family left AFDC, its members generally would lose Medicaid


                                                       3
coverage.5 However, in a series of federal legislative acts beginning in 1984, states were required to

expand Medicaid coverage for infants, children, and pregnant women beyond the AFDC income limits,

leading to large increases in eligibility (Jonathan Gruber 1997). These are known as the poverty-related

or OBRA Medicaid expansions. By 2001, these expansions mandated that all children in families with

income up to the Federal poverty limit were eligible for Medicaid, provided they met other requirements.

        PRWORA further weakened the link between AFDC and Medicaid by requiring states to cover

any family that meets the pre-PRWORA AFDC income, resource, and family composition eligibility

guidelines (Ron Haskins 2001). This so-called 1931 program (named after the relevant section of the

Social Security Act, as amended by PRWORA) also allowed states to expand eligibility for parents

beyond the 1996 AFDC/Medicaid limits. Anna Aizer and Jeffrey Grogger (2003) report that by 2001,

about half the states had taken advantage of this program and expanded Medicaid access for parents

above the welfare income cutoffs. PRWORA also contained language restricting immigrant access to

means-tested transfer programs (including Medicaid). As discussed in George Borjas (2003), many states

responded by providing immigrant access to Medicaid using newly created, state-funded “fill-in”

programs.

        Lastly, in 1997, Congress established the State Children’s Health Insurance program (SCHIP),

which allows states to provide public health insurance to children up to 200 percent of the poverty level

(and subsequently to higher levels).6



III. Welfare Reform and Expected Impacts on Health

        Despite the lack of a direct connection between welfare reform and health, there are many

indirect pathways through which welfare reform may affect health outcomes.

        First, welfare reform reduces welfare caseloads, leading to a decline in Medicaid coverage. The

AFDC caseload has declined more than 60 percent since its peak in 1994 (U.S. Department of Health and

Human Services 2002).7 During this time period, the number of nondisabled adults and children on

Medicaid also fell. Between 1995 and 1997, the number of nondisabled adults on Medicaid fell by 10.6

                                                     4
percent, with larger reductions among cash welfare recipients (Leighton Ku and Brian Bruen 1999). The

noncash-assistance Medicaid caseload (especially children), on the other hand, grew, reflecting the

separation of AFDC eligibility from Medicaid eligibility described above.

        This expected loss in public coverage may be offset by increased private coverage due to

increases in mother’s employment or coverage from another family member (crowd-in). However, these

low-skill workers are likely to be employed in industry-occupation cells with traditionally low rates of

employer-provided health insurance (Janet Currie and Aaron Yelowitz 2000). In sum, the first prediction

is that welfare reform should be associated with a decrease in Medicaid coverage, an increase in private

insurance, and likely a decrease in overall insurance.

        This pathway of decreased insurance coverage may lead to changes in health. For example, a

decline in insurance may lead to less health service utilization—for example less preventive care and

prenatal care (Richard Nathan and Frank Thompson 1999). This decline in health care utilization may

subsequently impact health outcomes. Importantly, there is an ongoing debate about the magnitude of the

causal effects of health insurance coverage on health. Most observational studies show a positive and

significant association between health insurance and health. However, as summarized in the recent review

by Helen Levy and David Meltzer (2004), these observational studies are limited due to issues with

endogeneity and selection. Instead, they argue that the best evidence about a causal link between health

insurance and health comes from the quasi-experimental analysis of government policy expansions and

the RAND health insurance experiments. These studies show a much weaker, but still generally positive,

link between health insurance and health compared to the observational studies. The positive link is

stronger for more vulnerable or disadvantaged populations.8

        Second, welfare reform may impact families’ economic resources. While the evidence is less

clear on this topic, research suggests that welfare reform has led to an overall increase in the incomes of

low-skill families.9 However, Marianne Bitler, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes (2006) find that

reform has heterogeneous impacts across the income distribution, with some evidence of reductions at the




                                                      5
lowest income levels. These changes in a family’s economic well-being could then have impacts on

health care utilization and health status (as well as health insurance coverage).

           Third, reform-induced increases in employment may lead to changes in a parent’s time

endowment which in turn can affect choices about health care utilization, diet, and health (Steven Haider,

Alison Jacknowitz, and Robert Schoeni 2003). Fourth, welfare reform could lead to increases (or

decreases) in stress, which in turn can affect health.

           Discussion of these pathways illustrates that the impacts of welfare reform on health insurance

coverage and health care utilization are more direct than the impacts on health status. This interpretation

is consistent with the health production model in Michael Grossman (2001). In particular, health is a

durable capital stock that will change slowly with investment (time, nutrition, exercise, health services).

Health services, on the other hand, are investment goods consumed each period and therefore would be

expected to change more quickly in response to changes in prices, income, and time constraints. This has

important implications for how to interpret and what to expect from empirical analyses of welfare reform

on health. We might expect a somewhat immediate impact of reform on health insurance, while it may

take months or years for welfare reform to impact health status. We will return to this issue later in the

chapter.



IV. Empirical Identification of the Effects of Welfare Reform on Health

           Three challenges to identifying the impact of TANF are often raised in the literature (Blank

2001). First, at the same time welfare reform was occurring, the U.S. economy boomed. As documented

in James Hines, Hoynes, and Alan Krueger (2001) the expansion of the 1990s led to important gains for

disadvantaged families, especially in the last years of the decade. For example, the unemployment rate

for African-Americans fell to the lowest level ever recorded and low-skill groups experienced the first

increase in real wages since the 1970s. These gains in the economic position of disadvantaged families

may, of course, have independent impacts on health. Second, all states implemented TANF between

September 1996 and January 1998. This relatively short implementation period leaves less scope for

                                                         6
identifying impacts of TANF through differences in the timing of TANF implementation across states.

Identifying the impacts of welfare waivers, however, is considerably more straightforward, as there is

variation across states and over time in the implementation of waivers. Third, welfare reform is multi-

dimensional and consists of many different policy changes. In the end there is no single waiver program

or TANF program—there are 50 state TANF programs, one in each state. This makes it difficult to learn

about the importance of any specific policy change.

        In the face of these challenges, there are several different methodologies used in the literature.

The first is experimental—by federal law all states implementing welfare waivers were required to

evaluate their waivers, mostly using experimental methods. In these experimental evaluations,

individuals were randomly assigned into the treatment (welfare) and control (AFDC) groups. Using the

data from these experiments, the treatment effect of reform can be simply calculated as the difference

between mean outcomes in the treatment and control groups. Importantly, all experimental analyses

relate to welfare waiver programs—there is no experimental evidence of the effects of state TANF

programs.10

        The second approach is non-experimental. One common approach is to estimate state panel

models such as:

                                   yist = Rstβ + Xistδ + Lstα + γs + νt + εist.

In this prototype model, the outcome variable is yist and the welfare reform variable is Rst. The model also

includes controls: state-level labor market and other policy variables (Lst), individual covariates Xist (if

applicable), as well as state (γs) and time (νt) fixed effects. In one common version of this model, Rst is a

dummy variable equal to one if waivers and/or TANF are implemented in this state-year observation. In

this case, identification comes from variation in the presence and timing of reform across states.

        Because of the lack of variation in the timing of TANF implementation across states, many

studies extend the above model to a difference-in-difference model:

                  yist = Rstβ1 + TREATist*Rst β2 + TREATist β3+ Xistδ + Lstα + γs + νt + εist.




                                                        7
The parameter of interest is now β2 and is identified using the difference in trends post-reform between

the treatment and control groups. Various comparisons are used in the literature including comparing

single women with children to childless women, single women with children to married women with

children, and low educated single women with children to highly educated single women with children.

Other nonexperimental studies add variation in the waiver and TANF reform variables by using detailed

characteristics across states such as the length of the time limit or the severity of the sanctions.

        Another variation of the basic model above is to replace the reform variable Rst with a measure of

the welfare caseload (or per capita caseload) in the state-year cell, Cst. This approach seeks to take

advantage of the variation in the declines in welfare caseloads across states and over time. There are

potential problems with interpreting such estimates as the effect of reform, however. The literature has

shown that welfare reform accounts for only part of the fall in caseloads—other important factors are

labor market opportunities and other policies such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (examples of this

literature include Council of Economic Advisors, 1997, 1999; Geoffrey Wallace and Blank, 1999; James

Ziliak et al., 2000; and Jacob Klerman and Haider, 2004).11

        A third approach in the literature is a “leaver analysis”—consisting of national or state-level

studies that examine the characteristics of families leaving welfare. The leaver studies provide an

accurate snapshot of the experiences of those families that have left welfare. However, such studies

cannot identify causal impacts of welfare reform (Blank 2002). First, there is no way to identify why the

families left welfare—was it due to welfare reform or other factors? Second, a significant fraction of the

decline in welfare caseloads is due to reductions in initial entry into welfare (Grogger et al., 2003) and the

leaver studies could never capture this group. Finally, there is no control group, no before period data,

and no comparison to exits from welfare in the pre-reform period.

        Overall, the experimental and nonexperimental approaches have advantages and disadvantages.

Experimental studies have the appeal of random assignment, but have limitations such as the limited

coverage of TANF policies (as opposed to waivers), the inability to obtain nationally representative

estimates, and the inability to account for effects of changes in entry behavior that result from welfare


                                                       8
reform. Further, as is often noted in discussions of experimental methods for evaluating the effects of

programs, effects when a small scale program is ramped up to apply everywhere may differ from the

experimental estimates. Evaluators may be better funded or have a strong incentive to ensure program

participants understand the rules of the treatment. This may not be the case when the program is

implemented everywhere. Nonexperimental analyses have the advantage of being nationally

representative, but the usual identification concerns exist—that underlying trends in the outcome

variables of interest could lead to spurious estimates of policy effects. A further disadvantage of

nonexperimental analyses, especially as it relates to health outcomes, is that one is limited by the

available data at the state level. A further advantage of the experimental analyses in the context of this

study is that many state welfare waiver experiments collected data that allow for a somewhat richer

analysis of health outcomes than would be possible with large survey sample data sets such as the Current

Population Survey (CPS). However, the small sample sizes in these surveys are a limitation relative to

the large sample sizes in typical nonexperimental analyses.



V. What Do We Know from the Existing Literature?

        The literature on the impacts of welfare reform is quite large. Here, we focus our review on what

is known about the impacts of welfare reform on health.12 Our review summarizes evidence from both

experimental and nonexperimental analyses. We organize our summary into two sections, the first

examines the impacts of welfare reform on health insurance and the second examines the impacts of

reform on health utilization and health status.

        The nonexperimental literature utilizes national survey data that allows for identification of state-

year cells. Such national datasets include the CPS, Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS),

and Vital Statistics detailed natality files. The main source of data for experimental evaluations of welfare

waivers is state administrative data. These data, for example, are used to calculate impacts of reform on

employment, earnings, welfare use, public assistance payments, and, in a few cases, Medicaid enrollment.

Relevant for this project, however, these administrative data have (in some experiments) been augmented


                                                      9
by surveys of the treatment and control groups measuring additional family and child outcomes (including

health insurance coverage, utilization, and status). In addition to the state welfare experiments, we also

draw on the experimental evaluation of the Canadian Self Sufficiency Project (SSP) which, like TANF, is

an income support program with a time limit, which is considerably more generous than most of the U.S.

experiments. We discuss SSP’s impacts here for two reasons. First, SSP was associated with larger cash

increases during the treatment before time limits than were most of U.S. programs. Also, the SSP data

cover a longer follow-up period than the U.S. experimental data. Both of these features may make

possible detection of long term health effects of SSP if they exist.

A. Health insurance coverage

        Many studies examine the impacts of welfare reform on health insurance. The studies analyze the

impact of reform on public health insurance coverage (usually Medicaid), private health insurance

coverage (such as employer-provided coverage or individually purchased coverage), and any insurance

coverage. The discussion above suggests that reform should lead to overall reductions in health

insurance—through decreases in public coverage and increases in private coverage—as families move off

welfare and into work. We summarize the main findings of this literature.

    •   Welfare reform led to small reductions in health insurance coverage

        The literature is generally consistent with the prediction that reform is associated with a reduction

in health insurance coverage. Among the nonexperimental studies, Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (2005)

use the BRFSS and find that state waivers and TANF implementation led to reductions in any insurance

coverage for single women, with the largest impacts for Hispanic single women. The study uses a state

pooled panel model with dummies for waivers and TANF implementation and estimates a difference-in-

difference model (with married women as controls) to control for other contemporaneous impacts on

health insurance. John Cawley, Mathis Schroeder and Kosali Simon (2005) extend this work by

examining effects of reform on monthly health insurance coverage using the Survey of Income and

Program Participation (SIPP). They find an increase in the propensity to be uninsured, with somewhat

smaller effects for children compared to their mothers. Robert Kaestner and Neeraj Kaushal (2004) use


                                                     10
the CPS to estimate a difference-in-difference model and find that declines in the AFDC caseload are

associated with reductions in Medicaid, increases in employer-provided health insurance, and overall

increases in uninsurance for single mothers and their children. They measure welfare reform using the

AFDC/TANF caseload—the idea being that reform leads to reductions in the caseload which leads to

changes in health insurance (and other outcomes). These estimates may reflect factors other than reform

that are leading to changes in the caseload.

        The results using household survey data are consistent with Medicaid caseload analyses. Ku and

Garrett (2000) examine the impact of pre-PRWORA welfare waivers on Medicaid caseloads and find that

waivers led to (statistically insignificant) declines in the adult and child Medicaid caseload.

        Grogger, Klerman, and Karoly (2002) review the experimental literature and find small, typically

insignificant, and somewhat mixed impacts of welfare reform on the health insurance coverage of adult

recipients and their children. In these studies, surveys are used to measure health insurance coverage at

some point after random assignment (typically three to four years, depending on the particular study).

        In contrast to the above studies, Thomas DeLeire et al., (Forthcoming) conclude that welfare

reform leads to increases in health insurance coverage for low educated women. They use the CPS and

examine the impacts of waiver and TANF implementation and argue that reform could lead to increases

in insurance if there are spillover effects of reform on nonrecipients. Indeed, because of these possible

spillovers they consider the “treatment” group to be all women regardless of marriage or presence of

children.13

        Overall, while the literature is somewhat mixed, the balance of evidence is toward finding

decreases in insurance following reform. It is difficult to compare specific estimates across the studies—

due to different measurement of public coverage (Medicaid or any public insurance) and differences in

samples and control groups—but consistently the measured impacts are relatively small. For example,

Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (2005) find that TANF led to an insignificant 4 percentage point reduction in

insurance coverage among low educated single women with children. This is in stark contrast to the very

large rates of uninsurance reported in the leaver studies (for example, Garrett and Holahan, 2000). As


                                                     11
discussed above, leaver studies are not useful for estimating the impacts of the policy change that is the

focus of this study..

    •   Concurrent Medicaid expansions mitigated these declines in insurance coverage

        Borjas (2003) and Heather Royer (2003) find that more restrictive Medicaid policies did not

reduce health insurance coverage among immigrants, because the loss in public coverage was offset by

increases in private insurance coverage.14 Anna Aizer and Grogger (2003) and Susan Busch and Noelia

Duchovny (2003) use the CPS to examine parental Medicaid expansions through the 1931 program.

Aizer and Grogger (2003) find that these Medicaid expansions led to increases in health insurance

coverage of women (with some crowd-out of private insurance coverage). They also find that expanding

parental coverage leads to increases in the health insurance coverage of children—possibly arising from

an increase in benefits relative to costs associated with taking up coverage.

B. Health utilization and health outcomes

        The BRFSS allow for measures of utilization (indicators for recent checkups, Pap smears, breast

exams, and whether one needed care but found it unaffordable), health behaviors (smoking, drinking, and

exercise), and health status (obesity, lost work days, and self reported health status). Another source of

nonexperimental data is the detailed natality files—which as a census of birth certificates includes data on

prenatal care and birth outcomes (birth weight, gestation). Many state waiver experiments include

surveys designed to obtain richer family and child outcomes.

    •   Welfare reform had small, mixed impacts on health care utilization and outcomes

        The nonexperimental literature finds small, mixed and often insignificant impacts on health.

Currie and Grogger (2002) and Kaestner and Won Lee (Forthcoming) use the detailed natality data and

find that declines in welfare caseloads during the waiver period (Currie and Grogger) and TANF period

(Kaestner and Lee) are associated with declines in prenatal care and small increases in the incidence of

low birth weight for low-education women.

        Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (2005) use the BRFSS and find significant but small reductions in

health care utilization such as the probability of having gotten a checkup, Pap smear, or breast exam in the

                                                     12
last year. They also find (insignificant) increases in the likelihood of needing care but finding if

unaffordable. Kaestner and Elizabeth Tarlov (2006) also use the BRFSS and find no association between

reductions in welfare caseloads and health behaviors (smoking, drinking, diet, and exercise) and health

status (weight, days in poor health, and general health status).

        The experimental estimates of the impact of reform on health are summarized in several reviews

including Grogger and Karoly (2005); Grogger et al., (2001); Pamela Morris et al., (2001); and Lisa

Gennetian et al., (2002). (Estimates are also available from the final reports for each state’s evaluation.)

Much of the experimental evidence examines impacts on children ages five to twelve.15 Health utilization

measures include when the child last saw a dentist or doctor, whether any children have had ER visits

since random assignment, whether the child has a place to go for routine care, and whether various types

of medical care were unaffordable. Health outcomes include parent-rated child general health status as

well as indices of maternal depression and child behavior problems. The estimates from these child

surveys are mixed, with an equal number of unfavorable and favorable impacts of reform on health

(Grogger and Karoly, 2005). The Canadian SSP study examines somewhat different outcomes, focusing

on injuries, long term health limitations, parent’s emotional well-being and general health. The impacts

of SSP are quite consistently positive, but few are statistically significant.

    •   There is some evidence that the impacts varied across groups and with different types of welfare
        reform

        Bitler, Gelbach, and Hoynes (2005) find that the negative impacts of reform on health insurance

and outcomes are larger for Hispanics. This would be as expected if a large share of Hispanics were

affected by the immigrant provisions of PRWORA or were deterred from applying for public insurance

by concerns about program use affecting eventual citizenship or permanent residency applications.

Borjas (2003) finds, using a differences-in-differences-in-differences strategy, that reform was associated

with a decrease in the share of immigrants with public coverage, offset by an increase in private coverage.

        The experimental studies of child well-being find that any improvements in behaviors tend to be

concentrated among young children while there are more likely to be negative impacts on behaviors for

adolescent children (Morris et al., 2001 and Gennetian et al., 2002). The experimental literature also

                                                      13
finds that improvements are more likely to be present with welfare reforms that lead to increases in

income (such as those with generous earnings disregards). Examples of more generous reforms include

the state reforms in Connecticut and Minnesota, as well as the Canadian SSP program. We will discuss

this more in the next section.



VI. Illustrating Impacts of Reform from Experimental Data

        Overall, the summary of the literature above suggests that welfare reform most likely led to

decreases in insurance with more mixed evidence for health utilization and health outcomes. Here we

explore these findings by presenting estimates on the impact of reform from five state welfare waiver

evaluations. As discussed above, each state waiver (but no TANF program) was evaluated using

randomized experiments. Further, state waivers varied significantly in terms of their policy scope and

many of the state waivers did not include time limits or enhanced earnings disregards (two of the key

policies included in TANF).

        Here, we analyze public-use data from state waiver experiments in five states: Connecticut,

Florida, Iowa, Minnesota, and Vermont. The primary reason why we chose these states was that they

were among a relatively small number of states whose evaluations include data on health. Most state

evaluations relied on administrative data on employment and welfare participation while these five states

(and a few others) supplemented this administrative data by fielding a survey to a subset of treatment and

control participants. This is the main source of data used for the literature on family and child well-being

(Gennetian et al., 2002; Morris et al., 2001). We chose to include Connecticut and Florida in particular

because they included time limits as part of their waiver experiments. Overall, these five states provide a

nice range of welfare reform policies—from more generous (Connecticut, Minnesota) to less generous

(Florida, Vermont), including states with time limits (Connecticut, Florida) and without time limits (Iowa,

Minnesota, Vermont). This is useful for evaluating alternative sorts of welfare reforms. However, they

are less useful purely as a TANF evaluation exercise.




                                                     14
        Below we describe the five state’s policies and experimental data in more detail. We then present

the estimates of the effects of the policy changes on health insurance, health utilization, and health status.



A. Description of the Policies in the Five States

        Table 1 presents the policies for the welfare waivers in the five states and AFDC (which is the

control group program in each case). We document three central policies that are required in TANF

programs: time limits, work requirements, and financial sanctions. We also include earnings disregards

as quite commonly they are made more generous in TANF programs and they are very important for

determining how reform affects family income.

        Very few welfare waivers included time limits. In our set of states, Connecticut’s Jobs First (CT-

JF) and Florida’s Family Transition Program (FL-FTP) have time limits. There were some other states

that included time limits, one of which (Indiana) had public-use data available, but we excluded Indiana’s

reform due to limited data on health outcomes. All of the state waivers had work requirements that were

stricter than the pre-existing AFDC program. The states varied in terms of who was exempt from work

requirements (typically, this is based on the age of the youngest child in the family) and whether the

program was focused on employment (had a “work first” policy) or aimed recipients towards education

and training.

        The earnings disregards determine the rate at which benefits are reduced as earnings increase. In

the AFDC program, after three months all earnings over a basic deduction level were “taxed” at 100

percent. This high benefit reduction rate played a central role in the adverse work incentives in the pre-

reform system. All of the states (except Vermont—VT-WRP) had more generous disregard policies than

did AFDC. The most generous states in our sample are CT-JF (where all earnings below the poverty line

were disregarded) and Minnesota (MN-MFIP). FL-FTP and Iowa (IA-FIP) had somewhat less generous

reforms. Highlighting the earnings disregards is important because this liberalization leads not only to

increases in benefits, but also to an increase in the breakeven income point which implies increases in

welfare participation (at least before time limits hit). Thus, we have an opposite prediction for the effects


                                                      15
of reform in the short run compared to our long run prediction of reform causing a decrease in welfare

participation.

        Financial sanctions (which are triggered when a client does not comply with the work

requirements or other rules) also varied across the states, with the most stringent policy in FL-FTP.

Finally, the pre-existing AFDC policy provided twelve months of transitional Medicaid assistance to

families leaving welfare. This was expanded by CT-JF (to two years) and VT-WRP (to three years).

The final row of the table shows how the states vary in terms of the level of the maximum welfare grant at

the time of random assignment. Florida and Iowa have less generous maximum grants while

Connecticut’s and Vermont’s grants are quite generous.

        The experiments in VT-WRP and MN-MFIP had two treatments—incentives only and full

treatment. The incentives-only policies included the enhanced earnings disregards but not the work

requirements. In our analysis below, we analyze both treatments in MN-MFIP but present the full

treatment only for VT-WRP. (The Vermont incentives-only program was only mildly more generous

than the preexisting AFDC program, and thus would not be expected to have significantly different

impacts than AFDC.). Also important to note, FL-FTP had a two-tiered policy that assigned one

treatment to the “job ready” (which included a shorter time limit and a work first employment program)

and another to the “non job ready” (which included a longer time limit and more emphasis on education

and training). We evaluate the average treatment effect across both FL-FTP groups.

        Overall, CT-JF and FL-FTP are the most “TANF like” of the reform states, due to the presence of

the time limit. CT-JF and MN-MFIP are states whose waivers were most likely to lead to increases in

income and welfare use (at least before time limits bind in CT-JF) due to the enhanced earnings

disregards. VT-WRP was probably the most “gentle” of the reforms with a weaker work requirement, no

time limit, and the longest transitional Medicaid benefits. Again, we repeat the caveat above—these

states provide a nice range of possible welfare reform policies, but are less useful as a pure TANF

evaluation exercise.




                                                    16
B. Description of evaluations and our samples in the five states

        Table 2 describes the details of each of the five experiments and the samples that we use in our

analysis. We begin with the timing of the experiment (random assignment and follow up period), the

geographic range of the experiment (state-wide or partial state), and the sample size for the single-parent

component of the evaluation (used in the final reports in each state). Most of the state caseloads consist

primarily of single-parent families and this is reflected in the evaluations that also primarily focus on

single-parent families.

        All of the impacts on health come from the surveys which are given to a (random) subset of the

full sample.16 We indicate in table 2 the timing of the surveys, the cohorts that faced the surveys, and the

response rate on the surveys. The surveys tend to be fielded to specific cohorts between three and four

years after random assignment. For example, in CT-JF there is survey data on 2,424 single-parent

recipients who entered the experiment between April 1996 and February 1997. This number is a bit more

than half of the full sample size for the evaluation. The information on health comes from the adult

survey and the focal child survey (with the exception being VT-WRP which does not have a focal child

survey). The focal child is one child who is between the ages of five and twelve at the time of the survey.

Only one child is chosen (randomly if there is more than one child of the correct age) and there is no child

survey information if there is no child in that age range. That explains why the number of observations

for the child survey is less than the number for the adult survey.17

        It is important to note the timing of the survey (at three to four years after random assignment) is

rather medium term. First, we might not expect much to happen until after the time limits which in the

case of Florida (and to a lesser extent Connecticut) are first reached close to the survey dates. Further, to

comprehensively understand the impact of welfare reform on health status, we need to use data that span a

very long follow up period (which these surveys do not). On the other hand, we may expect that health

insurance (and probably health care utilization) will respond more immediately. However, because

several of these states included expansions in transitional Medicaid assistance, the expansions may

dampen any negative impacts on health insurance.


                                                     17
        We also indicate in the table the samples that we use in our analysis. We have focused on

samples of single parents (at the time of random assignment).18 For some states, this is simply the full

sample (CT-JF and FL-FTP), as the public-use data are only for single parents. In MN-MFIP, we present

estimates for long-term single parent welfare recipients living in urban counties. This is the group that

was highlighted in the state’s final report.19 Because we consider both incentives only and full treatment

in MN-MFIP, we report sample sizes for both treatments. We have chosen our IA-FIP sample to include

single females in early cohorts.20 Finally, for VT-WRP, we include only those receiving the “full”

treatment.



C. Results

        We present our results in six figures. In each case we present an unconditional “percent effect”

estimator which is simply 100 times the treatment group mean minus the control group mean divided by

the control group mean. This is weighted to be representative of the full experimental population at that

point in time where sampling probabilities varied (for Connecticut, Iowa, and Minnesota). An alternative

estimator, used often in the evaluation literature, is the standardized “effect size” which is the treatment

mean minus the control mean divided by the standard deviation of the control group. For those who

prefer that measure, we have companion appendix tables for each of the figures that present the effect size

(as well as the difference, standard error of the difference [calculated to be robust to heteroskedasticity],

the control group mean, and the number of observations). Note that in our experiment, there is no need to

differentiate between intent to treat and average treatment effects. Everyone in the treatment group is

treated—everyone faces the new welfare reform program. This is in contrast to, for example, the Moving

to Opportunity Program where the treatment is voluntary (Jeffrey Kling et al., forthcoming).21

        To begin, figure 1 presents the impacts of welfare reform on quarterly employment, quarterly

welfare participation, and quarterly income. These estimates are important “first stage” outcomes. For

example, we may expect states with smaller reductions in welfare participation to have smaller reductions

in health insurance coverage. Treatment group members in states whose reforms led to large increases in


                                                      18
income may show fewer adverse or more beneficial health outcomes compared to treatment group

members in states whose reforms led to decreases in income.

        Figure 1 presents these first stage outcomes measured at the quarter that the survey was fielded

(outcomes not available for Iowa). The companion table is Appendix table 1. Information about

employment and welfare participation at the time of the survey may present an incomplete picture of

these important first stage outcomes. For example, it may be important to know about longer term welfare

and employment exposure to understand impacts on health measured at the time of the survey. Figure 2

provides a more comprehensive characterization of these impacts by presenting differences (between the

treatment and control groups) in the outcomes averaged over all quarters between random assignment and

the time of the survey. The companion table is Appendix table 2. While an argument could be made in

support of either time frame, we focus on the entire period up to the survey to reflect the fact that the

health care utilization data refer to some look-back period and the health status variables are stock

measures that adjust over a longer time period.

        Figures 1 and 2 consist of three panels, where each panel corresponds to a different outcome:

quarterly employment, welfare participation, and income (earnings plus cash assistance plus food stamps

plus General Assistance for MN-MFIP only). Within each panel, we present percent effects for each of

the states where the outcome is available. There are a maximum of six estimates—one each for CT-JF,

FL-FTP, IA-FIP, and VT-WRP and two for MN-MFIP (incentives only treatment and full treatment).

Each estimate is shown as a bar, and at the end of the bar we provide the percent effect along with the

significance of the treatment control differences (* denotes significant at the 10 percent level, **

significant at the 5 percent level, and *** significant at the 1 percent level). Later figures differ only in

how many panels are presented. The sample for the estimates in figures 1 and 2 is persons completing the

survey who also have administrative data for all three outcomes.22

        The results for figure 1 show that at the time of the survey, employment is higher in all states,

with significant increases in CT-JF, VT-WRP and MFIP-Full. Welfare participation is significantly lower




                                                      19
in CT-JF and FL-FTP, reflecting the post-time limit period. MFIP shows higher welfare participation and

higher income, reflecting the generous reform without time limits.

        The results for figure 2, reflecting the average impact during the period between random

assignment and the survey, show that all of the programs led to statistically significant increases in

quarterly employment relative to AFDC. Effects on employment seem to be larger in the states with more

generous earnings disregards (MN-MFIP, CT-JF). Welfare participation is significantly higher than

under AFDC in Minnesota and somewhat higher in Connecticut, reflecting their more generous disregards

and (in the case of CT-JF) the fact that more of the period was pre-time limits. Welfare participation is

significantly lower with FL-FTP.23 Finally, Panel C presents impacts on quarterly income from

administrative sources (earnings plus cash welfare plus food stamps plus General Assistance for MN-

MFIP only). Total quarterly income was significantly higher for the treatment group members in

Connecticut and Minnesota, and about the same for the other states.

        These findings may suggest various patterns for the impacts on health insurance coverage, health

care utilization, and health status, depending on the importance of the various pathways for reform to

affect these outcomes. For example, if the most important factor leading to public insurance coverage is

ongoing welfare participation, figures 1 and 2 suggest that we would find increases in coverage with

reform for Minnesota and possibly Connecticut. If, instead, employment is important, it has other

implications. We should point out again, that increases in welfare participation are not generally expected

with TANF. This difference in welfare participation in the experiments compared with what we expect

from TANF reflects the fact that only two of our states have time limits and Connecticut (being one of

those two states) is highly unusual in its generous earnings disregard and extension of the transitional

Medicaid benefits. For those readers most interested in evaluating TANF, the results for FL-FTP are the

most relevant.

        Figure 3 presents the estimates of the effect of reform on the head’s health insurance coverage.24

Reform led to increases in public insurance coverage in MN-MFIP and CT-JF—this seems to be a direct

result of longer stays on welfare (figure 2). Public insurance coverage fell (though not significantly) in


                                                     20
the other states. Having other nonpublic (private) insurance and no public insurance shows the opposite

pattern. In both cases, MN-MFIP full treatment leads to larger (in magnitude) impacts, consistent with

the larger first stage effects discussed above. The bottom line is that reform leads to an increase in head’s

overall insurance coverage in CT-JF, an insignificant increase for MFIP, and negative, small, and

insignificant effects for the other states. One interesting outcome available in some states is the presence

of spells of uninsurance since random assignment. This shows large and significant decreases (a positive

outcome) for Minnesota, perhaps reflecting increased welfare participation (figures 1 and 2).

        The results for children’s insurance coverage, presented in figure 4, show small (1 to 2 percent)

and insignificant impacts on any insurance coverage. Similar to the results for adults, any insurance and

public insurance coverage increase for CT-JF and MN-MFIP (and IA-FIP) and decrease for the other

states (VT-WRO and FL-FTP), although the effects are smaller and fewer are significant compared to the

adults. We would expect smaller impacts on child coverage given the other available public insurance

programs.25 Again, the measure of any spells of uninsurance for any child shows positive effects for

Minnesota (negative estimates).

        Figure 5 presents estimates for utilization, access, and affordability of care for the sample of focal

children five to twelve (and for their families for doctor or dentist care being unaffordable). These results

are very inconclusive. Few of the estimates are significant and for most variables there are an equal

number of positive and negative estimates. For example, the variable “focal child has seen a doctor in the

past two years” has one significant positive estimate, with the rest insignificant and very close to zero.

There are some large negative estimates for the outcome “someone in the family could not afford to see a

dentist or doctor”—however none of these are significant. Further, one might expect smaller decreases

(or increases) in utilization in states that had smaller decreases (or increases) in insurance. No such

pattern emerges from this figure.

        Finally, figure 6 presents the results for health outcomes for the focal child sample including

mother’s risk for depression (a positive effect is an adverse impact), child’s having behavioral problems

(a positive effect is an adverse impact), and for the parent reporting the child was in excellent or very


                                                     21
good health (a positive effect is a good outcome).26 These estimates consistently point to welfare reform

leading to improvements in health status, although few estimates are statistically significant. For

example, four of five estimates indicate that the risk of maternal depression decreases (the exception is

CT-JF), four of five estimates indicate that the child behavior index improves (the exception is FL-FTP),

and three of five estimates indicate that child health status improves (the exceptions are IA-FIP and MN-

MFIP full treatment). Again, the improvements tend to be most systematic for the most generous

reforms: Minnesota has the largest improvements (perhaps related to their large increases in income) with

Connecticut close behind.

        Given that we estimate effects for many outcomes, we need to be concerned about the possibility

that the separate tests are sometimes wrongly rejecting the null of no impact. To address this concern

about multiple inference, we have also constructed summary measures for the types of outcomes within

each table for each state which allow us to test the effect of the treatment on each set of outcomes. For

each set of outcomes (for example, quarterly employment, welfare receipt, and income since random

assignment for figure 2), the summary measure is defined as the average of the standardized outcomes

(after having converted all outcomes to be positive when they are good and normalizing them by the

control group standard deviation). So, for the example, the summary measure would be the average of the

quarterly employment, quarterly income, and 1 minus quarterly welfare receipt (assuming, as per the

intent of reform, that ongoing welfare receipt is a negative thing), each normalized by its control group

standard deviation. This new averaged variable is then regressed on treatment status for each state. Tests

on this summary measure are then robust to over-testing.

        This does not entirely resolve the issue of multiple inference as there are still five such summary

measures. It is important to consider hypotheses about these summary measures as members of families

of hypotheses. This involved calculating cutoffs for test statistics such that the probability is less than a

set amount (say 0.05) that at least one of the tests in the family would exceed the cutoff under a joint null

of no effects. A familiar but quite conservative such test (if the test statistics are highly correlated) is the

Bonferroni adjustment, in which the adjusted p-value is the observed p-value times the number of


                                                       22
outcomes examined. More powerful tests remove hypotheses from the family of nulls if they are rejected.

An alternative from the biostatistics literature used in recent papers by Kling and Jeffrey Liebman (2004),

Kling, Liebman, and Larry Katz (Forthcoming), and Michael Anderson (2005) involves calculating

family-wise error adjusted significance levels, using the Westfall and Young free step-down resampling

method (Peter Westfall and Stanley Young, 1993). We have also implemented this method to adjust our

summary measure p-values for the multiple inference, using 1000 draws from the null distribution of no

impact of each summary measure (for more details, see algorithm 2.8 in Westfall and Young, 1993).

        We now discuss the results of our five summary measures for each of the states, reported in

Appendix table 6. The table reports the treatment-control difference in summary measures for each

state/treatment and figure, along with the standard error, the family-wise error adjusted p-values for each

state/treatment, and the N for each summary measure.27 Each summary measure is for a single table and

state/treatment, and averages all (normalized) reported outcomes for that treatment. The normalized

outcomes are then all for positive outcomes (so the summary measure treatment-control difference is

positive if the reform caused an improvement in the summary measure). For the employment, welfare,

and income summary measure (figure 2), lack of welfare receipt is considered “good.” For the adult and

child/family health insurance coverage summary measures (figures 3 and 4), public coverage and lacking

any spells of coverage are considered “good.” For the health care utilization summary measure (figure 5),

not having been unable to afford to see the doctor or dentist is considered good. Finally, for the health

status summary measure (figure 6), the child’s mother not being at risk for depression and the child not

having a high Behavioral Problem Index measure are considered “good.”

        Adjusting for the family-wise error rate definitely makes a difference in the overall interpretation

of the results. For example, for the figure 2 summary measure (panel A of Appendix table 7), the

treatment-control differences for IA-FIP, MN-MFIP full, FL-FTP, and CT-JF are all positive and

significant at the 5 percent level if the p-value is unadjusted for the multiple testing (significance levels

not shown in table). However, when multiple inference has been controlled for, only FL-FTP and CT-JF

have significant treatment-control differences in the summary measure, and only Florida’s is significant at


                                                      23
the 5 percent level. For the adult health insurance measures in figure 3, the summary measure treatment-

control difference is only statistically significant for CT-JF (and it is positive, suggesting an improvement

in health insurance coverage for the head). None of the child/family health insurance summary measures

(figure 4) are significant, although both the MN-MFIP incentives only and CT-JF measures are both

positive and come close to statistical significance (p=0.107 and 0.103 respectively). Again, none of the

figure 5 or figure 6 summary measure treatment-control differences are statistically significant, although

all but one are positive. Thus, considering all the measures within each domain suggests a similar

interpretation to the one we have from considering them one at a time. CT-JF had a positive and

significant effect on income, employment, and leaving welfare and also on better adult insurance

coverage outcomes. Effects for child/family insurance, utilization, and health status are small and

insignificant in general.



VII. Conclusion

        This paper explores the relationship between welfare reform and health. We examine both state

welfare waivers and TANF implementation. We first present a comprehensive review of the literature and

summarize what is known about impacts of welfare reform on health insurance coverage, health care

utilization, and health status. There is a growing literature on this subject, although there are few clear

findings. Most studies find that welfare reform leads to reductions in health insurance coverage, although

some studies find the opposite. Results for utilization and health status fairly consistently find negative

impacts but the estimates are very small and rarely statistically significant.

        We then go on to present estimates from five experimental evaluations of state welfare waivers.

We present percent effects—100 times the difference in means between the treatment and control group

divided by the control group mean. Given the random assignment to the treatment and control groups,

this is an unbiased estimate of the effects of welfare reform. Overall, the results suggest that reform leads

to small changes in health insurance and possible improvements in health. The results for health

utilization are less conclusive.


                                                      24
        Our choice of these five states (Connecticut, Florida, Iowa, Minnesota, and Vermont) is driven

primarily by data availability. Most state welfare experiments collected data on employment and welfare

use, but relatively few provided the data on health needed for this study. Further, states were required by

law to provide experimental evaluations of their waiver programs yet TANF imposed no such

requirement. As a consequence, while these five state’s waivers are representative of all waiver

programs, they are not necessarily representative of TANF programs. Only two of these states have time

limits (Connecticut and Florida). Two (Connecticut and Minnesota) had very large expansions in their

earning disregards which led to increases in benefits and welfare participation (at least prior to reaching

the time limits). An advantage of using data from these states is that their welfare policies span a wide

range of the policy space. A disadvantage is that they are not ideal if the goal is a pure TANF evaluation.

We had little choice in this selection, however, as there is no experimental data for TANF, or public-use

data for many states.

        With this caveat, we have several important conclusions from our analysis of the experimental

data and our reading of the broader literature. First, work promoting reforms do not necessarily lead to

bad outcomes. There is little evidence that reforms led to significant reductions in health care utilization

or worse health. Second and somewhat more speculatively, the type of welfare reform likely matters.

Reforms that encouraged work while increasing benefits (as in Minnesota or Connecticut) even in the

presence of work requirements and time limits may lead to more consistent positive impacts on health.

Finally, investments in data collection resulted in important increases in our knowledge. Our analysis (and

the analyses by many others) could not have been done without the randomized experimental data and the

additional resources spent on surveys that provide a rich set of health, education and well-being

outcomes.

        We have much left to learn about the impacts of welfare reform on health. Many health outcomes

may require a longer follow up period to be fully evaluated. The study here is at best a short- to medium-

term analysis and thus may be too early to inform us about the full impacts of reform. However, we need

the appropriate data in order to complete this task. For example, one could field follow up surveys to


                                                     25
these experimental samples. There are other ways to improve access to data that facilitate both

experimental and nonexperimental research. There are limited options for using household survey data to

estimate the impacts of a state varying policy such as welfare reform. The CPS is an option, but it only

provides information on health insurance and (in some years) health status. The SIPP has richer

outcomes but smaller samples and no SIPP panel spanned key reform periods. National Health Insurance

Survey data are the obvious choice, but despite sample sizes comparable to the CPS, the public use

version of the NHIS data does not identify individual states. The BRFSS is another possibility, but the

samples are smaller, and there is no coverage for children. Non-health surveys need to be expanded to

include more health outcomes, and even some health surveys might benefit from expanding the

population surveyed or including health outcomes that might respond to shorter-run changes in income,

employment, or program participation. An example of the underlying demand for large scale survey data

with state identifiers and health outcomes is evidenced by the explosion of studies that use vital statistics

natality data on births in the U.S. The rich natality data permits analysis of gestation, birth outcomes, and

prenatal care and identify states and counties. Finally, it would be useful for experimental evaluators to

provide researchers with links to administrative data on Medicaid claims. This would enable a richer

characterization of health utilization and, possibly, health conditions.




                                                      26
1
    For example, see comprehensive reviews by Rebecca Blank (2002) and Jeffrey Grogger and Lynn

Karoly (2005).
2
    The new welfare programs include other changes which we document in section II. Especially relevant

for health, many states expanded “transitional” Medicaid coverage which is received when leaving

welfare.
3
    Other leaver studies documented similar rates of coverage (Marilyn Ellwood and Kimball Lewis 1999;

Jocelyn Guyer 2000; Robert Moffitt and Eric Slade 1997; Harold Pollack et al., 2002).
4
    Family caps prevent welfare benefits from increasing when a woman gives birth while receiving aid.

Residency-requirement policies mandate that unmarried teen parents who receive aid must live in the

household of a parent or other guardian.
5
    States could and did set up Medically Needy programs that allowed states to provide Medicaid benefits

to families above the AFDC income cutoff if they had high medical expenses. States were also required to

provide transitional Medicaid coverage for families leaving AFDC due to an increase in earnings.
6
    We will not discuss the literature on the effects of SCHIP, but its existence makes it more difficult to

assess the impacts of reforms for coverage of children using nonexperimental data spanning the period

after SCHIP was implemented.
7
    The literature on welfare reform includes an ongoing debate on what has contributed to this decrease in

the welfare caseload. The leading candidate besides welfare reform itself is the booming economy of the

late 1990s. Teen pregnancy rates also began to fall before TANF implementation.
8
    For example, Janet Currie and Jonathan Gruber found that expansions in Medicaid are associated with

increased utilization and health outcomes among the poor (Currie and Gruber 1996a, 1996b) and David

Card, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas (2006) found that the introduction of Medicare led to increases

in insurance coverage and utilization, with larger impacts for more disadvantaged groups.
9
    For recent summaries of the experimental and nonexperimental studies of welfare reform and family

income, see the reviews by Blank (2002), Grogger and Karoly (2005), and Moﬃtt (2002).
                                                       27
10
     There are states that adopted their waiver programs as their TANF programs, when federal law was

passed. Therefore some of the welfare waiver experimental studies do, then, estimate impacts of TANF.
11
     Another possible problem with using caseloads to identify the causal impact of reform on other

outcomes is that the caseload and the outcomes of interest may themselves be affected by unobserved

factors.
12
     We focus here on the impacts of welfare reform on health. A related literature finds that pre-reform

public assistance programs lead to improvements in health. Currie and Nancy Cole (1993) find that

AFDC participation leads to improvements in birth outcomes (higher birth weight). Currie and Grogger

(2002) find that higher pre-PRWORA welfare participation rates are associated with more prenatal care

and improved birth outcomes. Price Fishback et al., (2005) find that increases in public assistance

spending during the New Deal led to lower infant mortality, lower suicide rates, fewer deaths from

diarrhea and infectious diseases, and higher birth rates.
13
     Large spillover effects seem to be inconsistent with the small estimated impacts of welfare reform on

marriage and fertility (see, for example, Bitler et al., 2004; and the review in Grogger and Karoly, 2005).
14
     Royer also examines impact on pregnant immigrants and finds a temporary reduction in prenatal care

but no effect on birth outcomes.

15
     DHHS funded a number of state experimental evaluations to allow them to examine longer run impacts

of reform on various school and health outcomes for children who were 2–9 at the time of random

assignment, and thus approximately 5–12 at the time of the surveys.
16
     In states conducting the focal-child evaluations, single parents with children of the appropriate age were

oversampled for the adult survey as well. The data for these states include sample weights to make the

survey data representative of the overall population in the survey (these weights adjust for initial

differences in sampling ratios for Connecticut, Iowa, and Minnesota).
17
     The table mentions the maximum number of available observations. Because of item non-response, the

actual Ns are lower than this for many outcomes. We chose to use a different number of observations for

each outcome to maximize sample. Item non-response is generally low for most of our outcomes.
                                                       28
18
     Some of the evaluations do not include data for two-parent families. We wanted a sample that was

consistent across states to the extent possible.
19
     It also has the advantage that there were no changes in the random assignment ratios across the time

period, mitigating the need for controls beyond the treatment indicator. Long term recipients are those on

welfare for at least 24 of the past 36 months.
20
     To be precise, we include single females 18 and up or 16–17 with a preschool aged child, who were in a

cohort randomly assigned at least 57 months before the survey. The final report includes separate

outcomes for ongoing recipients and applicants in three cohorts. We wanted the applicant sample to have

been exposed to the new program or AFDC for as long as the ongoing recipients. Thus, we restricted the

analysis to the earlier applicants. This was not an issue for the four other states, as the surveys in the

other evaluations were only administered to narrow cohorts of participants. Also, in 1997, Iowa

implemented TANF, and applied the new TANF policies to the control group. Thus the treatment-control

program differences are much smaller for later cohorts.
21
     In the MTO study, persons were randomly assigned to a treatment group (who was offered a housing

voucher to move to a low poverty neighborhood) and a control group (no offer). The need to examine

intent to treat for MTO comes in because only a subset of persons in the treatment group accepted the

offer. Here, everyone has applied to obtain—and been deemed eligible for—welfare, although a small

share of each group does not take up welfare.
22
     The exception to this is Iowa, where it is impossible to merge the administrative and survey information

with the public-use data. For Iowa, we have tried to match our survey sample as closely as possible.
23
     The difference between Connecticut and Florida reflects the fact that Connecticut had a much more

generous earnings disregard. Further, while the Connecticut time limit was a short 21 months, in practice,

extensions to the time limit were fairly common. Florida’s time limit was also relatively short (for the

work-ready, 24 months out of 60) but more stringent than Connecticut’s while the survey in Florida was

administered 4 years out.



                                                      29
24
     In this and all subsequent figures, there is an appendix table with the same number that provides the

supporting data and an alternative estimator.
25
     For example, many of these low-income children would be eligible for Medicaid via the poverty or

OBRA expansions (children under about 15 in families with income up to 100% of poverty).
26
     The mother being at risk for depression is determined by her score being at least 16 (out of a possible

60) on the 20-item Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression scale. The child having behavioral

problems is determined by whether the child’s Behavioral Problem Index score was in the worst 25

percent. General health is reported on a five-point scale: excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor.
27
     The Ns reported are less than the maximum possible N because an observation will be missing if it is

missing for any of the outcomes. A small share of observations is missing for each set of outcomes.




                                                       30
References

Administration of Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services. 1997. Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families Program Instructions. Transmittal No. TANF-ACF-PI-97-7.
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ofa/pi9707.htm.

Administration of Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services. 2002. Major
Provisions of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-
193). http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ofa/aspesum.htm.

Aizer, Anna, and Jeffrey Grogger. 2003. “Parental Medicaid Expansions and Health Insurance
Coverage.” NBER Working Paper 9907. Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Anderson, Michael. 2005. “Uncovering Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention: A
Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.” Unpublished Paper.
MIT.

Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2005. “Welfare Reform and Health.” Journal of
Human Resources 40(2): 309–334.

Bitler, Marianne P., Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. “What Mean Impacts Miss: Distributional
Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments.” American Economic Review. Forthcoming, September 2006.

Blank, Rebecca M. 2002. “Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States.” Journal of Economic
Literature 40(4): 1105–66.

Blank, Rebecca M. 2001. “Declining Caseloads/ Increased Work: What Can We Conclude about the
Effects Of Welfare Reform?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review.

Bloom, Dan, James J. Kemple, Pamela Morris, Susan Scrivener, Nandita Verma, and Richard Hendra.
2000. The Family Transition Program: Final Report on Florida’s Initial Time-Limited Welfare Program.
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Bloom, Dan, Susan Scrivener, Charles Michalopoulos, Pamela Morris, Richard Hendra, Diana Adams-
Ciardullo, and Johanna Walter. 2002. Jobs First Final Report on Connecticut’s Welfare Reform
Initiative. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Borjas, George. 2003. “Welfare Reform, Labor Supply, and Health Insurance in the Immigrant
Population.” Journal of Health Economics 22(6): 933–58.

Busch, Susan H., and Noelia Duchovny. 2005. “Family Coverage Expansions: Impact on Insurance
Coverage and Health Care Utilization of Parents.” Journal of Health Economics 24(5): 876–90.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin and Nicole Maestas, “The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance Coverage
on Health Care Utilization and Health: Evidence from Medicare,” NBER Working Paper No. 10365

Cawley, John, Mathis Schroeder, and Kosali Ilayperu Simon. 2005. “Welfare Reform and Health
Insurance Coverage of Women and Children.” Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Volume 8, Article 5.

Council of Economic Advisers. 1997. Explaining the Decline in Welfare Receipt 1993–1996. Executive
Office of the President of the United States.


                                                  31
Council of Economic Advisers. 1999. Economic Expansion, Welfare Reform, and the Decline in
Welfare Caseloads, an Update. Executive Office of the President of the United States.

Crouse, Gil. 1999. State Implementation of Major Changes to Welfare Policies, 1992–1998.
http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/Waiver-Policies99/policy_CEA.html.

Currie, Janet, and Nancy Cole. 1993. “Welfare and Child Health: The Link between AFDC
Participation and Birth Weight.” American Economic Review 83(4): 971–85.

Currie, Janet, and Jeffrey Grogger. 2002. “Medicaid Expansions and Welfare Contractions: Offsetting
Effects on Maternal Behavior and Infant Health.” Journal of Health Economics 21(2): 313–35.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):431-466.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political Economy 104(6), 1263-1296.

Currie, Janet, and Aaron Yelowitz. 2000. “Health Insurance and Less Skilled Workers.” In Finding
Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, edited by David Card and Rebecca M. Blank, 233–261. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.

DeLeire, Thomas, Judith A. Levine, and Helen Levy. Forthcoming. “Is Welfare Reform Responsible for
Low-Skilled Women’s Declining Health Insurance Coverage in the 1990s?” Journal of Human
Resources.

Ellwood, Marilyn R., and Kimball Lewis. 1999. “On and Off Medicaid: Enrollment Patterns for
California and Florida in 1995.” Urban Institute Occasional Paper No. 27. Washington, DC: Urban
Institute.

Fishback, Price V, Michael R. Haines, and Shawn Kantor. 2005. “Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief
during the Great Depression.” Unpublished paper.

Fraker, Thomas, Christine Ross, Rita Stapulonis, Robert Olsen, Martha Kovac, M. Robin Dion, and Anu
Rangarajan. 2002. The Evaluation of Welfare Reform in Iowa: Final Impact Report. Final report 8217-
125 and 530. Mathematica Policy Research.

Garrett, Bowen, and John Holahan. 2000. “Health Insurance Coverage after Welfare.” Health Affairs
19(1): 175–84.

Gennetian, Lisa, Greg Duncan, Virginia Knox, Wanda Vargas, Elizabeth Clark-Kauffman, and
Andrew S. London. 2002. How Welfare and Work Policies for Parents Affect Adolescents: A Synthesis
of Research. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Gennetian, Lisa, Cynthia Miller, and Jared Smith. 2005. Turning Welfare into a Work Support: Six-Year
Impacts on Parents and Children from the Minnesota Family Investment Program. New York:
Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Lynn Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.



                                                   32
Grogger, Jeffrey, Lynn Karoly, and Jacob Klerman. 2002. “Consequences of Welfare Reform: A
Research Synthesis.” RAND Working Paper DRU-2676-DHHS, Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Grossman, Michael. 2001. “The Human Capital Model of the Demand for Health.” In Handbook of
Health Economics Volume 1A, edited by Joseph Newhouse and Anthony Culyer, 347–408. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science.

Gruber, Jonathan. 1997. “Health Insurance for Poor Women and Children in the U.S.: Lessons from the
Past Decade.” In Tax Policy and Economy, Volume 11, edited by James Poterba, 169–211. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Guyer, Jocelyn. 2000. “Health Care after Welfare: An Update of Findings from State Leaver Studies.”
Unpublished paper. Center for Budget and Policy Priorities.

Haider, Steven, Alison Jacknowitz, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2003. “Welfare Work Requirements and
Child Well-being: Evidence from the Effects on Breast-feeding.” Demography 40(3): 479–97.

Haskins, Ron. 2001. “Effects of Welfare Reform at Four Years.” In For Better and for Worse: Welfare
Reform and the Well-Being of Children and Families, edited by Greg Duncan and P. Lindsay Chase-
Lansdale, 264–89. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Hines, James R.,, Hoynes, Hilary, and Alan Krueger. 2001. “Another Look at Whether a Rising Tide
Lifts All Boats,” In The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained? edited by Alan Krueger
and Robert Solow. Russell Sage Foundation: New York.

Kaestner, Robert, and Won Chan Lee. Forthcoming. “The Effect of Welfare Reform on Prenatal Care
and Birth Weight.” Journal of Health Economics.

Kaestner, Robert, and Neeraj Kaushal. 2004. “The Effect of Welfare Reform on Health Insurance
Coverage of Low Income Families.” Journal of Health Economics 22(6): 959–81.

Kaestner, Robert, and Elizabeth Tarlov. 2006. “Changes in the Welfare Caseload and the Health of Low-
Educated Mothers.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 25(3): 623–43.

Klerman, Jacob, and Steven J. Haider. 2004. “A Stock-Flow Analysis of the Welfare Caseload.”
Journal of Human Resources 39(4): 865–86.

Kling, Jeffrey R., and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2004. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects on
Youth.” Unpublished Paper.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. Forthcoming. “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica.

Ku, Leighton, and Brian Bruen. 1999. “The Continuing Decline in Medicaid Coverage.” Urban Institute
Working Paper A-37. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Ku, Leighton, and Bowen Garrett. 2000. “How Welfare Reform and Economic Factors Affected
Medicaid Participation: 1984–1996.” Urban Institute Working Paper 00-01. Washington, DC: Urban
Institute.




                                                 33
Levy, Helen, and David Meltzer. 2004. “What Do We Really Know About Whether Health Insurance
Affects Health?” In Health Policy and the Uninsured, edited by Catherine G. McLaughlin. Washington,
DC: Urban Institute Press.

Moffitt, Robert A. 2002. “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply,” in Handbook of Public Economics,
Volume 4, edited by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein. New York, NY: Elsevier Science, North
Holland.

Moffitt, Robert A., and Eric P. Slade. 1997. “Health Care Coverage for Children Who Are On and Off
Welfare.” The Future of Children 7(1).

Morris, Pamela, Aletha Huston, Greg Duncan, Danielle Crosby, and Johannes Bos. 2001. How Welfare
and Work Policies Affect Children: A Synthesis of the Literature. New York: Manpower Demonstration
Research Corporation.

Nathan, Richard and Frank Thompson. 1999. “The Relationship Between Welfare Reform and
Medicaid: A Preliminary View.” Typescript.

Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services.
2001. Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare Waivers.
http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/isp/waiver2/title.htm.

Pollack, Harold, Sheldon Danziger, and Sean Orzol. 2002. “Health Insurance Coverage and Access to
Care among Former Welfare Recipients.” Unpublished Paper.

Royer, Heather. 2003. “Do Rates of Health Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization Respond to
Changes in Medicaid Eligibility Requirements? Evidence from Pregnant Immigrant Mothers.”
Unpublished Paper.

Scrivener, Susan, Richard Hendra, Cindy Redcross, Dan Bloom, Charles Michalopoulos, and Johanna
Walter. 2002. WRP: Final Report on Vermont’s Welfare Restructuring Project. New York: Manpower
Demonstration Research Corporation.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2002. U.S. Welfare Caseloads Information.
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/stats/newstat2.html.

Wallace, Geoffrey, and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. “What Goes Up Must Come Down? Explaining
Recent Changes in Public Assistance Caseloads.” In Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform, edited
by Sheldon H. Danziger. Kalamazoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute.

Westfall, Peter H., and S. Stanley Young. 1993. Resampling-Based Multiple Testing. New York, NY:
John Wiley and Sons.

Ziliak, James P., David N. Figlio, Elizabeth E. Davis, and Laura S. Connolly. 2000. “Accounting for the
Decline in AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or Economic Growth?” Journal of Human Resources
35(3): 570–86.




                                                  34
                                                 Figure 1
           Impacts of Welfare Reform on Employment, Welfare, and Income from Experimental Studies,
                         Outcomes Measured at the Quarter of Survey (Percent Effects)

A. Quarterly em ploym ent

 IA-FIP

 MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                          14 *

 MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                               13

 FL-FTP                                                                                                2

 VT-WRP
                                                                                                                    19 ***

 CT-Jobs First                                                                                             9 **


B. Quarterly w elfare participation

  IA-FIP

  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                                   21 ***

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                                          25     ***
                                                               ***
  FL-FTP                                                    -41

  VT-WRP                                                                                -7
                                                                         ***
  CT-Jobs First                                                        -30


C. Total quarterly incom e


  IA-FIP

  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                         13 **

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                                      20 ***

  FL-FTP                                                                                               3

   VT-WRP                                                                                          0

   CT-Jobs First                                                                          -5



                                                   -60           -40            -20            0                   20                  40


Note: The impacts are reported the outcomes at the quarter w hen the survey w as conducted. For CT-Jobs First, the survey
w as done 36 months after random assignment began; for VT-WRP, 42 months; for FL-FTP, 48 months; for MN-MFIP, 36 months;
and for IA-FIP, 5-6 years. Effect sizes reported are the treatment-control difference divided by the control mean. Significance
levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control differences.




                                                               35
                                                 Figure 2
           Impacts of Welfare Reform on Employment, Welfare, and Income from Experimental Studies,
                   Averages from Random Assignment to Quarter of Survey (Percent Effects)

A. Quarterly em ploym ent

 IA-FIP                                                                                     6 ***

 MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                                           33 ***

 MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                                16 **

 FL-FTP                                                                                                12 ***

 VT-WRP
                                                                                                 9 *

 CT-Jobs First                                                                                              13 ***


B. Quarterly w elfare participation

  IA-FIP                                                                           2

  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                   13 ***

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                                 18 ***

                                                               ***
  FL-FTP                                                 -10

  VT-WRP                                                                 -1

  CT-Jobs First                                                                            5 *


C. Total quarterly incom e


  IA-FIP                                                                               4*

  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                         15 ***

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                               17 ***

  FL-FTP                                                                               3

   VT-WRP                                                                  0

   CT-Jobs First                                                                                 8    ***




                                                   -20           -10           0                 10               20      30            40


Note: The impacts are reported for quarterly averages from the time of random assignment through the quarter w hen the survey
w as conducted. For CT-Jobs First, the survey w as done 36 months after random assignment began; for VT-WRP, 42 months;
for FL-FTP, 48 months; for MN-MFIP, 36 months; and for IA-FIP, 5-6 years (w e report the 6 year average). Effect sizes reported
are the treatment-control difference divided by the control mean. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-
control differences.




                                                                 36
                                                  Figure 3
      Impacts of Welfare Reform on Head’s Health Insurance from Experimental Studies (Percent Effects)


A. Public insurance



  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                              11 *

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                              9
  FL-FTP                                                                                 -7
  VT-WRP                                                                                      -2
  CT-Jobs First                                                                                                           17 ***

B. Other nonpublic insurance (not
public)

  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                   -26

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                 -17
   FL-FTP                                                                                                 5
  VT-WRP                                                                                                      8
  CT-Jobs First
                                                                   -25 ***


 C. Any insurance


  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                2
  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                     2
  FL-FTP
                                                                                              -2
  VT-WRP                                                                                       -1
  CT-Jobs First
                                                                                                          6 ***

D. Ever no insurance coverage

  IA-FIP                                                                                                      9

  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                   -20 **

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients        -38 ***
  FL-FTP                                                                                              3




                                                     -50              -30               -10                   10                   30

Note: The impacts are reported at the time of a follow -up survey administered to some recipients at some time after random
assignment. For CT-Jobs First, the survey w as done 36 months after random assignment began; for VT-WRP, 42 months; for
FL-FTP, 48 months; for MN-MFIP, 36 months; and for IA-FIP, 5-6 years. Effect sizes reported are the treatment-control
difference divided by the control mean. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control differences.




                                                              37
                                                     Figure 4
             Impacts of Welfare Reform on Child or Family Health Insurance from Experimental Studies
                                                (Percent Effects)


A. Any child has public Insurance

 IA-FIP                                                                                                           6

 MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                              6

 MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients
                                                                                                                  6
 FL-FTP
                                                                                                  -6
 VT-WRP
                                                                                                    -4
 CT-Jobs First
                                                                                                                   7 ***


B. Any child has any
insurance
  IA-FIP
                                                                                                              1
  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients
                                                                                                              2
 MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients
                                                                                                              1
  FL-FTP
                                                                                                       -2
  VT-WRP
                                                                                                         -1
  CT-Jobs First
                                                                                                              1



C. Any child ever w ithout coverage
  IA-FIP                                                                                                              8

  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                -27 **

  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients      -44 ***




                                                       -50        -40        -30      -20        -10        0         10        20
Note: The impacts are reported at the time of a follow -up survey administered to some recipients at some time after random
assignment. For CT-Jobs First, the survey w as done 36 months after random assignment began; for VT-WRP, 42 months; for FL
FTP, 48 months; for MN-MFIP, 36 months; and for IA-FIP, 5-6 years. Effect sizes reported are the treatment-control difference
divided by the control mean. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control differences. Values for IA
are for any coverage w ithin the family, those for other states are for any coverage for any child.




                                                                38
                                                   Figure 5
   Impacts of Welfare Reform on Child and Family Health Care Utilization, Access and Affordability of Care from
                                    Experimental Studies (Percent Effects)
A. Focal child has seen dentist in past tw o years

IA-FIP                                                                                                      -1
MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                                          2
MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                                                   3
FL-FTP                                                                                            -3
CT-Jobs First                                                                                               -1

B. Focal child has seen doctor in past tw o years

                                                                                                                     0
IA-FIP
MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                                      1
MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                                                   3 *
FL-FTP                                                                                                      -1
CT-Jobs First
                                                                                                                     0

C. Focal child has place to go for routine care

IA-FIP                                                                                                 -2

MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                                  0

MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients                                                                                       4 **
FL-FTP                                                                                                               0
CT- Jobs First                                                                                                       0

D. Fam ily not able to afford dentist

 IA-FIP                                                                                                                                      6
 MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                                                                     5
 MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients               -16

 FL-FTP                                                                                                -2

 CT-Jobs First                                                            -12


E. Fam ily not able to afford doctor
                                                              -16
 IA-FIP
                                                                                                                                                 7
 MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients
                                                                                  -9
 MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients
 FL-FTP                                                                                 -6

 CT-Jobs First                                                              -11


                                                        -20         -15           -10        -5                  0                   5               10

Note: The impacts are reported at the time of a follow -up survey administered to some recipients at some time after random
assignment. For CT-Jobs First, the survey w as done 36 months after random assignment began; for VT-WRP, 42 months; for FL-
FTP, 48 months; for MN-MFIP, 36 months; and for IA-FIP, 5-6 years. Effect sizes reported are the treatment-control difference
divided by the control mean. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control differences. Outcomes in
panels A., B., and C. are for focal child, those in panels D. and E. are for family but for sample of focal children.




                                                              39
                                                     Figure 6
             Impacts of Welfare Reform on Child and Mother Health Outcomes from Experimental Studies
                                                 (Percent Effects)

A. Focal child's m other at risk for depression


  IA-FIP                                                                                       -4


  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                                    -7


  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients             -20 **

  FL-FTP                                                                                      -5

  CT-Jobs First
                                                                                                             1


B. Behavioral Problem Index top 25th
      til

  IA-FIP                                                                               -8


  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients                                      -13


                                                                                               -4
  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients

  FL-FTP                                                                                                                 9


  CT-Jobs First                                                                  -10



C. Focal child has excellent or very good health

                                                                                                    -1
  IA-FIP

                                                                                               -4
  MN-MFIP, full, long-term recipients

                                                                                                                 4
  MN-MFIP, incentives-only, long-term recipients

                                                                                                                         9 ***
  FL-FTP

  CT-Jobs First                                                                                                  4 *




                                                       -25        -20     -15      -10         -5        0       5       10      15


  Note: The impacts are reported at the time of a follow -up survey administered to some recipients at some time after random
  assignment. For CT-Jobs First, the survey w as done 36 months after random assignment began; for VT-WRP, 42 months;
  for FL-FTP, 48 months; for MN-MFIP, 36 months; and for IA-FIP, 5-6 years. Effect sizes reported are the treatment-control
  difference divided by the control mean. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control differences.




                                                                  40
Table 1: Policies in Welfare Reform Experiments and Preexisting AFDC Program
                                  Connecticut               Florida Family         Minnesota Family        Iowa Family Investment   Vermont Welfare
                                 Jobs First (JF)          Transition Program      Investment Program           Program (FIP)      Restructuring Project                 AFDC
                                                                 (FTP)                  (MFIP)                                           (WRP)

General                                                 Two tiered system        Two tiered system for     Control group subject   Two treatments:
                                                        based on job readiness   long term/short term      to TANF rules in 97     incentives only and full
                                                                                 recipients; Two                                   (we only consider full
                                                                                 treatments incentives                             treatment)
                                                                                 only and full
Time Limit                   21 months with 6           24 months (of every 60) None                       None                    None                       None
                             months extensions          for job ready; 36 (of
                                                        every 72) months for
                                                        others
Work Requirements            Mandatory work first, Mandatory job search          Mandatory employment      Employment and            Half time work required Education/training;
                             exempt if child < 1 year & employment for job       and training for long     training; exempt if child after 30 months on aid Exempt if child < 3
                                                      ready; education and       term; exempt if child <   < 6 months (eliminated                            years
                                                      training for others;       1 year                    in 97)
                                                      exempt if child < 6
                                                      months
Earnings Disregards          All earnings               $200 + 50% of            38% of earnings           40% of earnings          $150 + 25% of             $120 + 33%: Mo. 1–3
                             disregarded until          remaining earnings       disregarded up to 140%    disregarded (all         remaining earnings        $120: Mo. 4–12
                             poverty line                                        of poverty;               earnings disregarded                               $90: Mo. > 12
                                                                                 maximum grant             for 1st 4 months of work
                                                                                 increased by 20% if       if “new worker”
                                                                                 working                   through 97)

Financial Sanctions          Cut in grant for 1st and   Adult portion of grant   10% reduction in grant 3 months reduced           None                       Minimal
                             2nd offense; 3 mo.         eliminated until                                benefits, 6 months no
                             suspension for 3rd         compliant (until 6/97)                          benefits
Selected other policies      Two years transitional     One year transitional    One year transitional     One year transitional   3 years transitional       One year transitional
                             Medicaid                   Medicaid                 Medicaid                  Medicaid                Medicaid                   Medicaid
Benefit level, family of 3   $636                       $303                     $532                      $426                    $640                       N/A
at start of experiment


Sources: Dan Bloom et al., (2000); Bloom et al., (2002); Thomas Fraker et al., (2002); Gennetian et al., (2005) ; and Susan Scrivener et al., (2002).
Table 2: Welfare Reform Experiments and Samples
                                      Connecticut          Florida Family Transition        Minnesota Family             Iowa Family Investment          Vermont Welfare
                                     Jobs First (JF)               Program                 Investment Program                Program (FIP)             Restructuring Project
                                                                    (FTP)                        (MFIP)                                                       (WRP)

Timing of Experiment         RA: 1/96–2/97                RA: 5/94–2/95                RA: 4/94–3/96 (urban            RA: 9/93–3/96               RA: 6/94–12/96
RA: random assignment        FO: 4 years                  FO: 4 years                  counties through Q3 1995)       FO: 6–7 years               FO: 6 years
FO: follow-up                                                                          FO: 2–4 years (through
                                                                                       6/98)
Geographic range             Statewide waiver             Partial state waiver         Partial state waiver            Statewide waiver            Statewide waiver
                             Evaluation in 2 offices      Evaluation in 1 county       Evaluation in 7 counties (3     Evaluation in 9 counties    Evaluation in 6 districts
                                                                                       urban counties)

Sample Size for Evaluation   4,803 single parent cases    2,815 single parent cases    9,217 single parent cases,      7,823 single parent cases   5,469 single parent cases
                                                                                       2,615 long term urban                                       4,381 single parents for full
                                                                                       recipients                                                  WRP

Timing of survey             Collected 3 years after RA   Collected 4 years after RA   Collected 3 years after RA      5–6 years after RA to        Collected 42 months after
                             to cohort entering           to cohort entering           to cohort entering              cohorts entering before 4/96 RA to cohort entering
                             experiment between 4/96      experiment between 8/94      experiment between 4/94         for recipients               experiment between 10/94
                             and 2/97                     and 2/95                     and 10/94                                                    and 6/95
Survey Response rate         80%                          80%                          80%                             72%                         80%
Sample used in our analysis All single parent cases       All single parent cases      Long-term single-parent         Single females 18 and older Full WRP single parent
                                                                                       recipients in incentives only   or 16–18 at RA with a pres- cases
                                                                                       urban group (on welfare at      school child                N=4,381
                                                                                       least 24 of past 36 months)     N=1,996
                                                                                       N=1,769                         (Note: survey sample as
                                                                                       Long-term single-parent         here completing survey
                                                                                       recipients in full urban        between 4 years 10 months
                                                                                       group                           to 5 years 11 months after
                                                                                       N=1,780                         RA)

Maximum number of            2,424                        1,729                        718 (incentives only)           1,201                       842
observations when using                                                                724 (full MFIP)
adult survey data
Maximum number of            1,469                        1,108                        573 (incentives only)           683                         NA (no focal child survey)
observations when using                                                                587 (full MFIP)
focal-child survey data


Sources: Bloom et al., (2000); Bloom et al., (2002); Fraker et al., (2002); Gennetian et al., (2005); and Scrivener et al., (2002).
Appendix Table 1
Impacts on Employment, Welfare and Income, Quarter of Survey

                                            Std. Err.,       Mean         Std. Dev.   Percent       Effect
                               Difference   Difference     (Controls)    (Controls)   Effect         Size             N
A. Quarterly employment
IA-FIP                         NA
MN-MFIP full                   0.071*           0.040          0.50            0.50    14.13%          0.142          724
MN-MFIP inc. Only              0.064            0.041          0.50            0.50    12.72%          0.128          718
FL-FTP                         0.009            0.024          0.54            0.50     1.69%          0.018      1,729
VT-WRP                         0.102***         0.034          0.53            0.50    19.28%          0.204          842
CT-JF                          0.050**          0.022          0.57            0.50     8.69%          0.100      2,414
B. Quarterly welfare receipt
IA-FIP                         NA
MN-MFIP full                   0.117***         0.040          0.56            0.50    20.97%          0.235          724
MN-MFIP inc. only              0.137***         0.039          0.56            0.50    24.65%          0.276          718
FL-FTP                         -0.082***        0.017          0.20            0.40   -40.77%         -0.204      1,729
VT-WRP                         -0.029           0.034          0.42            0.49    -6.86%         -0.058          842
CT-JF                          -0.121***        0.021          0.40            0.49   -30.26%         -0.248      2,414
C. Average quarterly income
IA-FIP                         NA
MN-MFIP full                   337.97**        146.04      2616.34         1829.27     12.92%          0.185          724
MN-MFIP inc. only              512.71***       158.42      2616.34         1829.27     19.60%          0.280          718
FL-FTP                          49.53           89.20      1799.48         1759.93      2.75%          0.028      1,729
VT-WRP                           2.26          129.79      2527.20         1869.25      0.09%          0.001          842
CT-JF                          -144.57         107.24      2974.01         2384.00     -4.86%         -0.061      2,414

Source: Authors’ tabulations of public-use data. Shown are average quarterly employment rates, averages for any
cash welfare receipt during quarter (to be comparable to the employment rates), and average quarterly income (cash
welfare plus food stamps plus general assistance (MN only) plus earnings) for the quarter during which the survey
was done (except for IA where we do not report values because no quarterly number is available). Statistics are for
all observations completing the adult survey that also had data for all the outcomes. Numbers are weighted to be
representative of survey design where relevant. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Percent effect is
100 times the treatment-control difference divided by control mean, effect size is treatment-control difference
divided by control standard deviation. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control
differences.
Appendix Table 2
Impacts on Employment, Welfare and Income, Averaged over Period from Random Assignment to Survey

                                            Std. Err.,      Mean          Std. Dev.     Percent        Effect
                             Difference     Difference    (Controls)     (Controls)     Effect          Size           N
A. Quarterly employment
IA-FIP                        0.033***           0.010           0.52          0.35        6.37%          0.095       7,823
MN-MFIP full                  0.132***           0.029           0.40          0.36       32.92%          0.372            724
MN-MFIP inc. only             0.065**            0.030           0.40          0.36       16.17%          0.183            718
FL-FTP                        0.058***           0.016           0.47          0.34       12.36%          0.169       1,729
VT-WRP                        0.043*             0.025           0.46          0.37        9.28%          0.116            842
CT-JF                         0.067***           0.017           0.51          0.38       13.16%          0.174       2,397
B. Quarterly cash welfare receipt
IA-FIP                        0.008              0.009           0.47          0.34        1.68%          0.023       7,823
MN-MFIP full                  0.091***           0.025           0.72          0.34       12.76%          0.270            724
MN-MFIP inc. only             0.127***           0.024           0.72          0.34       17.77%          0.376            718
FL-FTP                       -0.044***           0.015           0.43          0.33      -10.20%         -0.133       1,729
VT-WRP                       -0.006              0.025           0.61          0.36       -0.98%         -0.017            842
CT-JF                         0.029*             0.015           0.59          0.37        4.95%          0.079       2,397
C. Average quarterly income
IA-FIP                         83.23*            46.66       2215.24       1651.09         3.76%          0.050       7,823
MN-MFIP full                 366.82***           88.79       2443.30       1133.39        15.01%          0.324            724
MN-MFIP inc. only            404.10***           97.66       2443.30       1133.39        16.54%          0.357            718
FL-FTP                          58.85            55.91       1750.35       1101.99         3.36%          0.053       1,729
VT-WRP                          -2.84            72.42       2376.29       1030.16        -0.12%         -0.003            842
CT-JF                        209.93***           71.43       2658.18       1517.52         7.90%          0.138       2,397

Source: Authors’ tabulations of public-use data. Shown are average quarterly employment rates, averages for any
cash welfare receipt during quarter (to be comparable to the employment rates), and average quarterly income (cash
welfare plus food stamps plus general assistance (MN only) plus earnings) for the period from random assignment to
the quarter during which the survey was done (except for IA, when it is an average over the entire follow-up period).
Statistics are for all observations completing the adult survey that also had data for the full period, except for Iowa,
where they are for approximately the same cohorts as the survey data (the IA public use data does not contain the
appropriate information to link the survey and administrative records). Numbers are weighted to be representative
of survey design where relevant. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Percent effect is 100 times the
treatment-control difference divided by control mean (also shown in figure 1), effect size is treatment-control
difference divided by control standard deviation. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-
control differences.
Appendix Table 3
Impacts on Head’s Health Insurance, Survey Data

                                             Std. Err.,       Mean      Std. Dev.     Percent         Effect
                            Difference      Difference    (Controls)   (Controls)      Effect          Size            N
A. Public insurance
IA-FIP                       NA
MN-MFIP full                 0.072*              0.038         0.65         0.48      11.07%          0.152           712
MN-MFIP inc. only            0.058               0.038         0.65         0.48       8.93%          0.122           709
FL-FTP                      -0.025               0.023         0.37         0.48       -6.77%        -0.052      1,725
VT-WRP                      -0.012               0.032         0.70         0.46       -1.71%        -0.026           840
CT-JF                        0.099***            0.021         0.60         0.49      16.69%          0.203      2,418
B. Other nonpublic insurance (not public)
IA-FIP                       NA
MN-MFIP full                -0.044               0.028         0.17         0.38     -25.77%         -0.117           707
MN-MFIP inc. only           -0.029               0.028         0.17         0.38     -16.86%         -0.076           704
FL-FTP                       0.013               0.021         0.25         0.43       5.24%          0.030      1,723
VT-WRP                       0.011               0.024         0.14         0.35       7.84%          0.031           837
CT-JF                       -0.055***            0.018         0.22         0.41     -25.23%         -0.133      2,402
C. Any insurance
IA-FIP                       NA
MN-MFIP full                 0.015               0.030         0.84         0.37       1.82%          0.042           708
MN-MFIP inc. only            0.016               0.030         0.84         0.37       1.96%          0.045           705
FL-FTP                      -0.011               0.023         0.62         0.49       -1.78%        -0.023      1,723
VT-WRP                      -0.006               0.025         0.84         0.37       -0.71%        -0.016           837
CT-JF                        0.046***            0.017         0.82         0.39       5.65%          0.119      2,403
D. Ever no insurance coverage
IA-FIP                       0.049               0.032         0.54         0.50       9.13%          0.098      1,190
MN-MFIP full                -0.079**             0.039         0.39         0.49     -20.15%         -0.161           723
MN-MFIP inc. only           -0.149***            0.037         0.39         0.49     -38.15%         -0.305           717
FL-FTP                       0.011               0.023         0.38         0.49       2.87%          0.023      1,729
VT-WRP                       NA
CT-JF                        NA

Source: Authors’ tabulations of public-use data. Shown are survey estimates of insurance coverage for the recipient
for month before survey, or of having had any spell of non-coverage since random assignment. Statistics are for all
observations completing the adult survey that had data for the outcome. Numbers are weighted to be representative
of survey design where relevant. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Percent effect is 100 times the
treatment-control difference divided by control mean (also shown in figure 2), effect size is treatment-control
difference divided by control standard deviation. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-
control differences.
Appendix Table 4
Impacts on Child or Family Health Insurance, Survey Data

                                           Std. Err.,        Mean      Std. Dev.       Percent        Effect
                             Difference   Difference     (Controls)   (Controls)        Effect         Size            N
A. Public insurance
IA-FIP                        0.031            0.033          0.49          0.50        6.32%         0.062       1,106
MN-MFIP full                  0.045            0.036          0.72          0.45        6.34%         0.100           697
MN-MFIP inc. only             0.044            0.036          0.72          0.45        6.14%         0.097           696
FL-FTP                       -0.037            0.026          0.61          0.49       -6.06%         -0.076      1,471
VT-WRP                       -0.029            0.029          0.82          0.39       -3.58%         -0.076          774
CT-JF                         0.055***         0.019          0.78          0.42        7.14%         0.132       2,135
B. Any insurance
IA-FIP                        0.006            0.026          0.80          0.40        0.80%         0.016       1,105
MN-MFIP full                  0.017            0.027          0.86          0.34        1.97%         0.049           698
MN-MFIP inc. only             0.008            0.029          0.86          0.34        0.90%         0.022           697
FL-FTP                       -0.017            0.020          0.82          0.38       -2.07%         -0.045      1,468
VT-WRP                       -0.013            0.022          0.90          0.30       -1.45%         -0.044          772
CT-JF                         0.005            0.010          0.95          0.22        0.57%         0.025       2,141
C. Any child ever without coverage
IA-FIP                        0.035            0.034          0.43          0.50        8.12%         0.071       1,004
MN-MFIP full                 -0.094**          0.038          0.35          0.48      -27.08%         -0.197          698
MN-MFIP inc. only            -0.154***         0.036          0.35          0.48      -44.32%         -0.323          697
FL-FTP                        NA
VT-WRP                        NA
CT-JF                         NA

Source: Authors’ tabulations of public-use data. Shown are survey estimates of insurance coverage for any child of
the recipient for the month before survey, or of any child having had any spell of non-coverage since random
assignment. Statistics are for all observations completing the adult survey that had data for the outcome and had a
child in their household at the time of the survey. Numbers are weighted to be representative of survey design
where relevant. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Percent effect is 100 times the treatment-control
difference divided by control mean (also shown in figure 3), effect size is treatment-control difference divided by
control standard deviation. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control differences.
Appendix Table 5
Impacts on Child and Family Health Care Utilization, Access and Affordability of Care, Survey Data
                                         Std. Err of        Mean      Std Dev.        Percent      Effect
                           Difference Difference (Controls) (Controls)                  Effect      Size                                                  N
A. Focal child has seen dentist in past two years
IA-FIP                        -0.005             0.021                            0.93              0.25          -0.54%             -0.020            683
MN-MFIP full                   0.022             0.025                            0.89              0.31           2.47%              0.071            570
MN-MFIP inc. only              0.029             0.024                            0.89              0.31           3.25%              0.094            558
FL-FTP                        -0.023             0.023                            0.85              0.36          -2.68%             -0.064          1,063
VT-WRP                         NA
CT-JF                         -0.013             0.012                            0.96              0.21          -1.41%             -0.065          1,459
 B. Focal child has seen doctor in past two years
IA-FIP                         0.004             0.014                            0.97              0.17           0.40%              0.023            683
MN-MFIP full                   0.008             0.018                            0.95              0.22           0.79%              0.034            570
MN-MFIP inc. only              0.027*            0.016                            0.95              0.22           2.83%              0.121            559
FL-FTP                        -0.012             0.011                            0.97              0.16          -1.22%             -0.072          1,065
VT-WRP                         NA
CT-JF                          0.002             0.004                            0.99              0.07           0.16%              0.021          1,461
 C. Focal child has place to go for routine care
IA-FIP                        -0.021             0.015                            0.97              0.17          -2.14%             -0.123            682
MN-MFIP full                   0.001             0.019                            0.95              0.23           0.11%              0.005            570
MN-MFIP inc. only              0.034*            0.016                            0.95              0.23           3.59%              0.149            559
FL-FTP                         0.004             0.018                            0.90              0.30           0.41%              0.012          1,067
VT-WRP                         NA
CT-JF                         -0.004             0.006                            0.99              0.11          -0.37%             -0.035          1,460
 D. Family not able to afford dentist
IA-FIP                         0.009             0.031                            0.17              0.37          5.62%               0.025            682
MN-MFIP full                   0.010             0.033                            0.20              0.40          5.19%               0.026            587
MN-MFIP inc. only             -0.031             0.032                            0.20              0.40        -16.01%              -0.079            573
FL-FTP                        -0.007             0.029                            0.35              0.48         -2.14%              -0.016          1,107
VT-WRP                         NA
CT-JF                         -0.019             0.019                            0.17              0.37        -11.51%              -0.051          1,468
 E. Family not able to afford doctor
IA-FIP                        -0.017             0.025                            0.11              0.31        -15.68%              -0.055            682
MN-MFIP full                   0.009             0.028                            0.13              0.33          7.14%               0.027            587
MN-MFIP inc. only             -0.012             0.027                            0.13              0.33         -9.11%              -0.035            573
FL-FTP                        -0.014             0.025                            0.22              0.42         -6.43%              -0.035          1,107
VT-WRP                        NA
CT-JF                         -0.014             0.017                            0.12              0.33        -11.17%              -0.042          1,469

Source: Authors’ tabulations of public-use data. Shown are survey estimates for the focal child of the recipient of having seen a doctor or dentist
during the two years before the survey, for the focal child of the recipient for having a place to go for routine care, and for the focal child sample,
whether the family had someone who could not see a doctor or dentist because they could not afford it during the last year. Statistics are for all
observations completing the focal child survey that had data for the outcome. Numbers are weighted to be representative of survey design where
relevant. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Percent effect is 100 times the treatment-control difference divided by control mean
(also shown in figure 4), effect size is treatment-control difference divided by control standard deviation. No focal child survey was completed in
Vermont. Focal child sample is children 5–12. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-control differences.
Appendix Table 6
Impacts on Child and Mother Health Outcomes, Survey Data

                                            Std. Err.,        Mean       Std. Dev.       Percent        Effect
                             Difference    Difference     (Controls)    (Controls)        Effect         Size             N
A. Focal child’s mother at risk for depression
IA-FIP                        -0.012             0.038          0.30          0.46       -3.88%         -0.025           676
MN-MFIP full                  -0.036             0.044          0.55          0.50       -6.51%         -0.072           525
MN-MFIP inc. only             -0.112**           0.044          0.55          0.50      -20.27%         -0.226           507
FL-FTP                        -0.018             0.029          0.39          0.49       -4.70%         -0.038       1,091
VT-WRP                        NA
CT-JF                         0.005              0.025          0.34          0.47        1.45%          0.010       1,436
B. Behavioral Problem Index in top 25th percentile
IA-FIP                        -0.023             0.037          0.28          0.45       -8.27%         -0.052           683
MN-MFIP full                  -0.038             0.040          0.30          0.46      -12.73%         -0.083           510
MN-MFIP inc. only             -0.012             0.041          0.30          0.46       -4.13%         -0.027           493
FL-FTP                        0.023              0.027          0.26          0.44        8.70%          0.052       1,100
VT-WRP                        NA
CT-JF                         -0.028             0.023          0.28          0.45       -9.92%         -0.063       1,450
C. Focal child has excellent or very good health
IA-FIP                        -0.012             0.029          0.85          0.36       -1.39%         -0.033           683
MN-MFIP full                  -0.029             0.036          0.78          0.42       -3.74%         -0.070           570
MN-MFIP inc. only             0.031              0.034          0.78          0.42        4.01%          0.075           559
FL-FTP                        0.069***           0.026          0.73          0.45        9.43%          0.154       1,068
VT-WRP                        NA
CT-JF                         0.033*             0.020          0.81          0.39        4.11%          0.086       1,466


Source: Authors’ tabulations of public-use data. Shown are survey estimates for the focal child of the recipient
sample of whether the mother was at risk for depression (score of 16 or higher on 20-item Center for
Epidemiological Studies-Depression scale (worst score was 60)), whether the focal child’s Behavioral Problem
Index score was in the worst 25th percentile, and whether the mother reported the child’s general health was
excellent or very good. Statistics are for all observations completing the focal child survey that had data for the
outcome. Numbers are weighted to be representative of survey design where relevant. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity. Percent effect is 100 times the treatment-control difference divided by control mean (also shown
in figure 5), effect size is treatment-control difference divided by control standard deviation. No focal child survey
was completed in Vermont. Focal child sample is children 5–12. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%)
are for treatment-control differences.
Appendix Table 7
Summary Measure Impacts on Adult, Child, and Family Measures, Survey Data
                                  Std. Err of    FWE Adjusted
                 Difference       Difference        p-value                       N
A. Summary measure, employment, off welfare, and income, ave. since RA
IA-FIP                0.041             0.020             0.181               7,823
MN-MFIP full          0.113             0.051             0.115                 724
MN-MFIP               0.021             0.054             0.698                 718
FL-FTP                0.110***          0.030             0.000               1,729
VT-WRP                0.046             0.048             0.671                 842
CT-JF                 0.078*            0.034             0.099               2,397
B. Summary measure, head’s HI coverage
IA-FIP               -0.049             0.032             0.409               1,190
MN-MFIP full          0.070             0.059             0.551                 707
MN-MFIP               0.118             0.059             0.125                 704
FL-FTP               -0.021             0.051             0.900               1,723
VT-WRP               -0.007             0.038             0.849                 837
CT-JF                 0.060*            0.025             0.099               2,402
C. Summary measure, child/family HI coverage
IA-FIP                0.001             0.050             0.993               1,105
MN-MFIP full          0.114             0.062             0.235                 697
MN-MFIP               0.144             0.064             0.107                 696
FL-FTP               -0.066             0.053             0.489               1,468
VT-WRP               -0.052             0.060             0.671                 771
CT-JF                 0.067             0.032             0.103               2,134
IA-FIP               -0.013             0.045             0.993                 681
D. Summary measure, child/family utilization, access, and affordability
MN-MFIP full           0.015            0.058             0.857                 570
MN-MFIP                0.117            0.055             0.123                 558
FL-FTP                -0.018            0.045             0.900               1,060
VT-WRP              NA
CT-JF                  0.006            0.024             0.801               1,453
E. Summary measure, child/mother health
IA-FIP                0.015             0.054             0.993                 676
MN-MFIP full          0.030             0.062             0.857                 509
MN-MFIP               0.120             0.062             0.125                 492
FL-FTP                0.065             0.044             0.435               1,048
VT-WRP              NA
CT-JF                 0.051             0.036             0.263               1,421

Source: Authors’ tabulations of public-use data. Shown are survey estimates for summary measures for each state
for each of the variables presented in figures 2–6. Each summary measure is the average of the outcomes on each
figure (normalized by each outcome’s control standard deviation), after converting each outcome to be positive
when good (welfare participation is considered bad, but any kind of HI good). For the figure 2 summary measure,
the sample is adults completing the survey with non-missing administrative data (for IA only, it is instead the same
cohort as the survey). For the figure 3 summary measure, the sample is adults completing the survey with non-
missing HI data. For the figure 4 summary measure, the sample is adults with a child in the HH at the time of the
survey completing the survey with non-missing child/family HI coverage data. For the figures 5 and 6 summary
measures, the sample is survey recipients with a focal child completing the survey, with non-missing data on health
care utilization, access, and affordability or health outcomes, respectively. Numbers are weighted to be
representative of survey design where relevant. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. Difference is
treatment control difference in each summary measure. FWE adjusted p-value is p-value for comparison in row,
adjusted for joint testing across all summary measures in the state. No focal child survey was completed in
Vermont. Focal child sample is children 5–12. Significance levels (*** 1%, ** 5% and * 10%) are for treatment-
control differences, adjusted for family-wise errors.
