                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DEVALUATION WITH CONTRACT REDENOMINATION IN ARGENTINA

                                           Charles Calomiris

                                         Working Paper 12644
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12644


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




The author thanks Mario Blejer, Charles Goodhart, Dimitrios Tsomocos, and Roko Aliprantis for helpful
comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Charles Calomiris. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Devaluation with Contract Redenomination in Argentina
Charles Calomiris
NBER Working Paper No. 12644
October 2006
JEL No. G18,G3,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

This study offers the first empirical microeconomic analysis of the effectiveness of dollar debt and
contract redenomination policies to mitigate adverse financial and relative price consequences from
a large devaluation. An analysis of Argentina's policy of devaluation with redenomination in 2002,
in contrast to Mexico's policy of devaluation without debt redenomination in 1994-1995, shows that
devaluation benefited tradables firms, and that dollar debt redenomination in Argentina benefited high-dollar
debtors, as shown in these firms' investment behavior, especially non-tradables firms whose revenues
in dollar terms were adversely affected by devaluation. That investment behavior contrasts with the
experience of Mexican firms in the aftermath of Mexico's large devaluation, in which non-tradables
producers with high dollar debt displayed significant relative reductions in investment. Stock return
reactions to Argentine debt redenomination indicate large, positive, unanticipated effects on high-dollar
debtors from debt redenomination. Energy concession contract redenomination likewise increased
investment by high energy users in Argentina, and that benefit was apparent also in positive stock
returns of those firms.

Charles Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
I. Introduction

       Argentina’s financial crisis of 2001-2002 was one of the most widely anticipated

emerging market crises in recent years. The inconsistency between persistent fiscal deficits and

recession, on the one hand, and the inflexible currency regime of “convertibility,” on the other

hand, became increasingly apparent to market observers from 1999 through 2001. By the end of

2001, given the political infeasibility of fiscal reform (a fact illustrated by the brief tenure and

abrupt demise of officials who suggested the desirability of fiscal reform), sovereign default and

devaluation became inevitable toward the end of 2001.

       Argentina’s denouement, however, had an unusual and largely unforeseen wrinkle,

namely “pesification” – the effective redenomination of dollar-denominated debts enforceable

under domestic law and many other dollar-denominated or dollar-indexed contracts.

Redenomination of dollar debts implied a substantial reduction of the real debt service burdens

of dollar-denominated debtors. It was inspired by the realization that without redenomination

Argentina would have to find a way to address massive, economy-wide insolvency of dollar-

denominated debtors, as well as a huge relative price increase for energy and transport costs that

were fixed by concession contracts in dollar terms.

       Although a change in relative prices always has real economic consequences, in a world

of perfect capital markets, the reallocation of wealth between creditors and debtors, or the

incidence of financial distress, would not matter for real decisions (like investment, employment

and consumption). But in the presence of adverse selection, moral hazard, and physical

contracting costs, wealth reallocations and financial distress can have powerful effects on firms’

and consumers’ investment and employment decisions. Hence redenomination policy could have
important effects on investment and consumption as a means of resolving economy-wide

financial distress and increasing the net worth, and hence the borrowing capacity, of borrowers.

       A superficial look at Argentina’s macroeconomic performance suggests that the decision

to redenominate debts, and other dollar-denominated or dollar-indexed contracts, during the

devaluation of the peso in the beginning of 2002 was successful in reversing the downward trend

in economic activity. Figure 1 displays the path of quarterly GDP in Argentina from 1999 to

2005. The beginning of 2002 marked the end of recession and the beginning of a sustained

recovery. Of course, this evidence is not conclusive, since it does not establish a clear link

between redenomination policy and macroeconomic performance. In particular, the

macroeconomic evidence does not disentangle among the three potentially important channels

through which Argentina’s devaluation with redenomination could have expanded economic

activity – namely, (1) a boost to exports (as the result of devaluation alone), (2) a reduction in the

relative price of energy costs, and (3) the implicit transfer of wealth to dollar-denominated

debtors from debt redenomination alongside devaluation.

       This study analyzes the effects of redenomination policy on firms in Argentina in the

aftermath of its devaluation of 2002. The study employs firm-level data to examine how the

effects of redenomination policy varied across firms depending on their differing levels of dollar-

denominated debt and their different sectoral exposures to devaluation risk (i.e., tradables

producers versus non-tradables producers). By exploiting the cross-sectional variation in firms’

exposure to different consequences of devaluation with redenomination, I am able to distinguish

the effects of the three channels through which devaluation with redenomination affected firms’

behavior. To provide a standard of comparison for the Argentine firms, I view Argentine firms’

experiences in 2002-2003 in the mirror of the experiences of Mexican firms in 1995-1996,




                                                  2
during the aftermath of the Mexican crisis of 1994-1995 (a large devaluation in a highly

dollarized economy that occurred without the redenomination of dollar debts).

         Section II begins with an analysis of the timing of the Argentine financial crisis. That

review shows that: (1) Argentina was in an unusually vulnerable macroeconomic position as the

result of the large fraction of domestic debts and transportation and utility concession contracts

that were denominated in or indexed to dollars, and the small fraction of its economy devoted to

exports; (2) the risk of devaluation was widely understood by market participants long in

advance of the crisis and considered substantial by the market by mid 2001. Section III examines

the effects of Argentine debt redenomination policy as part of its decision to devalue. Section IV

adds to that analysis a consideration of effects of the redenomination of utility concession

contracts.1

         Sections III and IV each analyze the investment decisions of Argentine firms. Those

analyses compare the Argentine (2001-2002) and Mexican (1994-1995) devaluation experiences

from the perspective of Argentine and Mexican firms’ rates of fixed capital investment.

Mexico’s devaluation policy did not include redenomination of debt and utility contracts, while

Argentina’s devaluation policy did include redenomination. The comparison of individual firms’

investment behavior shows that Argentina’s decision to redenominate dollar debt and dollar-

indexed utility tariffs in pesos had a salutary effect on the investment decisions of firms, which is

isolated within the subset of firms that had high dollar debt and operated in the non-tradables

sector. In Section III, I provide estimates of the size of the effect on Argentine firms from the

policy of redenominating debt. Section IV extends the analysis of Section III to evaluate the


1
  This study considers only the effects of redenomination policy on utility and debt contracts because one cannot
identify other differences across firms related to redenomination policy (e.g., different firms’ propensities to use toll
roads, whose tariffs were also affected by redenomination policy).



                                                            3
effect of utility tariff redenomination by comparing the investment behavior of high energy

consuming Argentine firms to those of other firms. The results reported in Section IV show that

high energy consuming Argentine firms invested more in the year after the crisis than other

Argentine firms, ceteris paribus.

       In theory, non-tradable producers with high dollar-denominated debts, and high energy

consuming firms, should have benefited from redenomination policy, ceteris paribus, more than

other producers. Unlike non-tradables producers, tradable producers’ dollar-denominated

revenues are not reduced by devaluation. In fact, the investments by high-dollar debt, non-

tradables producers in Mexico fell more following devaluation than those of high-dollar debt

tradables producers. But in Argentina, as a result of redenomination, there was no difference in

investment behavior between highly dollar-indebted tradable and non-tradable producers.

       Sections III and IV also contain an analysis of Argentine firms’ stock returns during the

announcement of devaluation policy. Section III’s analysis of stock returns shows that (1)

redenomination policy was not anticipated by the market, and (2) the advantage of

redenomination in improving the condition of high-dollar debt firms was understood at the time

the Argentine government made its decision, and became priced into the market, as is visible in

highly positive average stock returns during both of the redenomination event windows.

Apparently, the salutary effect of redenomination was understood by the Argentine stock market

at the time redenomination policy was announced. Section IV’s analysis of stock prices also

considers the effect of utility tariff redenomination on stock returns. Holding constant other

characteristics (including the effects of debt redenomination), high energy consuming Argentine

firms’ stock returns reacted positively to redenomination news that signaled lower energy costs.




                                                 4
         The results relating to debt redenomination are consistent with the view that debt-

deflation shocks related to the combination of dollar-denominated debt and large devaluation can

have important adverse short-term consequences for investment. And redenomination policies

that reallocate wealth from creditors to debtors, and from energy producers to energy consumers,

can have positive short-term macroeconomic consequences. This study does not measure the

long-term costs associated with redenomination policy, such as adverse reputational

consequences in capital markets. Section V offers some observations about the tradeoffs

policymakers face when considering whether to redenominate contracts during a devaluation.



II. Argentina’s Crisis and Its Vulnerability to Devaluation

         The Predictability of Collapse

         In 2000 and 2001, market participants became increasingly concerned about the

possibility of an Argentine devaluation. Devaluation became a significant possibility as early as

2000.2 Figure 2 plots the interest rates on 30-day dollar-denominated and peso-denominated

deposits for the years 2000 and 2001. The interest differential between these two deposit interest

rates, according to covered interest parity arbitrage, is equal to the forward premium on the peso,

and therefore, is a direct measure of the market’s perception of devaluation risk.3 The interest

rate differential, plotted in Figures 3A and 3B, contains a combined forecast of devaluation and a

risk premium, as follows:4



2
  For a review of the evolving drama from the perspective of markets and policy makers, see Paul Blustein, And the
Money Kept Rolling In (and Out): Wall Street, the IMF, and the Bankrupting of Argentina, Public Affairs, 2005. See
also Pedro Pou, “What Lessons Can Be Learned from Recent Financial Crisis? The Argentine Experience,”
available at http://www.kc.frb.org/Publicat/sympos/1997/pdf/s97pou.pdf.
3
  For a discussion of covered interest parity, see David O. Beim and Charles W. Calomiris, Emerging Financial
Markets, Irwin-McGraw Hill, 2000, pp. 248-50.
4
  In this discussion, I abstract from the fact that the 30-day deposit interest rate differential understates the extent of
devaluation expectations, since the possibility of a redenomination of dollar debts was taken into account by the


                                                            5
         iP - iD = (perceived probability of devaluation) x (% expected devaluation) + devaluation risk premium



For example, if the peso-denominated interest rate on 30-day deposits is 20% and the dollar-

denominated interest rate on 30-day deposits is 12%, that implies an interest differential of 8%.

Under the assumption of risk neutrality (where only the first of the two terms above enters into

market pricing of devaluation risk), an 8% interest rate differential could imply a 20% chance of

a 40% devaluation sometime during the next thirty days. That interest differential would also be

consistent with a 40% chance of a 20% devaluation. Under the assumption of risk aversion, some

of the interest differential would represent a premium for bearing risk (in excess of simply

earning an expected return equal to the riskless return for bearing the risk of devaluation). For

example, under risk aversion, an 8% interest rate differential could be consistent with a 2% risk

premium and a 20% chance of a 30% devaluation.

         While it is not possible to determine the precise combination of (1) the perceived

probability of devaluation, (2) the percentage devaluation expected to occur if a devaluation does

occur, and (3) the devaluation risk premium, these three components of the interest rate

differential tend to be positively related (bad news about fiscal affairs tends to produce increases

in all three components). Thus, a rising interest rate differential will tend to be the result of

increases in each of the three components.

         As Figure 2 shows, the possibility of devaluation, as measured by the deposit interest rate

differential, increased substantially in the spring of 2001, and then rose dramatically in the late

summer and fall of 2001. The sovereign risk of Argentina followed a similar pattern, as shown in


market. The perceived possibility of debt redenomination acts to reduce the observed interest rate differential for any
given probability of devaluation.


                                                          6
Figures 3A and 3B, which use two similar alternative measures of the sovereign yield spread on

Argentina’s international bonds. The co-movement of the sovereign debt spread and the deposit

interest rate differential reflects the fact that both sovereign default risk and devaluation risk

were driven by a common factor, namely an unsustainable fiscal policy.

         The peso-dollar deposit interest rate differential declined dramatically at the beginning of

December 2001, just before the January 2002 devaluation. That decline does not reflect a decline

in the perceived risk of devaluation. Rather, it is an artifact of the so called corralito – the policy

of restricting the withdrawal of bank deposits, which was accompanied by a dramatic reduction

in the interest rate paid on 30-day deposits denominated in both dollars and pesos.

         Another indicator of perceived devaluation risk is capital flight. From June through the

end of November 2001, as shown in Figure 4, more than $6 billion in dollar-denominated

deposits were withdrawn from Argentine banks. Similarly, Argentina’s international reserves

declined dramatically during 2001, as shown in Figure 5. Capital flight was closely associated

with the corralito, beginning on December 1, 2001. As shown in Figure 6, capital flight was the

last phase of a contraction in capital inflows that had been gaining momentum since 1999, and

that had been negative since 2000.

         As Figures 2-6 clearly show, market sentiment about devaluation risk and government

default risk varied during 2001. Devaluation and default risk were significant as early as

December 2000, and remained elevated throughout 2001, but reached very high levels during

particular weeks and months of 2001 (e.g., March-April, July, and September-December of

2001).

         After the initial devaluation occurred (plotted in Figure 7), and in anticipation of the

decision to float the currency (which implied the likelihood of a substantial increase in




                                                   7
devaluation), the government chose to redenominate private dollar debts and transportation and

utility tariffs to alleviate the economic harm that otherwise would have resulted from

devaluation. On Friday, January 4, 2002, the government announced a plan to end convertibility,

take steps to provide debt relief to debtors owing dollar-denominated debts, and eliminate the

legislation that had tied public utility and transportation tariffs to the dollar. Convertibility was

ended on January 6, 2002, and the executive was empowered to establish a new exchange rate

system. Some small dollar debts were converted right away into pesos. On February 3, under

Decree 214/02, all dollar-denominated debts were redenominated in anticipation of floating the

currency, which occurred on February 11.5

        The potential financial harm from devaluation without debt contract redenomination, or

equivalent measures to reduce the real value of dollar-denominated debts, was a theme of much

academic research and policy debate in the wake of the Mexican financial crisis of 1994-1995

and the 1997 Asian financial crises. The Argentine government had observed the consequences

of devaluation without debt redenomination in Mexico post-1994 and in East Asia post-1997,

and was keenly aware of the severe adverse consequences of not combining devaluation with

debt redenomination. Those consequences included massive financial distress of borrowers, and

financial gridlock resulting from that inability of firms to repay their debts. Those concerns

figured prominently in the discussion of Argentina’s policy options at the time it chose to

devalue. Several prominent academics (including Nobel Laureate Joseph Stiglitz) argued that

devaluation would produce financial distress for borrowers with dollar denominated claims, and




5
 Decree 214/2002 can be found within the website of the Ministry of Economy and Production:
http://www.mecon.gov.ar. More specifically, Decree 214/2002 can be found at
http://infoleg.mecon.gov.ar/txtnorma/72017.htm.


                                                      8
that a redenomination of debts or some other economy-wide plan to reduce the value of dollar-

denominated debt would soften the blow of devaluation.6

         It bears emphasis that debt, and transportation and utility tariff, redenomination were

linked by policy to devaluation. Dollar debts and transportation and utility tariffs were not

reduced by a fixed nominal quantity (as in a debt exchange), but rather were redenominated in

pesos so that any future reductions in the value of the peso would not result in the deterioration

of borrowers’ abilities to meet debt service obligations, or energy or toll road users’ abilities to

pay their energy bills or tolls. Furthermore, recognizing that debt redenomination was not

necessary with respect to the financing of exports (as argued above), the government limited debt

redenomination in its Decree 410 of March 1, 2002 by excluding foreign trade finance from

redenomination.7

         Observers and policy makers were also aware of examples that illustrated the possibility

of macroeconomic improvement via reductions in the real value of debt. A debt exchange that

effectively reduced the real value of bank debt had been used to help revive Argentine banks

under the Bonex Plan a decade earlier. Debt redenomination alongside devaluation had been



6
  See also Michael Bordo and Roberto Chang, “Throw Away the Dollar Peg,” Financial Times, June 7, 2001. For a
review of the issues involved in this discussion, see Luis Felipe Cespedes, Roberto Chang, and Andres Velasco,
“Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7840,
2000, and “IS-LM-BP in the Pampas,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 50, Special Issue, 2003, pp. 143-56; Charles W.
Calomiris, Daniela Klingebiel, and Luc Laeven, “A Taxonomy of Financial Crisis Restructuring Mechanisms:
Cross-Country Experience and Policy Implications,”, in Systemic Financial Distress: Containment and Resolution,
edited by Patrick Honohan and Luc Laeven, Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp. 25-75; Ricardo Hausmann and
Andres Velasco, “Hard Money’s Soft Underbelly: Understanding the Argentine Crisis,” in Brookings Trade Forum:
2002, edited by Susan M. Collins and Dani Rodrik; Aaron Tornell, “Policy in an Economy with Balance Sheet
Effects,” in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, edited by Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey A. Frankel,
University of Chicago Press, 2002, pp. 705-40; Sebastian Edwards, Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and
Adjustment, MIT Press, 1989; and Paul Krugman and Lance Taylor, “Contractionary Effects of Devaluation,”
Journal of International Economics 8, 1978, pp. 445-56.
7
  Decree 410/2002 can be found within the website of the Ministry of Economy and Production:
http://www.mecon.gov.ar. More specifically, Decree 410/2002 can be found at
http://infoleg.mecon.gov.ar/txtnorma/72761.htm. It is important to note that, while foreign trade finance, and foreign
debts enforced outside Argentina, were not pesified, pesification still had substantial benefits for exporters to the
extent that they had borrowed domestically in dollars for purposes other than trade finance.


                                                          9
used to great effect by the United States when it redenominated private sector gold-denominated

debts into dollar-denominated debts in 1933. A study by Professor Randall Kroszner, arguing

for the salutary effects of that policy choice, was widely circulated before the Argentine crisis.8

Professor Kroszner was also a member of President Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers at the

time of the Argentine crisis. Mexico had pursued a similar debt-relief policy of reducing the

dollar value of its dollar-denominated bank loans and dollar-denominated deposits in 1982.9

         One aspect of Argentina’s redenomination policy that is outside of the scope of this study

is worthy of comment, namely “asymmetric pesification” of bank loans and deposits. While bank

loans were subject to redenomination at face value into pesos (and therefore depreciated in dollar

terms fully by the amount of exchange rate devaluation), dollar-denominated deposits were

converted into pesos at a higher peso value. This policy was an attempt to placate depositors,

who complained of the loss of value of their bank deposits. Asymmetric pesification implied a

substantial loss to banks, since their liabilities were depreciated in value much less than their

assets. To compensate banks for that loss, the government issued bonds to the banks which

replaced the lost value from asymmetric pesification. Thus, citizens qua taxpayers paid for the

cost of the relative subsidy received by citizens qua depositors. Asymmetric pesification seems

to have had little real effects on banks (or their borrowers) and seems best described as a




8
  See Randall Kroszner, “Is It Better to Forgive than to Receive? Repudiation of the Gold Indexation Clause in
Long-Term Debt During the Great Depression,” University of Chicago, Working Paper, November 1999.
9
  Liliana Rojas-Suarez and Steven R. Weisbrod, Financial Fragilities in Latin America: The 1980s and 1990s, IMF
Occasional Paper 132, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, October 1995, pp. 17-18. This article
describes how partial redenomination of bank loans and deposits in Mexico was used to shift some of the burden for
the bailout of bank borrowers (via loan redenomination) onto bank depositors (via deposit redenomination): “…the
government engaged in a policy of reducing the real burden of borrower debt and forcing depositors to absorb some
of these losses through a reduction in the real value of deposits. The latter action was achieved through a
combination of policies: forced conversion of foreign currency-denominated deposits at unfavorable exchange rates
and negative real interest rates on peso-denominated deposits. The real value of loans was reduced through the
conversion of foreign currency loans to pesos at an exchange rate that overstated the value of the peso relative to the
dollar.”


                                                          10
politically expedient way to impose losses on consumers by postponing taxation and making it

less visible.



        Argentina’s Vulnerability to Devaluation

        The appeal of redenomination of dollar debts as part of a devaluation policy reflected the

fact that the Argentine financial system was one of the most dollarized financial systems in the

world on the eve of the Argentine devaluation. Based on an overall financial system dollarization

score, derived by Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003), Argentina was the fourth most

dollarized financial system (outside the United States) in the world during the period 1996-2001.

Table 1 reports data for the 16 countries identified by Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003) as

having the highest dollarization scores.

        The Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano score (which takes into account the fraction of

dollarized deposits, dollar-denominated bonds and external public sector debt) does not fully

capture the peculiar vulnerability of Argentine debtors to devaluation (in the absence of dollar

debt redenomination). To capture the vulnerability of Argentine private sector borrowers on the

eve of devaluation, I construct an alternative measure, based entirely on private borrowing

denominated in dollars (relative to total private debt). This measure (corporate debt denominated

in dollars – or, CDDD – relative to total domestic private debt), is reported in Table 1 alongside

the Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano dollarization score, and is plotted for the 50 countries

identified by Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano as having “highest” or “high” dollarization scores

in Figure 8D.

        Table 1 and Figures 8C and 8D show that the dollarization score and the CDDD ratio

imply somewhat different rankings of countries. According to the CDDD ratio, Argentine private




                                                11
sector debt was much more heavily dollarized than those of the other four countries with similar

or higher Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano dollarization scores (Bolivia, Bulgaria, Ecuador, and

Uruguay).

       But neither the dollarization score nor the CDDD ratio, by itself, can capture a country’s

debtors’ vulnerability to devaluation. First, as discussed in Section IV below, other dollar-

denominated or dollar-indexed contracts (i.e., utility tariffs) may add to financial distress in the

wake of a devaluation. Furthermore, to the extent that a country’s dollar-denominated debt

service can be paid by export revenues, borrowers can be insulated from the effects of

devaluation. Exporters earn dollar-denominated revenues in external markets, and so are

insulated from declines in the domestic demand for their products. That ability to maintain dollar

revenues during a devaluation enables tradables producers to continue to service dollar-

denominated debt, even after a devaluation. Indeed, the decline in the dollar value of labor and

occupancy expenses as the result of devaluation can result in a net advantage to exporters from

devaluation, despite high dollar-denominated debt. In contrast, non-exporting firms’ revenues do

not provide a revenue offset against rising real debt service costs.

       Thus, in a highly dollarized country with a small fraction of exports to GDP, devaluation

without debt redenomination would have a particularly negative effect on domestic borrowers. In

addition, as discussed in Section IV below, a proper measure of a country’s financial

vulnerability to a devaluation should also take into account the existence of factors such as

dollar-indexed transportation and utility concession contracts.

       Table 1 and Figures 8A-8D show that Argentina was in a peculiarly vulnerable position

from the standpoint of that combined measure of financial vulnerability (the combination of its

export-to-GDP ratio and either measure of financial dollarization). There are countries listed in




                                                 12
Table 1, and plotted in Figures 8A, 8B, 8C, and 8D, that have a higher CDDD ratio or

dollarization score than Argentina’s (Angola, Mozambique, and São Tomé & Príncipe, for

example, have higher CDDD ratios than Argentina; Ecuador, Bolivia, and Uruguay have higher

dollarization scores), but those countries all have substantially higher export-to-GDP ratios than

Argentina. Argentina had the lowest export-to-GDP ratio of the highly dollarized economies

shown in Table 1, and ranked fourth and sixth with respect to its financial dollarization (using

the Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano score, or the CDDD ratio, respectively). Clearly, Argentina

was one of the most vulnerable economies, if not the most vulnerable economy, in the world to

the financial and macroeconomic consequences of devaluation (if it were pursued without the

redenomination of debts).



III. Effects of Debt Redenomination

       I now turn to the questions of whether devaluation with debt redenomination had salutary

effects on the investment behavior of debtor firms, and whether redenomination was a positive

surprise at the time it was enacted. To test whether devaluation with debt redenomination

substantially increased the investments of Argentine firms, and whether the announcement of

this policy was a positive surprise to the market, I undertook two empirical analyses.

       The first is an analysis of the investment behavior of firms, which measures the extent to

which debt redenomination improved the ability of Argentine firms, and especially non-tradables

firms, to invest in plant, property and equipment during the two years after devaluation. This

study contrasts the relatively favorable experience of non-tradables producers with high

preexisting levels of dollar-denominated debt in Argentina after its devaluation with the

experience of high-dollar-debt non-tradables producers in Mexico after its devaluation.




                                                13
       By using a “difference in difference” empirical approach – that is, contrasting the lack of

a difference in investment behavior between non-tradables high-dollar debtors, and tradables

high-dollar debtors, in Argentina, with the substantially lower investment spending of non-

tradables high-dollar debtors relative to tradables high-dollar debtors in Mexico – I am able to

control not only for differences in the effects of devaluation on firms’ revenues, but also for

selectivity bias in firms’ decisions to issue dollar-denominated debts. In particular, it non-

tradables producers that issue dollar-denominated debt may have some superior characteristics

relative to other non-tradables producers ex ante (at the time of their debt offerings) that help to

explain their willingness to issue dollar-denominated debt despite its risks. Indeed, below I

describe some evidence from ex post performance that supports that view. This selectivity bias

will tend to understate the effects of debt deflation shocks. Comparing the performance of

Argentine and Mexican non-tradables firms with high dollar debt controls somewhat for that

selectivity bias, since selectivity bias should apply to both Argentine and Mexican non-tradables

firms with high dollar debt.

       The second part of the analysis examines the Argentine stock market’s reactions to the

debt redenomination announcement of February 3, 2002, to determine whether redenomination

policy was a surprise and whether the market viewed redenomination as improving the condition

of Argentine firms – in particular, whether redenomination was associated with an improvement

in the market’s view of the prospects of Argentine firms with high preexisting levels of dollar-

denominated debt. This event study finds that the announcement of debt redenomination was

beneficial and not fully anticipated. The announcement was associated with a positive stock

market reaction, on average, and with an especially favorable reaction with respect to the

prospects of high-dollar-debt producers.




                                                 14
        Both empirical analyses provide support for the view that the combination of devaluation

and redenomination of debt in Argentina was a beneficial short-term macroeconomic policy

compared to devaluation without the redenomination of debt. The fact that high-dollar-debt non-

tradables producers benefited the most from redenomination is consistent with the theory of

investment under imperfect capital markets, discussed at length above, which implies that they

would have been among the most vulnerable to a devaluation without redenomination. Given

Argentina’s low proportion of exports and high levels of dollarized debts (shown above in Table

1, and in Figures 8A-8D), the improvement in the performance of high-dollar-debt non-tradables

producers likely was of substantial importance to the Argentine recovery from the crisis.



        A Comparison of Investment Behavior after the Argentine and Mexican Crises

        The effect of financial distress on a firm’s economic performance is revealed through that

firm’s investment decisions. Fixed capital investment is clearly a decision variable of the firm,

one that is highly dependent on the availability of financing. Firms that are in financial distress,

or even those not in distress that have suffered substantial declines in net worth value as the

result of an increase in the value of their debts relative to their assets, will suffer higher costs of

financing investment, and consequently may shrink investment spending dramatically.10

        I compare the investment behavior of firms in Mexico and Argentina in the wake of their

devaluations of December 1994-1995 and early 2002, respectively, which are plotted in Figures

7 and 9. I consider differences in firms’ investment behavior during periods one and two years

after devaluation, and relate those investment behavior differences to the sector in which the

10
  See Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler, “Financial Fragility and Economic Performance,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 104, 1989, pp. 878-104; Steve Fazzari, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Petersen, “Financing Constraints
and Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 1, 1988, pp. 141-95; and Charles W. Calomiris
and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Internal Finance and Investment: Evidence from the Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936-37,”
Journal of Business, 68, 1995, pp. 443-82.


                                                      15
firms operate (tradable or non-tradable) and to the firms’ reliance on dollar-denominated debt.

Behavioral differences are gauged relative to a simple neoclassical benchmark “accelerator”

model, in which investment is a function of sales. As discussed above at length, firms in the non-

tradables sector with a heavy reliance on dollar debt will be the most vulnerable to a devaluation

without a debt redenomination (the policy choice of Mexico in 1994-95). Non-tradables firms

with high dollar debt should demonstrate the greatest reductions in investment, both because

their sales growth will be relatively lower after a devaluation, and because their ability to access

external finance will be adversely affected by their deteriorating financial condition. Non-

tradables producers that have issued less dollar-denominated debt (in Mexico) will experience

less deterioration in their financial condition, and thus, less of a decline in their investment. The

effect of dollar-denominated debt should be less apparent in the investment behavior of

Argentine non-tradables firms with high dollar-denominated debt, since their debts were

redenominated. Thus, in theory, one would expect to observe the following three phenomena

from a comparative study of Mexican and Argentine firms’ investment behavior after their

respective devaluations:


       Hypothesis 1: In both countries, firms in the tradables sector, ceteris paribus, should
       exhibit higher investment growth after a devaluation relative to non-tradables producers,
       since in comparison to non-tradables producers, devaluation reduces their revenues less
       and affects their financing costs less.

       Hypothesis 2: Non-tradables firms with high dollar debt, ceteris paribus, should exhibit
       lower investment spending in Mexico, compared to low-dollar debt, non-tradables firms
       in Mexico, in the wake of devaluation, since devaluation increases the effective debt
       burden for high-dollar debt, non-tradables producers.

       Hypothesis 3: Non-tradables firms with high dollar debt, ceteris paribus, should not
       exhibit inferior performance in Argentina, compared to low-dollar debt, non-tradables
       firms in Argentina, since debt redenomination removed the effect of an increased debt
       burden for high-dollar debt, non-tradables borrowers as the result of devaluation.




                                                  16
       Table 2 describes the variables used in the study and defines them. Table 3 investigates

the three hypotheses from the perspective of raw data on investment expenditures in the first year

after a devaluation (as a proportion of the firm’s total plant, property and equipment at the end of

the prior year). Table 4 is identical to Table 3 but considers the two-year period after a

devaluation. Hypothesis 1 is confirmed by Tables 3 and 4. Tradables producers in both Mexico

and Argentina tend to invest more after devaluation than non-tradables producers. To be specific,

in Argentina, both high-dollar-debt and low-dollar-debt tradables firms invest more after

devaluation than firms with similar dollar debt ratios operating in the non-tradables sector, and

those differences are statistically significant. For example, high-dollar-debt tradables producers

in Argentina had investment ratios of 0.18 in the two years after devaluation (shown in Table 4),

while high-dollar-debt non-tradables producers in Argentina displayed investment ratios of only

0.07. The difference between non-tradables and tradables, which is shown in Table 4 as -0.1092,

is significant at the 7.8% significance level. In Mexico, the difference between tradables and

non-tradables firms is also positive and statistically significant for high-dollar-debt firms, but

there is no significant difference across the two sectors within the category of low-dollar-debt

firms (and the sign of the effect is reversed).

       Hypotheses 2 and 3 are also confirmed in Tables 3 and 4. With respect to Hypothesis 2,

in Mexico, high-dollar-debt non-tradables producers display much lower investment rates than

low-dollar-debt non-tradables producers. The differences are large, statistically significant, and

persistent (they grow in magnitude during the second year after devaluation). With respect to

Hypothesis 3, in Argentina, there is no difference among non-tradables producers related to the

presence of dollar-denominated debt. Within the category of non-tradables producers, high-




                                                  17
dollar-debt and low-dollar-debt firms behave similarly (particularly in the two-year window

results in Table 4) and are not statistically significantly different.

        By way of providing additional background on the determinants of investment, Tables 5-

8 report data on sales and earnings before interest cost, taxes, depreciation or amortization

(EBITDA), broken down into the same categories as in Tables 3 and 4. While these revenues and

earnings measures are certainly not independent of financial distress effects, they are measured

before taking into account the effects of debt service costs on net earnings. Tables 5 and 6

provide evidence on sales revenue growth and Tables 7 and 8 provide data on earnings

(EBITDA) relative to assets. The patterns of difference between tradables and non-tradables

producers are similar to those shown in the investment tables. Tradables producers have superior

sales and earnings growth to non-tradables producers after devaluation.

        One interesting finding is that in both Mexico and Argentina, high-dollar-debt firms

(within either sector) tend to have higher revenue growth than low-dollar-debt firms after

devaluation. In other words, in Mexico, high-dollar-debt non-tradables firms had lower

investment growth than low-dollar-debt non-tradables firms despite the fact that their revenue

growth was higher, indicating a very potent effect of dollar-denominated debt in depressing

investment rates for non-tradables producers in Mexico. The higher revenue growth of high-

dollar-debt firms reflects selection bias; firms with better prospects for growth and earnings tend

to be the ones that qualified for access to dollar-denominated debt in the past.11

        Tables 9 and 10 provide an additional analysis of Hypotheses 2 and 3, using a multiple

regression framework. Those Hypotheses predict the presence (in Mexico) and absence (in

Argentina) of a high-dollar-debt effect for non-tradables producers, ceteris paribus. Tables 9 and


11
 See Sanket Mohapatra, “Exchange Rate Regimes and Corporate Borrowing from International Capital Markets,"
Working Paper, Columbia University, February 2004.


                                                    18
10 perform a ceteris paribus comparison by controlling for differences in sales growth or prior

rates of investment (pre-devaluation) at the firm level, for firms in Mexico and Argentina, pre-

and post-devaluation. Table 9 reports cross-sectional regression results for two specifications for

one-year period comparisons, and Table 10 reports similar regressions for two-year periods. The

two regression specifications within each table differ by either including or excluding interactive

indicator variables that allow the interaction of the sector (tradable or non-tradable) and the

dollar debt level, and that also interact the product of those variables with the country indicator

(ARG).

        Tables 9 and 10 do not provide tests of Hypothesis 1. Note that the main effect of

devaluation on the relative performance of tradable producers is their relative growth in dollar-

denominated revenues. Since revenue growth is included in the regression, and is thus

controlled for, there is little residual explanatory role for the TR indicator variable in the

regressions. The fact that the TR indicator variable has a weak, and sometimes negative, effect

on investment in the regressions, does not imply a rejection of Hypothesis 1; it simply implies

that, once one controls for differences in dollar-denominated revenue growth, there is little else

about tradables producers, per se, that boosts their investment rates (although, the net effect of

the TR indicator is positive, and often statistically significant, for Argentina – that is, the sum of

the TR and TRxARG coefficients is positive, and the TRxARG coefficient is often statistically

significant).

        Tables 9 and 10 provide tests of Hypotheses 2 and 3. With respect to Hypothesis 2, the

predictions are that the coefficient on DDA is negative (reflecting the negative effect of higher

dollar debt in Mexico for non-tradable producers), and that the coefficient on TRxDDA is

offsetting and positive (reflecting the mitigation of the negative effect of dollar debt that comes




                                                  19
from being an exporter). These predictions are supported by the regression results; the

coefficients are of the right sign and large, although the levels of statistical significance are not

always high, owing to the limited sample size. With respect to Hypothesis 3, the predictions are

that the interactions of the DDA and TRxDDA with the ARG indicator should be opposite to

those of DDA and TRxDDA. In other words, DDAxARG should be positive (reflecting that the

negative effect of higher dollar debt that is present in Mexico is absent in Argentina), and

TRxDDAxARG should be negative (reflecting the fact that the relative advantage tradable firms

have in avoiding the special burden of dollar debt is also absent in Argentina). These predictions

are similarly confirmed.

       In summary, an investigation of the investment behavior of firms in Mexico and

Argentina, one or two years after their countries’ respective devaluations, finds that the predicted

effects of devaluation with and without debt redenomination are upheld in the data. In Mexico,

where devaluation was not accompanied by dollar debt redenomination, investment was reduced

as the result of increased debt burdens for firms with high dollar debt, and this burden was borne

primarily by non-tradable firms. In Argentina, where devaluation was accompanied by the

redenomination of private dollar-denominated debts, these effects on investment were not

apparent.



       An Event Study of the Announcement of Debt Redenomination

       Having shown that redenomination seems to have improved the financial condition and

investment performance of Argentine firms, I ask whether the market anticipated that

improvement. The purpose of this event study is to see whether the salutary effects of




                                                  20
redenomination were anticipated in advance, and whether they were understood widely at the

time the policy was announced.

       The event study measures whether the stock market in Argentina reacted favorably to the

announcement, overall, and also whether the abnormal returns of firms that were most likely to

benefit from redenomination policy (those with high dollar debt, and those producing in the non-

tradable sector) enjoyed the largest relative returns in reaction to the announcement. In Tables 11

and 12, I present results for an event study of redenomination using both raw returns and

abnormal returns (returns measured after removing the effects of overall market returns on the

returns of individual firms). The results for raw returns are useful for gauging the overall

macroeconomic effect of the announcement of redenomination. Both the raw and abnormal

returns results are useful for gauging cross-sectional differences.

       While there had been an announced intention to redenominate some dollar debts on

January 4, and small dollar debts had been redenominated in the first week in January, it was not

until later that the government decided to redenominate all dollar debts into pesos. On February

3, all dollar-denominated debts were redenominated in anticipation of floating the currency,

which occurred on February 11. Given the ambiguities about redenomination of debt in early

January, and the absence of any trading days in the stock market between January 4 and January

17, I chose January 30, 2002 to February 7, 2002 as the event window for debt redenomination.

The details of the method for calculating raw and abnormal returns are provided in the notes to

Table 11.

       Table 11 divides Argentine publicly traded firms into four categories, divided by the level

of their dollar debt (high or low) and by whether they are in tradables or non-tradables sectors.

The raw and abnormal returns are positive for all four categories of firms during the event




                                                 21
window, indicating a substantial positive returns for each group, which ranges from 1.6% for

low-dollar-debt non-tradable firms to 27.6% for high-dollar-debt tradable firms.

       The differences in Table 11 between high-dollar-debt firms and low-dollar-debt firms in

each sector are large and statistically significant, indicating that firms with large amounts of

dollar-denominated debt enjoyed much higher raw and abnormal returns during the event

window. This confirms that redenomination was not fully anticipated, and that the market

perceived that redenomination would particularly improve the performance of firms with large

amounts of dollar debt.

       Interestingly, however, within each debt category, tradable producers show substantially

higher returns than non-tradable producers. This result seems to contradict economic theory and

the empirical results of our investment study above. Shouldn’t high-debt non-tradable producers

have been expected to receive a greater advantage from redenomination than high-debt tradable

firms, since in the event, they actually do seem to have been relatively advantaged by

redenomination?

       There are two simple potential explanations for the relatively positive effect on tradable

producers’ returns during the redenomination event window. First, redenomination was

understood at the time to be a preamble to floating the currency. Having redenominated

transportation and utility tariffs and dollar debts, the government was much more likely to float,

and much more likely to permit a substantial devaluation, since the major macroeconomic cost of

a large devaluation had been removed by the redenomination of debt contracts. Thus, one of the

pieces of “news” embedded in the redenomination announcements was the likelihood of a much

greater devaluation than had been previously expected. Obviously, news of a much higher

devaluation than previously expected would benefit tradable producers. Thus, any interpretation




                                                 22
of the cross-section of returns during the redenomination event window is complicated by the

fact that redenomination was news about two things: On the one hand, it was news about tariff

and debt relief, which was most advantageous to high-dollar-debt firms, and to high-dollar-debt

non-tradable firms, in particular. On the other hand, it was news about the likelihood of a large

devaluation, which advantaged tradable firms. This may explain why the cross-section of returns

shown in Table 11 shows high relative returns for firms with high debt, and also high relative

returns for tradable firms. In other words, even if redenomination, per se, was understood to be

relatively advantageous to non-tradable firms with high dollar debt, there was more to the

redenomination announcements than redenomination per se.

       A second possible interpretation revolves around the effects of the February debt

redenomination announcement on the fortunes of utility producers. A large proportion of non-

tradables firms were utilities, and many of them were affected adversely by the redenomination

of utility tariffs, which had been part of the earlier redenomination announcement in the first

week in January 2002. It is possible that the decision to broadly redenominate dollar debt in

February was interpreted as a signal of a declining possibility that the government would

renegotiate utility tariffs to increase their real amount (as many utility industry representatives

hoped). According to that interpretation, the February redenomination announcement may have

been bad news for utility companies. This possibility in more detail in Section IV below.

       Table 12 provides regression results for the cross-sections of raw and abnormal returns,

which confirm the results of Table 11. The higher the dollar debt ratio, the bigger the positive

effect on returns during the redenomination window. Holding the level of debt constant, tradable

firms experienced higher returns during the event window.




                                                 23
IV. Redenomination of Utility Contracts

         Consequences of Utility Tariff Redenomination

         Thus far, this study has explored only the effects of devaluation and debt redenomination

policies on firms. The redenomination of Argentine utility contracts is another potentially

important dimension through which redenomination policy affected macroeconomic

performance, and cross-sectional differences in investment and stock market returns.

         Not only did market participants perceive a significant risk of collapse as early as 2000,

they recognized the possibility of redenomination of contracts as part of the government

response to that collapse. The potential redenomination of dollar-indexed transportation and

energy tariffs and dollar debts was discussed frequently as a policy to accompany devaluation, as

a means of promoting macroeconomic improvement.12 Indeed, many observers favored

reductions in the real costs of energy and transport tariffs from an early date. As early as April

2000, an influential market analyst and the Minister of the Economy were openly suggesting that

it would be desirable to renegotiate transport and utility contracts as a means to improve

Argentine macroeconomic performance:


         Argentina is “bogged down” on several fronts, according to the influential
         analyst [Miguel Angel Broda]. The currency board, which pegs the peso to
         the dollar, and the fact that 85 percent of the foreign debt was incurred in
         dollars prevent Argentina from resorting to a devaluation to lower costs,
         he pointed out.

         That means the costs in dollars are very high,” said Broda, who like
         [Minister of the Economy] Machinea stressed the need to reduce transport
         costs and utility rates by renegotiating the contracts under which
         companies were privatized.13

12
   The Argentine economy continued to contract in 2000 and 2001. During 2000, real GDP growth was -0.8%.
During 2001, growth in the first two quarters of the year (relative to the same quarters of the previous year) was
-2.0% and -0.2%, respectively. In the third and fourth quarters, the decline in GDP accelerated, and the growth in
real GDP for the 2001 year as a whole was -0.4%.
13
   “Economy – Argentina: On the Mend, Albeit Slowly, Say Officials”, Inter Press Service, April 6, 2000.


                                                         24
Similarly, in its October 7, 2000 issue, The Economist noted that:

         Businessmen complain that they are hurt by the high tariffs charged by
         privatized utilities. Next month, the government is throwing open the
         telecoms market, which should cut tariffs, but it argues that in gas and
         electricity industries its hands are tied by long-term contracts. Not so,
         argues Eduardo Basualdo, an economist: the Menem government was
         lenient in enforcing the utilities’ contracts, and Mr. de la Rua could insist
         on a renegotiation.14

         Economists, policy makers, and market participants inside and outside Argentina

perceived a high risk of a financial crisis and saw high tariffs as a significant drag on the

economy as early as the Spring of 2000. Market participants knew that devaluation without

redenomination would have substantially increased already high real costs of transportation,

energy, and debt service.

         Firms and consumers, in general (other than the affected utilities and toll road suppliers)

should have benefited (at least in the short term) from the elimination of dollar indexation of

transportation and utility tariffs. But some firms and consumers should have benefited more than

others. In particular:

         Hypothesis 4: Firms that are heavy users of energy as an input to production, ceteris
         paribus, should have seen the largest benefits from tariff redenomination. In contrast,
         utilities suppliers whose tariffs were redenominated may have suffered from the policy.15

         A Comparison of Investment after the Argentine and Mexican Crises

         To investigate that hypothesis, I first added two new indicator variables to the previous

regression analysis of investment for post-crisis years in Argentina and Mexico, and to the

analysis of the cross-section of Argentine stock returns. First, the variable “utility” is an indicator


14
  “Another President Caught in Argentina’s Economic Trap,” The Economist, October 7, 2000.
15
  I say “may have suffered” because it is conceivable that utility companies did not suffer, on net, from
redenomination policy, since tariff redenomination increased quantities demanded (by lowering prices) and also
increased the likelihood of the payment of utility bills that otherwise may not have been paid at all as the result of
their high cost (especially in the volatile political environment of Argentina in 2002).


                                                           25
variable that takes the value 1 if the firm is an Argentine utility producer affected by the

redenomination of tariffs in 2002, and otherwise takes the value 0. All of the firms in Table 13

are included in the investment regression analysis, but only some are included in the event

studies. A list of the firms is provided in Table 13. Second, the variable “high energy” captures

whether an Argentine firm is in an industry that is an intensive user of energy. I define a firm as

a high-energy consumer if its 3-digit NAICS code is 322 (Paper), 324 (Petroleum & Coal

Products), 325 (Chemicals), or 331 (Primary Metals). These four industries were the top

manufacturing consumers of energy in 1998 in the United States, according to the U.S.

Department of Energy. To my knowledge, comparable information is not available at the sector

level in Argentina.

       The results (which are modified versions of Tables 9 and 10) are reported in Tables 14

and 15. Coefficient estimates for most variables in Tables 9 and 10 are quite similar to those in

Tables 14 and 15. The utility indicator coefficient is negative in all specifications, but the effects

are not statistically significant. The high-energy indicator coefficient is positive in the one-year

specification, and significant at the ten percent level, but in the two-year specification, the

coefficient is negative, small in magnitude, and statistically insignificant. These results suggest

that utility tariff changes had little adverse effect on investment by utility suppliers (during our

sample period), but large, positive short-term effects on investment by high energy users. The

fact that this effect is not present over the two-year post-crisis window may indicate that the

positive effects from tariff redenomination reflected the elimination of the perceived risk of a

sharp rise in the real cost of energy for high energy users, rather than a long-term motivation to

expand investment relative to sales.




                                                  26
       The absence of a long-run positive effect on investment relative to sales for high-energy

firms in this regression, relative to other firms, should not be misconstrued to imply that the

stabilizing effects of tariff redenomination for investment in the year immediately after the crisis

were unimportant in the long run. In the counterfactual world of no tariff redenomination,

financial distress could have resulted for many high-energy consuming firms, and that would

have had significantly negative long-run effects on investment by those firms, and on the

economy generally. In other words, the regression coefficient measures the effect of tariff

redenomination relative to an implicit benchmark of no change in real tariff costs. In fact, in the

absence of tariff redenomination, real tariff costs would have more than tripled. Thus, a zero

long-run effect (relative to other firms) may reflect a large positive long-run outcome when

properly compared to the counterfactual of what otherwise would have resulted from the tripling

of real energy costs and the reductions in investment by high-energy firms that would have been

a consequence of that cost increase.

       One possible explanation for the lack of an observed negative effect on utility suppliers is

that reductions in real energy costs increased demand and reduced default risk (by improving the

ability of consumers and firms to pay their bills).



       Event Studies of the Announcements of Redenominations

       Tariff redenomination occurred in the first week in January, long before the

redenomination of all dollar-denominated debts in early February. Thus, I consider two separate

event studies of announcement effects. The first event window is designed to address the effect

of the initial announcement of utility tariff redenomination. This event window examines stock

returns over the period January 2 to January 18. January 2 is two days before the government’s




                                                 27
January 4 announcement; January 17 is the first day in which trading occurred after the

announcement. The second event study is designed to explore the potential effects of debt

redenomination policy on expectations about tariff renegotiation (on the theory that debt

redenomination may have been viewed as a negative signal about the government’s political

propensity for utility tariff renegotiation). It examines the same time frame as Table 12 above

(January 30-February 7).

       Results for the two event study windows are presented in Tables 16 and 17. The average

raw returns in the first event window were 26.4 percent, indicating that the policy announcement

was seen as favorable for the sample of firms, overall. For the first event window (Table 16),

coefficient signs are consistent with expectations, and are quite large, but the standard errors are

even larger. With the exception of the tradables indicator (reflecting the importance of the

devaluation aspect of the announcement), none of the other coefficients is statistically

significant. While the results are consistent with expectations, the sample size is not large enough

to offer conclusive evidence on the effects of tariff changes on the stock returns of suppliers and

high-energy users.

       For the second event window (Table 17), the high-energy indicator is positive, large, and

somewhat statistically significant. The utility indicator is negative, large, and statistically

insignificant. These results lend some credence, but not conclusive evidence, in support of the

hypothesis that the February debt redenomination decree was perceived as a signal of political

propensities that implied a reduced chance that the government would renegotiate to raise tariff

rates in the near future (which, in the event, the government was unwilling to do). Overall, the

event study results indicate that the market perceived redenomination policy changes as positive




                                                  28
for companies that were heavy users of energy, after controlling for other firm attributes (i.e.,

indicators for dollar debt and tradables).



V. Conclusion

       This study offers the first empirical microeconomic analysis of the effectiveness of dollar

debt and contract redenomination policies to mitigate adverse financial and relative price

consequences from a large devaluation. An analysis of Argentina’s policy of devaluation with

redenomination in 2002, in contrast to Mexico’s policy of devaluation without debt

redenomination in 1994-1995, shows that devaluation benefited tradables firms, and that dollar

debt redenomination in Argentina benefited high-dollar debtors, as shown in these firms’

investment behavior, especially non-tradables firms whose revenues in dollar terms were

adversely affected by devaluation. That investment behavior contrasts with the experience of

Mexican firms in the aftermath of Mexico’s large devaluation, in which non-tradables producers

with high dollar debt displayed significant relative reductions in investment. Stock return

reactions to Argentine debt redenomination indicate large, positive, unanticipated effects on

high-dollar debtors from debt redenomination. Energy concession contract redenomination

likewise increased investment by high energy users in Argentina, and that benefit was apparent

also in positive stock returns of those firms.

       This evidence for short-term macroeconomic benefits from redenomination, however,

does not necessarily imply that redenomination policy in Argentina was socially beneficial, on

net, nor does it imply that Argentina’s policy should be imitated by other countries facing a need

to devalue. When government interferes with preexisting contracts it may damage the reliability

of contracting agreements made in the future. The adverse reputational consequences to a




                                                 29
government from redenomination, therefore, must be considered alongside the short-term gains

from redenomination. Clearly, redenomination policy should not be used frequently as a

countercyclical measure, since doing so would have little short-term benefit (few contracts

would exist to be redenominated) and would eliminate the use of beneficial dollar contracting,

which can be helpful in spurring investment in emerging market countries by limiting the

devaluation risks borne by creditors or investors in privatized utility companies.

       To the extent that redenomination policy leads market participants to expect future ex

post changes in contract enforcement, it could be particularly damaging to the economy. Thus,

when redenomination policy is employed, it should be accompanied by other policies and

credible signals that indicate that its use is exceptional. For example, in Argentina, having

redenominated utility contracts into pesos, the government should have moved quickly to

renegotiate utility tariffs on a fair basis. If it had done so, that would have substantially mitigated

reputational consequences of pesification policy.

       Despite the reputational costs of redenomination policy, however, it is likely to be

beneficial for some circumstances in some contexts. In the presence of a large devaluation in a

highly dollarized financial system, the alternatives to the redenomination of dollar debts for

emerging market countries are frequently very unattractive policies, including (a) the economy-

wide litigation of creditors’ claims on bankrupt borrowers through the legal system, (b) the

establishment of government-run asset management companies to dispose of distressed assets, or

(c) government subsidies to banks and borrowers to permit them to resolve otherwise unpayable

debts. As Calomiris, Klingebiel and Laeven (2005) show in a analysis of various cases of

financial crises, emerging market countries suffer from weak legal systems and corrupt political




                                                  30
environments, which make solutions of type (a) and (b) particularly unattractive.16 And the large

moral-hazard costs associated with bailouts, and their undesirable effects on government

finances, make solutions of type (c) problematic, as well. Despite the reputational costs of

redenomination, compared to available alternatives, in some cases it may offer the speediest and

least costly method of resolving the financial distress and macroeconomic decline that results

from devaluation in a highly dollarized economy.




16
  Charles W. Calomiris, Daniela Klingebiel, and Luc Laeven, “A Taxonomy of Financial Crisis Restructuring
Mechanisms: Cross-Country Experience and Policy Implications,”, in Systemic Financial Distress: Containment
and Resolution, edited by Patrick Honohan and Luc Laeven, Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp. 25-75.


                                                      31
                                    Figure 1: Argentine Quarterly GDP, 1999-2005




                     320



                     300
Billion 1993 Pesos




                     280



                     260



                     240



                     220



                     200
                           Q1-99


                                   Q3-99


                                           Q1-00


                                                   Q3-00


                                                           Q1-01


                                                                   Q3-01


                                                                           Q1-02


                                                                                   Q3-02


                                                                                           Q1-03


                                                                                                   Q3-03


                                                                                                           Q1-04




                                                                                                                           Q1-05


                                                                                                                                   Q3-05
                                                                                                                   Q3-04
             Quarterly GDP (Real 1993 Prices): 1999Q1-2005Q3
Source: Indec (http://www.indec.mecon.ar/nuevaweb/cuadros/17/cuadro8_1.xls)




                                                                           32
                                          Figure 2: Interest Rates on 30-Day Time Deposits in Pesos and Dollars

               60



               50



               40
Interest Rate (%)




               30                                                                                                    Pesos
                                                                                                                     Dollars


               20



               10



                    0
                                                            May-00




                                                                                                                                                                        May-01
                                                   Apr-00




                                                                                       Aug-00


                                                                                                         Oct-00
                                                                                                                  Nov-00
                                                                                                                           Dec-00




                                                                                                                                                               Apr-01




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Aug-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nov-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dec-01
                        Jan-00
                                 Feb-00
                                          Mar-00




                                                                     Jun-00
                                                                              Jul-00


                                                                                                Sep-00




                                                                                                                                    Jan-01
                                                                                                                                             Feb-01
                                                                                                                                                      Mar-01




                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-01
                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep-01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-02
                        Sources: J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.; Banco Central de la República Argentina, Interest Rates on Deposits
                        (available at http://www.bcra.gov.ar/).




                                                                                                                              33
       Figure 3A: Difference Between Interest Rates on 30-Day Time Deposits in Argentina in Pesos
                              and Dollars vs. EMBI+ Argentina Strip Spread

                                   30                                                                                                                              6000


                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                   5000
Difference in Interest Rates (%)




                                                                                                                                                                          EMBI+ Argentina Strip Spread
                                   20
                                                                        Weekly Interest Rate Difference
                                                                                                                                                                   4000
                                                                        Daily EMBI+ Argentina Strip Spread
                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                   3000
                                   10

                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                    5


                                                                                                                                                                   1000
                                    0


                                   -5                                                                                                                              0
                                                          May-00




                                                                                                                      May-01
                                        Jan-00


                                                 Mar-00




                                                                   Jul-00


                                                                               Sep-00


                                                                                         Nov-00


                                                                                                    Jan-01


                                                                                                             Mar-01




                                                                                                                               Jul-01


                                                                                                                                        Sep-01


                                                                                                                                                 Nov-01


                                                                                                                                                          Jan-02
                                        Sources: J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.; Banco Central de la República Argentina, Interest Rates on Deposits
                                        (available at http://www.bcra.gov.ar/).




                                                                                                   34
       Figure 3B: Difference Between Interest Rates on 30-Day Time Deposits in Argentina in Pesos
                         and Dollars vs. EMBI+ Argentina Spread Over Treasury

                                   30                                                                                                                                 4500

                                                                                                                                                                      4000
                                   25




                                                                                                                                                                             EMBI+ Argentina Spread Over Treasury
                                                                                                                                                                      3500
Difference in Interest Rates (%)




                                   20
                                                                   Weekly Interest Rate Difference
                                                                                                                                                                      3000
                                                                   Daily EMBI+ Argentina Spread Over Treasury
                                   15                                                                                                                                 2500


                                   10                                                                                                                                 2000

                                                                                                                                                                      1500
                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                      1000

                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                      500

                                   -5                                                                                                                                 0
                                                          May-00




                                                                                                                         May-01
                                        Jan-00


                                                 Mar-00




                                                                     Jul-00


                                                                                Sep-00


                                                                                            Nov-00


                                                                                                     Jan-01


                                                                                                                Mar-01




                                                                                                                                  Jul-01


                                                                                                                                           Sep-01


                                                                                                                                                    Nov-01


                                                                                                                                                             Jan-02
                                    Sources: J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.; Banco Central de la República Argentina, Interest Rates on Deposits
                                    (available at http://www.bcra.gov.ar/).




                                                                                                        35
                                                Figure 4: Monthly Dollar Deposits in Argentina, 2001

                       54

                       53

                       52

                       51

                       50
Billion U.S. Dollars




                       49

                       48

                       47

                       46

                       45

                       44

                       43
                                                                    May-01
                              Jan-01


                                       Feb-01


                                                  Mar-01


                                                           Apr-01




                                                                             Jun-01


                                                                                      Jul-01


                                                                                               Aug-01


                                                                                                        Sep-01


                                                                                                                 Oct-01


                                                                                                                          Nov-01


                                                                                                                                   Dec-01
                            Source: Argentina Ministry of Economy & Production, Macroeconomic Statistics (available at
                            http://www.mecon.gov.ar/peconomica/basehome/infoeco_ing.html).




                                                                                 36
                                            Figure 5: International Reserves in Argentina, 2001

                40


                35


                30


                25
Billion Pesos




                20


                15


                10


                 5


                 0
                                                          May-01
                     Jan-01


                              Feb-01


                                       Mar-01


                                                 Apr-01




                                                                   Jun-01


                                                                                 Jul-01


                                                                                          Aug-01


                                                                                                   Sep-01


                                                                                                            Oct-01


                                                                                                                     Nov-01


                                                                                                                              Dec-01
                       Note: Because of a change in the BCRA’s definition of international reserves, data after October 31, 2001
                       includes public bonds involved in reverse repo-operations. Data before October 31 does not include these
                       bonds.
                       Source: Banco Central de la República Argentina, International Reserves and BCRA’s Financial Liabilities
                       (available at http://www.bcra.gov.ar/).




                                                                            37
                                            Figure 6: Annual Capital Inflows in Argentina, 1990-2002

                       40



                       30
                                                                                                                  Total
                                                                                                                  FDI
                                                                                                                  Equity
                       20
                                                                                                                  Debt
Billion U.S. Dollars




                                                                                                                  Other

                       10



                        0



                   -10



                   -20
                            1990


                                   1991


                                           1992


                                                   1993


                                                          1994


                                                                  1995


                                                                          1996


                                                                                      1997


                                                                                             1998


                                                                                                    1999


                                                                                                           2000


                                                                                                                  2001


                                                                                                                           2002
                            Note: Equity inflow was not available until 1992. I use the following variables from the IMF’s International
                            Financial Statistics as components of capital inflows:
                            1) FDI: line 78bed (Direct Investment in the Reporting Economy, n.i.e.)
                            2) Equity: line 78bmd (Equity Securities Liabilities)
                            3) Debt: line 78bnd (Debt Securities Liabilities).
                            4) Other: line 78bid (Other Investment Liabilities, n.i.e.)
                            Source: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, June 2004.




                                                                                 38
                                                       Argentine Pesos / U.S. Dollar




                                     0.0
                                           0.5
                                                 1.0
                                                         1.5
                                                                2.0
                                                                       2.5
                                                                              3.0
                                                                                       3.5
                                                                                             4.0
                                                                                                   4.5
                            Jun-00

                            Aug-00

                            Oct-00

                            Dec-00




     Source: Economatica.
                            Feb-01

                            Apr-01

                            Jun-01

                            Aug-01




39
                            Oct-01

                            Dec-01

                            Feb-02
                                                                                                                  June 2000 – December 2002




                            Apr-02
                                                                                                         Figure 7: Argentina’s Nominal Exchange Rate




                            Jun-02

                            Aug-02

                            Oct-02

                            Dec-02
                          Figure 8A: Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano Composite Dollarization Index Level vs.
                                     Exports-to-GDP Ratio for Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano’s
                                               Five Highest Dollarized Countries
                   1.0

                   0.9

                   0.8

                   0.7
2001 Exports/GDP




                   0.6
                                                                                     Bulgaria
                   0.5

                   0.4

                   0.3
                                                                                                                      Ecuador

                   0.2                                                                  Uruguay
                                                                                                       Bolivia

                                                                                           Argentina
                   0.1

                   0.0
                         8         10        12        14         16      18          20         22              24      26
                                           Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano Composite Index Level: 1996-2001

                         Sources: Carmen M. Reinhart, Kenneth S. Rogoff, & Miguel A. Savastano, Addicted to Dollars, NBER
                         Working Paper 10015, October 2003, at Table 4; World Bank, World Development Indicators Database
                         (available at http://devdata.worldbank.org/data-query/).




                                                                     40
                                 Figure 8B: CDDD-to-Private Credit Ratio vs. Exports-to-GDP Ratio for
                                    Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano’s Five Highest Dollarized Countries

                   1.0

                   0.9

                   0.8

                   0.7
2001 Exports/GDP




                   0.6
                                                                                  Bulgaria

                   0.5

                   0.4

                   0.3
                                                                                   Ecuador

                   0.2                                                       Uruguay
                                                                                   Bolivia

                                                                                                     Argentina
                   0.1

                   0.0
                         0.0      0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8      1.0         1.2      1.4        1.6      1.8      2.0
                                                               2001 CDDD/Private Credit
                         Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics Yearbook (2002); World Bank,
                         World Development Indicators Database (available at http://devdata.worldbank.org/data-query/); Bank for
                         International Settlements, Consolidated Banking Statistics (Table 9A) and Securities Statistics (Table 12C)
                         (available at http://www.bis.org/statistics/index.htm).




                                                                           41
                          Figure 8C: Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano Composite Dollarization Index Level vs.
                                     Exports-to-GDP Ratio for Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano’s
                                               Fifty Highest Dollarized Countries

                   1.0

                   0.9             Estonia



                   0.8                        Bahrain

                                                                                                  Angola

                   0.7         Belarus

                                 Thailand               Mongolia
                                                                        Tajikistan
2001 Exports/GDP




                   0.6             Hungary

                                                        Vietnam                                            Bulgaria
                                         Moldova                        Ghana              Cambodia
                   0.5                       Philippines       Croatia
                                   Turkmenistan
                             Costa Rica                  Indonesia     Jordan
                                             Jamaica
                   0.4                         Kyrgyz Republic
                                                               YemenHonduras
                                                                               Guinea-Bissau
                                                                              São Tomé & Príncipe
                               Côte d'Ivoire
                                                  Russia               Turkey

                   0.3             El Salvador               Guinea             Mozambique
                                                               Malawi                                                                              Ecuador
                                   Armenia                                    Zambia   Paraguay
                                   Georgia
                   0.2             Pakistan
                                                          Congo DR                                                        Uruguay
                                                                                                                                    Bolivia
                                                              Sierra Leone
                                                                                                  Peru
                                                           Tanzania              Lebanon
                                   Uganda                                                                             Argentina
                   0.1

                   0.0
                         8               10               12         14         16      18          20         22                             24       26
                                                         Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano Composite Index Level: 1996-2001

                         Note: Lao, Nicaragua, and Bosnia & Herzegovina are excluded from this figure because the World Bank
                         did not have data on these countries’ exports-to-GDP ratio in 2001.
                         Sources: Carmen M. Reinhart, Kenneth S. Rogoff, & Miguel A. Savansto, Addicted to Dollars, NBER
                         Working Paper 10015, October 2003, at Table 4; World Bank, World Development Indicators Database
                         (available at http://devdata.worldbank.org/data-query/).




                                                                                                 42
                                                        Figure 8D: CDDD-to-Private Credit Ratio vs.
                                                                   Exports-to-GDP Ratio
                   1.0

                   0.9                                           Estonia



                   0.8                                        Bahrain

                                                                                                                              Angola
                   0.7                              Belarus
                                         Thailand     Mongolia
2001 Exports/GDP




                   0.6                              Hungary
                                          Bulgaria
                                                    Vietnam
                                            Moldova Cambodia
                   0.5
                                            Croatia Philippines
                                           Jordan Indonesia
                              Jamaica    Costa Rica         Guinea-Bissau
                   0.4                            Yemen
                                                        Côte d'
                                                              Ivoire                     São Tomé & Príncipe
                                         Honduras                      Kyrgyz Republic
                                                Russia      Turkey
                   0.3                               Ecuador                                      Mozambique
                                    Zambia                                 Guinea
                                                        Malawi
                                                 Armenia
                                        Paraguay     Georgia
                   0.2                             Uruguay
                                Sierra Leone PakistanBolivia
                                                           Tanzania
                                                     Peru
                                   Uganda Lebanon        Argentina
                   0.1

                   0.0
                         -1                     1                          3                  5                7   9            11
                                                                               2001 CDDD/Private Credit

                         Note: Lao, Nicaragua, and Bosnia & Herzegovina are excluded from this figure because the World Bank
                         did not have data on these countries’ exports-to-GDP ratio in 2001. In addition, Ghana, Tajikstan, Congo
                         DR, El Salvador, and Turkmenistan are excluded from the graph because the IMF did not have data on
                         these countries’ private credit, or because the BIS did not have data on at least one component of CDDD
                         for these countries.
                         Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics Yearbook (2002); World Bank,
                         World Development Indicators Database (available at http://devdata.worldbank.org/data-query/); Bank for
                         International Settlements, Consolidated Banking Statistics (Table 9A) and Securities Statistics (Table 12C)
                         (available at http://www.bis.org/statistics/index.htm).




                                                                                         43
                                                 Mexican Pesos / U.S. Dollar




                                     0
                                         1
                                             2
                                                  3
                                                         4
                                                                5
                                                                       6
                                                                               7
                                                                                   8
                                                                                       9
                            Jun-94


                            Aug-94


                            Oct-94


                            Dec-94




     Source: Economatica.
                            Feb-95


                            Apr-95


                            Jun-95


                            Aug-95


                            Oct-95




44
                            Dec-95


                            Feb-96
                                                                                                   June 1994 – December 1996




                            Apr-96


                            Jun-96
                                                                                           Figure 9: Mexico’s Nominal Exchange Rate




                            Aug-96


                            Oct-96


                            Dec-96
                  Table 1: Degrees of Dollarization for Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano’s
                                Sixteen Highest Dollarized Countries

 Country                    Reinhart-Rogoff-Savastano          CDDD / Private Credit:         Exports / GDP: 2001
                           Composite Index Level: 1996-           2001 (Rank)                       (Rank)
                                  2001 (Rank)



  Ecuador                        25                (1)             1.123            (11)        0.267           (10)
  Bolivia                        22                (2)             1.124            (10)        0.183           (13)
  Uruguay                        21                (3)             1.104            (14)        0.187           (12)
  Argentina                      20                (4)             1.518             (6)        0.114           (16)
  Bulgaria                       19                (5)             1.117            (12)        0.557            (3)
  Lao                            17                (6)             1.088            (15)         N/A            N/A
  Nicaragua                      17                (6)             1.106            (13)         N/A            N/A
  Angola                         16                (8)             10.611            (1)        0.745            (1)
  Peru                           16                (8)             1.365             (8)        0.158           (14)
  Cambodia                       15               (10)             1.445             (7)        0.532            (4)
  Paraguay                       15               (10)             0.864            (17)        0.245           (11)
  Guinea-Bissau                  14               (12)             1.839             (4)        0.407            (6)
  Lebanon                        14               (12)             1.157             (9)        0.143           (15)
  Mozambique                     14               (12)             5.275             (2)        0.283            (8)
  São Tomé & Príncipe            14               (12)             4.381             (3)        0.381            (7)
  Zambia                         14               (12)             0.583            (18)        0.271            (9)
Note: Corporate Dollar-Denominated Debt (CDDD) is equal to the sum of 1) consolidated claims of reporting
foreign banks on the non-bank private sector of individual countries, 2) international debt securities by corporate
issuers, and 3) the difference between the nation’s total private credit and local currency claims on local residents.
Private credit is converted to U.S. dollars using the end-of-2001 exchange rate.
Sources: Carmen M. Reinhart, Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel A. Savastano, Addicted to Dollars, NBER Working
Paper 10015, October 2003, at Table 4 (attached as Exhibit D-10); International Monetary Fund, International
Financial Statistics Yearbook (2002); World Bank, World Development Indicators Database (available at
http://devdata.worldbank.org/data-query/); Bank for International Settlements, Consolidated Banking Statistics
(Table 9A) and Securities Statistics (Table 12C) (available at http://www.bis.org/statistics/index.htm).




                                                          45
                         Table 2: Description of Variables

 Variable         Description
 t                Year following devaluation (Argentina: t=2002; Mexico: t=1995).
                  Likewise, I define the year preceding devaluation to be: t-1=2001 for
                  Argentina, and t-1=1994 for Mexico.
 St               Net revenue in year t, converted to U.S. dollars
 SGt              log(St) – log(St-1)
 SG2yt            log(St + St+1) – log(St-1 + St-2)
 It               Capital expenditures in year t, converted to U.S. dollars
 Kt               Plant, property, and equipment as of December 31 in year t, converted
                  to U.S. dollars
 IKRt             It / Kt-1
 IKR2yt           (It + It+1) / Kt-1
 ARG              Argentina dummy variable: equal to 1 if the firm is Argentine, 0
                  otherwise
 TR               Tradable dummy: equal to 1 if the firm is in a tradable sector, 0
                  otherwise
 At               Total assets as of December 31 in year t, converted to U.S. dollars
 EBITDAt          Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation & amortization in year t,
                  converted to U.S. dollars
 DDAt-1           Ratio of dollar-denominated liabilities to total assets on December 31
                  in year t-1
 EARt             (EBITDAt – EBITDAt-1) / At-1
 EAR2yt           (EBITDAt + EBITDAt+1 – EBITDAt-1 – EBITDAt-2) / At-1

 KSRt              Kt / St
Note: I convert all financial data to real 1999 U.S. dollars using December-to-December
changes in the country’s consumer price index and the exchange rate for December 31,
1999. I define a firm as “tradable” if its 2-digit NAICS code is 11 (Agriculture, Forestry,
Fishing, and Hunting), 21 (Mining), or 31-33 (Manufacturing). I exclude firms with
NAICS codes 52 (Finance and Insurance), 531 (Real Estate), or 55 (Management of
Companies and Enterprises) from my analyses. I define all other firms as “non-tradable.”




                                            46
   Table 3: Mean Ratio of Capital Expenditures to Plant, Property, and Equipment in the Year
                                Following Devaluation (IKRT):
                             Argentina (2002) & Mexico (1995)

                    Non-Tradable Firms                     Tradable Firms
 Argentina        Mean    Firms Std. Dev            Mean       Firms Std. Dev         Dif       T-Stat    Pr(Dif     0)
 High-           0.0353       11       0.0366      0.0728       13      0.1218      -0.0375    -1.0554      0.1543
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-            0.0706        9       0.0804      0.0956       17      0.0996      -0.0250    -0.6929      0.2482
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif             -0.0353                           -0.0227
 T-Stat          -1.2160                           -0.5476
 Pr(Dif 0)        0.1251                            0.2946


                    Non-Tradable Firms                     Tradable Firms
 Mexico           Mean    Firms Std. Dev            Mean       Firms Std. Dev         Dif       T-Stat    Pr(Dif     0)
  High-           0.0295        7        0.0357       0.0750      23      0.0918      -0.0455 -1.9426           0.0315
  Dollar
  Debt Firms
  Low-            0.0875       28        0.1173       0.0670      25      0.0571       0.0205     0.8226        0.7922
  Dollar
  Debt Firms
  Dif            -0.0580                              0.0080
  T-Stat         -2.2348                              0.3594
  Pr(Dif 0)       0.0163                              0.6393
Note: In my analyses of Economatica data, the term “dollar-denominated” refers to any item denominated in foreign
currencies because Economatica does not provide dollar-specific information. Dollar-denominated debt is defined as
foreign currency-denominated liabilities of all kinds. I define a firm as a “high-dollar debt” firm if the ratio of its
dollar-denominated liabilities to its total assets on December 31 in the year preceding devaluation is greater than or
equal to 35 percent. I exclude all firms for which dollar-denominated liabilities were not available for the year
preceding devaluation, as well as any firms with dollar-denominated liabilities that exceeded total liabilities. I use
consolidated financial data if dollar-denominated liabilities are available on the firm’s consolidated balance sheet in
the year preceding devaluation; otherwise I use non-consolidated data if dollar-denominated liabilities are available
on the firm’s non-consolidated balance sheet in the year preceding devaluation. I convert all data to real 1999 U.S.
dollars using December-to-December changes in the country’s consumer price index and the exchange rate for
December 31, 1999. I exclude one outlier Mexican firm from all of my analyses. This firm’s value of SG2yt was -
5.37, which implies a revenue decline of 99.5 percent from 1993-94 to 1995-96. T-statistics are calculated assuming
unequal variances.
Source: Economatica.




                                                           47
   Table 4: Mean Ratio of Capital Expenditures to Plant, Property, and Equipment in the Two
                           Years Following Devaluation (IKR2YT):
                          Argentina (2002-03) & Mexico (1995-96)

                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Argentina       Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-          0.0724        6    0.0959   0.1817      7     0.1579    -0.1092   -1.5305    0.0784
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           0.0644        5    0.0397   0.2155      7     0.1537    -0.1511   -2.4875    0.0207
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif            0.0080                      -0.0339
 T-Stat         0.1862                      -0.4069
 Pr(Dif 0)      0.5712                       0.3456


                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Mexico          Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-           0.0711       7    0.0669   0.1460      23    0.1460    -0.0749   -1.8919    0.0356
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-            0.1625       28   0.2141   0.1224      25    0.0893    0.0401    0.9075     0.8150
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif            -0.0914                     0.0236
 T-Stat         -1.9155                     0.6695
 Pr(Dif 0)       0.0324                     0.7463
Note: See Note for Table 3.
Source: Economatica.




                                                   48
      Table 5: Mean Log Difference in Revenues in the Year Following Devaluation (SGT):
                             Argentina (2002) & Mexico (1995)

                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Argentina       Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-          -0.0494       11   0.2418   0.1642      12    0.6319    -0.2136   -1.0871    0.1474
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.2008       9    0.3560   0.3385      18    0.4697    -0.5394   -3.3234    0.0016
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif            0.1515                      -0.1743
 T-Stat         1.0876                      -0.8169
 Pr(Dif 0)      0.8522                       0.2121


                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Mexico          Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-          -0.1994       7    0.3497   -0.1589     23    0.3128    -0.0404   -0.2742    0.3950
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.6014       28   0.3513   -0.2400     25    0.2430    -0.3614   -4.3921    0.0000
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif             0.4020                     0.0811
 T-Stat          2.7181                     0.9969
 Pr(Dif 0)       0.9885                     0.8377
Note: See Note for Table 3.
Source: Economatica.




                                                   49
                              Table 6: Mean Log Difference in Revenues in the
                                Two Years Following Devaluation (SG2YT):
                                 Argentina (2002-03) & Mexico (1995-96)

                   Non-Tradable Firms                 Tradable Firms
 Argentina       Mean    Firms Std. Dev        Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-          -0.1289        11    0.3011    0.1058      12    0.7165    -0.2347   -1.0391    0.1576
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.2238        8     0.1843    0.3936      14    0.3891    -0.6174   -5.0312    0.0000
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif            0.0948                        -0.2878
 T-Stat         0.8488                        -1.2433
 Pr(Dif 0)      0.7960                         0.1156


                   Non-Tradable Firms                 Tradable Firms
 Mexico          Mean    Firms Std. Dev        Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-          -0.1258        7     0.3088    0.0707      22    0.3226    -0.1965   -1.4503    0.0880
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.3949        28    0.3786    0.0002      25    0.2606    -0.3950   -4.4626    0.0000
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif             0.2691                        0.0705
 T-Stat          1.9654                        0.8170
 Pr(Dif 0)       0.9625                        0.7906
Note: See Note for Table 3.
Source: Economatica.




                                                      50
            Table 7: Mean Earnings Growth in the Year Following Devaluation (EART):
                               Argentina (2002) & Mexico (1995)

                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Argentina       Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-          -0.0237       11   0.0799   0.1067      12    0.2077    -0.1304   -2.0184    0.0313
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.0306       9    0.0351   0.1021      18    0.1701    -0.1327   -3.1765    0.0024
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif            0.0068                      0.0046
 T-Stat         0.2558                      0.0637
 Pr(Dif 0)      0.5991                      0.5251


                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Mexico          Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-           0.0127       7    0.0468   0.0106      23    0.0459    0.0021    0.1039     0.5403
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.0512       28   0.0438   -0.0097     25    0.0656    -0.0414   -2.6710    0.0054
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif             0.0639                     0.0204
 T-Stat          3.2715                     1.2553
 Pr(Dif 0)       0.9950                     0.8919
Note: See Note for Table 3.
Source: Economatica.




                                                   51
       Table 8: Mean Earnings Growth in the Two Years Following Devaluation (EAR2YT):
                           Argentina (2002-03) & Mexico (1995-96)

                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Argentina       Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-          -0.0197       6    0.1670   0.3452      6     0.3459    -0.3649   -2.3270    0.0259
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.0818       7    0.0380   0.2565      9     0.2914    -0.3384   -3.4453    0.0041
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif            0.0621                      0.0886
 T-Stat         0.8917                      0.5172
 Pr(Dif 0)      0.7949                      0.6916


                   Non-Tradable Firms              Tradable Firms
 Mexico          Mean    Firms Std. Dev     Mean       Firms Std. Dev     Dif     T-Stat    Pr(Dif    0)
 High-           0.0525       7    0.1295   0.0534      22    0.0916    -0.0009   -0.0178    0.4931
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Low-           -0.0668       27   0.0867   0.0273      25    0.1068    -0.0940   -3.4678    0.0006
 Dollar
 Debt Firms
 Dif             0.1192                     0.0262
 T-Stat          2.3055                     0.9040
 Pr(Dif 0)       0.9738                     0.8146
Note: See Note for Table 3.
Source: Economatica.




                                                   52
      Table 9: OLS Regression Statistics for Ratio of Capital Expenditures to Plant, Property,
and Equipment in the Year Following Devaluation (IKRT):
                             Argentina (2002) & Mexico (1995)

                                           Specification 1               Specification 2
        Independent Variables        Coefficient         T-Stat   Coefficient          T-Stat
                                     (Std. Error)         P>|t|   (Std. Error)           P>|t|
             IKRt-1                     0.0523             3.08      0.0540              3.12
                                      (0.0170)           0.003     (0.0173)             0.002
             SGt                        0.0156             0.78      0.0137              0.68
                                      (0.0199)           0.437     (0.0201)             0.497
             ARG                       -0.0313            -0.87     -0.0844             -1.65
                                      (0.0361)           0.388     (0.0510)             0.101
             TR                        -0.0102            -0.51     -0.0382             -1.22
                                      (0.0201)           0.613     (0.0313)             0.225
             DDAt-1                    -0.0680            -1.36     -0.1449             -1.79
                                      (0.0500)           0.176     (0.0809)             0.076
             TR x ARG                   0.0496             1.58      0.1327              2.12
                                      (0.0314)           0.116     (0.0626)             0.036
             DDAt-1 x ARG               0.0423             0.54      0.2192              1.63
                                      (0.0788)           0.592     (0.1346)             0.106
             TR x DDAt-1                                             0.1242              1.21
                                                                   (0.1029)             0.230
             TR x DDAt-1 x ARG                                      -0.2684             -1.64
                                                                   (0.1638)             0.104
             Constant                  0.0790             3.73       0.0924              3.67
                                      (0.0212)           0.000     (0.0252)             0.000

        Regression Statistics
            Observations                130                          130
            R2                         0.1138                       0.1337
             Adjusted R2               0.0630                       0.0687
              Root MSE                 0.0833                       0.0830
       Note: See Note for Table 3.
       Source: Economatica.




                                                    53
Table 10: OLS Regression Statistics for Ratio of Capital Expenditures to Plant, Property, and
             Equipment in the Two Years Following Devaluation (IKR2YT):
                       Argentina (2002-03) & Mexico (1995-96)

                                         Specification 1               Specification 2
      Independent Variables        Coefficient         T-Stat   Coefficient          T-Stat
                                   (Std. Error)         P>|t|   (Std. Error)           P>|t|
           IKRt-1                     0.1788             4.66      0.1710              4.41
                                    (0.0384)           0.000     (0.0388)             0.000
           SG2yt                      0.0762             2.22      0.0774              2.24
                                    (0.0343)           0.029     (0.0345)             0.027
           ARG                       -0.0529            -0.68     -0.0962             -0.77
                                    (0.0781)           0.500     (0.1249)             0.443
           TR                        -0.0321            -1.01     -0.0830             -1.71
                                    (0.0316)           0.314     (0.0486)             0.091
           DDAt-1                    -0.1464            -1.93     -0.2810             -2.28
                                    (0.0759)           0.057     (0.1232)             0.025
           TR x ARG                   0.1338             2.16      0.2039              1.39
                                    (0.0620)           0.033     (0.1467)             0.168
           DDAt-1 x ARG               0.1140             0.66      0.2869              0.91
                                    (0.1721)           0.509     (0.3157)             0.366
           TR x DDAt-1                                             0.2183              1.39
                                                                 (0.1573)             0.169
           TR x DDAt-1 x ARG                                      -0.2702             -0.72
                                                                 (0.3768)             0.475
           Constant                  0.1363             4.26       0.1657              4.31
                                    (0.0320)           0.000     (0.0385)             0.000

      Regression Statistics
          Observations                104                          104
          R2                         0.2931                       0.3074
           Adjusted R2               0.2415                       0.2411
            Root MSE                 0.1263                       0.1263
     Note: See Note for Table 3.
     Source: Economatica.




                                                  54
      Table 11: Cumulative Raw & Abnormal Returns of Argentine Stocks Over the Five-Day Trading
                          Window Around the Redenomination Announcement:
                                   January 30 – February 7, 2002

                                     Non-Tradable Firms            Tradable Firms
          Raw                      Mean    Firms Std. Dev   Mean       Firms Std. Dev        Dif      T-Stat     Pr(Dif     0)
          Returns
          High-                    0.0941    6    0.0366    0.2757      9      0.1261     -0.1815    -4.0703       0.0011
          Dollar
          Debt Firms
          Low-                     0.0158    3    0.0353    0.1577      11     0.1012     -0.1419    -3.8683       0.0014
          Dollar
          Debt Firms
          Dif                      0.0784                   0.1180
          T-Stat                   3.1004                   2.2715
          Pr(Dif 0)                0.0167                   0.0190


                                     Non-Tradable Firms          Tradable Firms
      Abnormal                     Mean    Firms Std. Dev   Mean     Firms Std. Dev          Dif      T-Stat     Pr(Dif     0)
      Returns
      High-          0.0500       6      0.0878       0.2421         9       0.1510       -0.1921    -3.1088       0.0042
      Dollar
      Debt Firms
      Low-           0.0105       3      0.0295       0.0617        11       0.1283       -0.0511    -1.2105       0.1247
      Dollar
      Debt Firms
      Dif            0.0395                           0.1804
      T-Stat         0.9943                           2.8420
      Pr(Dif 0)      0.1774                           0.0059
Note: See Note for Table 3. The cumulative raw return for stock i is equal to:
               5
CRRi =               ri ,t ,
              t =1

where ri,t is the daily return for stock i on day t, defined as the percentage change in closing prices from the previous day,
or:
          pi ,t − pi ,t −1
ri ,t =                        .
              pi ,t −1
Before calculating any returns, I convert all closing stock prices to U.S. dollars using the exchange rate for that day. Not
all stocks trade every day. When calculating cumulative raw returns, I set the closing stock price for a day with no trades
equal to the most recent closing price preceding that day. I only calculate cumulative raw or abnormal returns for a stock
if it traded on at least one day in the first half of the window (January 30-February 1), before the announcement of
redenomination of all dollar-denominated debt, and on at least one day in the second half of the window (February 6-7),
after the announcement of redenomination of all dollar-denominated debt.
Before calculating cumulative abnormal returns, I estimated regression coefficients for each stock using the market
model:
 wri ,t = β 0,i + β1,i wrMERVAL,t + ε i ,t ,
where wri,t is the weekly return for stock i and the wrMERVAL,t is the weekly return of the MERVAL stock index on week t.
I estimate the market model for each Argentine stock in my sample over the 52 weeks from December 8, 2000, to
November 30, 2001. I only calculated wri,t if the stock traded both in week t and in the preceding week t-1. The
cumulative abnormal return for stock i in the event window is defined as:


                                                                   55
             5
CARi =             abri ,t ,
            t =1

where abri,t is the abnormal return on day t, or
abri ,t = ri ,t − ( β 0,i + ( 0.6 β1,i + 0.4 ) rMERVAL ,t ) .
As the abnormal return equation shows, I normalized the beta coefficients to 1 before estimating predicted returns. If a
stock did not trade on day t in the event window, though, I set abri,t equal to 0. I did not estimate cumulative raw or
abnormal returns for stocks with fewer than 10 weekly returns in the market model estimation period. T-statistics are
estimated assuming unequal variances.
Source: Economatica.




                                                                56
Table 12: OLS Regression Statistics for Cumulative Raw & Abnormal Returns of Argentine
                      Stocks Over the Five-Day Trading Window
                     Around the Redenomination Announcement:
                             January 30 – February 7, 2002

                                               Dependent Variable
                              Cumulative Raw Returns     Cumulative Abnormal Returns
      Independent Variables   Coefficient     T-Stat      Coefficient       T-Stat
                              (Std. Error)     P>|t|      (Std. Error)       P>|t|
          TR                     0.1561        3.82          0.1249          2.37
                               (0.0409)       0.001        (0.0528)         0.026
          DDAt-1                 0.2447        2.33          0.3473          2.56
                               (0.1051)       0.028        (0.1356)         0.017
          Constant              -0.0255       -0.49         -0.0959         -1.42
                               (0.0524)       0.631        (0.0676)         0.168

      Regression Statistics
          Observations           29                           29
          R2                   0.4070                       0.2912
          Adjusted R2          0.3613                       0.2367
          Root MSE             0.1009                       0.1301




                                           57
Table 13: Argentine and Mexican Firms in the Investment and Event Study Regression Samples
Defined as Utilities (Subject to Redenominated Tariffs) or as High-Energy Consumers
               Company Name                                       Included in Event Study
                                                                    Regression Sample?
               Utilities
               Camuzzi Gas Pamp. ORD                                        No
               Distr Gas Cuyana ORD                                         No
               Edenor ORD                                                   No
               Edesur ORD                                                   No
               Gas Natural BAN ORD                                          No
               Metrogas ORD                                                 Yes
               Transener ORD                                                Yes
               Transp Gas Sur ORD                                           Yes
               Transp Gas de Norte ORD                                      No

                High-Energy Consumers
                Acindar ORD                                                   Yes
                Aluar ORD                                                     Yes
                Atanor ORD                                                    Yes
                Massuh ORD                                                     No
                Quim Estrella ORD                                              No
                Rosenbusch ORD                                                Yes
                Siderar ORD                                                   Yes
                Siderca ORD                                                   Yes
                Solvay Indupa ORD                                             Yes
              Note: I define a firm as a high-energy consumer if its 3-digit NAICS code is 322
              (Paper), 324 (Petroleum & Coal Products), 325 (Chemicals), or 331 (Primary Metals).
              These four industries were the top manufacturing consumers of energy in 1998 in the
              United States according to the U.S. Department of Energy (see
              http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/aer/txt/ptb0203.html). I define an Argentine firm as a
              “utility” for the purposes of the regressions if its 2-digit NAICS code is 22 (Utilities)
              and if it was subject to the tariffs being redenominated into pesos. Two Argentine
              firms, Central Costanera ORD and Central Puerto ORD, are classified with the Utilities
              NAICS code in Economatica, but I do not assign them the “utility” dummy variable in
              the regressions because they were not subject to tariffs that were redenominated into
              pesos.
              Source: Economatica.




                                                     58
Table 14: OLS Regression Statistics for Ratio of Capital Expenditures to Plant, Property, and
Equipment in the Year Following Devaluation (IKRT):
                             Argentina (2002) & Mexico (1995)

                                            Specification 1               Specification 2
         Independent Variables        Coefficient         T-Stat   Coefficient          T-Stat
                                      (Std. Error)         P>|t|   (Std. Error)           P>|t|
             IKRt-1                      0.0516             2.97      0.0537              2.99
                                       (0.0173)           0.004     (0.0180)             0.003
             SGt                         0.0073             0.36      0.0058              0.28
                                       (0.0205)           0.721     (0.0207)             0.781
             ARG                        -0.0177            -0.43     -0.0710             -1.19
                                       (0.0417)           0.671     (0.0597)             0.237
             TR                         -0.0078            -0.39     -0.0355             -1.13
                                       (0.0200)           0.700     (0.0312)             0.259
             DDAt-1                     -0.0664            -1.34     -0.1425             -1.77
                                       (0.0497)           0.184     (0.0806)             0.080
             TR x ARG                    0.0209             0.56      0.1016              1.43
                                       (0.0376)           0.579     (0.0713)             0.156
             DDAt-1 x ARG                0.0421             0.53      0.2080              1.50
                                       (0.0793)           0.596     (0.1388)             0.136
             TR x DDAt-1                                              0.1227              1.20
                                                                    (0.1025)             0.234
             TR x DDAt-1 x ARG                                       -0.2489             -1.49
                                                                    (0.1667)             0.138
             Utility x ARG              -0.0233           -0.60      -0.0140             -0.35
                                       (0.0386)           0.548     (0.0401)             0.727
             HighEnergy x ARG            0.0592            1.70       0.0581              1.67
                                       (0.0348)           0.091     (0.0348)             0.097
             Constant                    0.0747            3.49       0.0879              3.45
                                       (0.0214)           0.001     (0.0255)             0.001

         Regression Statistics
             Observations                130                          130
             R2                         0.1378                       0.1549
             Adjusted R2                0.0731                       0.0761
              Root MSE                   0.0828                      0.0827
       Note: See Notes for Tables 3 and 13.
       Source: Economatica.




                                                     59
Table 15: OLS Regression Statistics for Ratio of Capital Expenditures to Plant, Property, and
             Equipment in the Two Years Following Devaluation (IKR2YT):
                       Argentina (2002-03) & Mexico (1995-96)

                                          Specification 1               Specification 2
      Independent Variables         Coefficient         T-Stat   Coefficient          T-Stat
                                    (Std. Error)         P>|t|   (Std. Error)           P>|t|
           IKRt-1                      0.1778             4.58      0.1701              4.34
                                     (0.0388)           0.000     (0.0392)             0.000
          SG2yt                        0.0779             2.23      0.0797              2.26
                                     (0.0350)           0.028     (0.0353)             0.026
          ARG                         -0.0325            -0.35     -0.0639             -0.43
                                     (0.0932)           0.728     (0.1481)             0.667
          TR                          -0.0327            -1.02     -0.0841             -1.71
                                     (0.0320)           0.309     (0.0491)             0.090
          DDAt-1                      -0.1466            -1.91     -0.2817             -2.26
                                     (0.0766)           0.059     (0.1244)             0.026
          TR x ARG                     0.1234             1.51      0.1779              1.05
                                     (0.0818)           0.135     (0.1700)             0.298
          DDAt-1 x ARG                 0.1063             0.61      0.2486              0.75
                                     (0.1756)           0.546     (0.3317)             0.455
          TR x DDAt-1                                               0.2190              1.38
                                                                  (0.1588)             0.171
           TR x DDAt-1 x ARG                                       -0.2275             -0.58
                                                                  (0.3920)             0.563
           Utility x ARG              -0.0358           -0.44      -0.0358             -0.42
                                     (0.0817)           0.662     (0.0848)             0.674
           HighEnergy x ARG           -0.0192           -0.25      -0.0203             -0.27
                                     (0.0755)           0.800     (0.0756)             0.789
           Constant                    0.1373            4.23       0.1669              4.29
                                     (0.0324)           0.000     (0.0389)             0.000

      Regression Statistics
          Observations                 104                          104
          R2                          0.2950                       0.3093
           Adjusted R2                0.2275                       0.2267
            Root MSE                   0.1274                      0.1275
     Note: See Notes for Tables 3 and 13.
     Source: Economatica.




                                                   60
Table 16: OLS Regression Statistics for Cumulative Raw & Abnormal Returns of Argentine
                      Stocks Over the Five-Day Trading Window
                       Around the Devaluation Announcement:
                              January 2 – January 18, 2002

                                                     Dependent Variable
                                    Cumulative Raw Returns     Cumulative Abnormal Returns
      Independent Variables         Coefficient     T-Stat      Coefficient       T-Stat
                                    (Std. Error)     P>|t|      (Std. Error)       P>|t|
          TR                           0.2857        1.80          0.3518          2.08
                                     (0.1584)       0.086        (0.1695)         0.051
          DDAt-1                       0.3566        1.09          0.2074          0.59
                                     (0.3271)       0.289        (0.3500)         0.560
          Utility                     -0.1484       -0.69         -0.1158         -0.51
                                     (0.2141)       0.496        (0.2291)         0.619
          HighEnergy                   0.1718        1.21          0.0873          0.57
                                     (0.1423)       0.241        (0.1522)         0.573
          Constant                    -0.0844       -0.48          0.0717          0.38
                                     (0.1743)       0.634        (0.1865)         0.705

      Regression Statistics
          Observations                  25                                25
          R2                          0.3841                            0.3475
          Adjusted R2                 0.2610                            0.2170
           Root MSE                    0.2886                             0.3088
    Note: See Note for Table 11. The calculation of returns is the same as in the window around the
    redenomination announcement. The same restrictions to the sample of firms included in the
    regression also apply to the devaluation window. The first half of this five-day trading window is
    January 2-4, and the second half of the window is January 17-18. No Argentine stocks traded from
    January 5 through January 16.




                                                   61
Table 17: OLS Regression Statistics for Cumulative Raw & Abnormal Returns of Argentine
                      Stocks Over the Five-Day Trading Window
                     Around the Redenomination Announcement:
                             January 30 – February 7, 2002

                                               Dependent Variable
                              Cumulative Raw Returns     Cumulative Abnormal Returns
      Independent Variables   Coefficient     T-Stat      Coefficient       T-Stat
                              (Std. Error)     P>|t|      (Std. Error)       P>|t|
          TR                     0.1168        2.44          0.0659          1.06
                               (0.0478)       0.022        (0.0622)         0.300
          DDAt-1                 0.2597        2.52          0.3780          2.82
                               (0.1031)       0.019        (0.1342)         0.010
          Utility               -0.0237       -0.34         -0.0731         -0.80
                               (0.0699)       0.737        (0.0910)         0.430
          HighEnergy             0.0919        2.02          0.1039          1.76
                               (0.0455)       0.055        (0.0591)         0.092
          Constant              -0.0233       -0.44         -0.0832         -1.21
                               (0.0526)       0.662        (0.0685)         0.236

      Regression Statistics
          Observations           29                           29
          R2                   0.4951                       0.3860
          Adjusted R2          0.4109                       0.2837
          Root MSE             0.0970                       0.1261




                                           62
