                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE ECONOMICS OF EARNINGS MANIPULATION AND MANAGERIAL COMPENSATION

                                            Keith J. Crocker
                                             Joel Slemrod

                                         Working Paper 12645
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12645


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2006




 The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful suggestions provided on earlier drafts by Thomas Gresik,
 Arthur Snow, and seminar audiences at the Pennsylvania State University, the University of Georgia,
 and the University of Notre Dame. A particular debt of gratitude is owed to an anonymous referee,
 whose thoughtful advice and constructive criticism has greatly improved the quality of the final product.
 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

 © 2006 by Keith J. Crocker and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
 is given to the source.
The Economics of Earnings Manipulation and Managerial Compensation
Keith J. Crocker and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 12645
October 2006
JEL No. A12

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines managerial compensation in an environment where managers may take a hidden
action that affects the actual earnings of the firm. When realized, these earnings constitute hidden
information that is privately observed by the manager, who may expend resources to generate an inflated
earnings report. We characterize the optimal managerial compensation contract in this setting, and
demonstrate that contracts contingent on reported earnings cannot provide managers with the incentive
both to maximize profits, and to report those profits honestly. As a result, some degree of earnings
management must be tolerated as a necessary part of an efficient agreement.

Keith J. Crocker
Pennsylvania State University
SMEAL College of Business
Department of Insurance and Real Estate
333 Business Building
University Park, PA 16802
kcrocker@psu.edu

Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
Wyly Hall, Room 7719
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu
                “In [a] case against…four Qwest executives, the government
                contends they rushed $34 million in revenue…on their books in
                2001….Prosecutors say they did it in knowing violation of
                accounting standards so they could meet quarterly targets that
                they believed were essential to their bonuses and careers.”
                                                                                         1
                                              Wall Street Journal (Young, 2004, p. C1)




1.    Introduction



        The explosive growth of performance-based executive compensation was a notable characteristic

of the late 20th century economic scene, and was for the most part applauded by economists as a way to

align the incentives of managers with the interest of the shareholders. The accounting scandals of the

early 21st century highlighted a darker side of performance-based compensation plans: they provided

managers with the incentive to misrepresent the company’s true performance. In a special report on

corporate governance, Business Week referred to this phenomenon as an example of the “law of

unintended consequences:” performance-based compensation, often received in the form of stock options

or direct stock grants, was designed to remedy the problem of widely dispersed ownership, but ended up

exacerbating it, leading to “borderline accounting and in some cases, outright fraud” (Byrne, 2002).

These scandals have caused a reconsideration of corporate governance and the role of enforcement

agencies such as the Securities and Exchange Commission, eventually leading to the Sarbanes-Oxley bill

of 2002, which is arguably the single most important piece of legislation affecting corporate governance,

financial disclosure and the practice of public accounting since the U.S. securities laws of the early 1930s.

        The economics and finance literatures have developed elegant theoretical models that analyze the

optimal contract between the shareholders and the manager of a firm. In the traditional framework, as

developed in the seminal paper of Holmstrom (1979), the underlying problem is that the shareholder

(principal) cannot observe, and therefore cannot contract upon, actions taken by the manager (agent) that


                                                     1
affect profitability even though the consequences of these actions ultimately affect the shareholders’

returns. The action, which provides disutility for the agent, together with a random state of nature

determines the observable profit of the firm. The issue in contract design is to provide the agent with the

incentive to take the (privately costly) action. A risk-neutral principal could, of course, eliminate the

incentive problem by making the agent the residual claimant of the profit, but the agent is risk-averse and

so shifting the risk to her entails an efficiency cost. The optimal contract, therefore, reflects a trade-off

between the incentive benefit of conditioning the agent’s compensation on the observed level of profit

and the cost of inefficiently allocating the risk to the risk-averse party.

        As the recent accounting scandals make clear, however, this standard model ignores a critical

feature of the relationship between the principal and agent: the agent may also possess private information

about the true profit of the firm and may, by incurring some cost, falsify that information in his report to

the principal. Recent experiences suggest that an optimal contract between the principal and the agent

should be designed not only to provide the agent with an incentive to take actions that enhance the actual

profitability of the firm, but also to minimize the agent’s incentive to falsify earnings reports.

        There is empirical evidence linking the character of executive compensation with earnings

manipulation and fraud. With regard to earnings manipulation, Ke (2001) finds that firms whose CEOs

have relatively high amounts of equity incentives, in the form of unrestricted stock and immediately

exercisable options, are more likely to engage in earnings management by reporting small earnings

increases more than small earnings decreases, and also by reporting long strings of increasing earnings.

Gao and Shrieves (2002) find that earnings management intensity, as measured by the absolute value of

discretionary accruals, is increasing in the amount of options and bonuses and decreasing in salaries.

Cheng and Warfield (2005) find an association between the extent of stock-based compensation and the

magnitude of abnormal accruals. They also find a lower earnings coefficient in a regression equation

explaining earnings for firms that use higher stock-based compensation, suggesting that earnings are less

informative in these settings.




                                                        2
        Other empirical studies address the relationship between the form of executive compensation and

accounting fraud.    Here the evidence is mixed.         Based on a sample composed predominantly of

companies from high-growth industries, Dechow et al. (1996) find no evidence of a link between

executive compensation (specifically, whether the firm had an earnings-based bonus plan) and SEC

enforcement actions.     More recently, Johnson, Ryan, and Tian (2003) find, based on univariate

comparisons between executives of firms accused of fraud and executives of firms of similar size and

industry, that the former group had higher financial incentives to increase stock price than the latter

group. Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2006) find that, controlling for the financing needed and

governance characteristics of the firm, the probability of accounting fraud is increasing in the percent of

total executive compensation that is stock-based.2

        The paper proceeds as follows.       In the next section, we develop a model of managerial

compensation in an environment in which a manager may take a hidden action that impacts on firm

profits, and in which the actual realization of that profit is hidden information known only to the manager.

Our modeling approach is to follow Holmstrom (1979) to deal with the hidden action aspects of the

contracting problem, and to apply the costly state falsification framework developed by Crocker and

Morgan (1998) to address the issues resulting from the hidden information. In a setting where the risk-

neutral manager can incur a cost to falsify the earnings reports observed by the risk-neutral shareholders,

we characterize the optimal managerial compensation arrangement and show that the form of such a

contract reflects a tension between the need to provide an incentive for the manager to engage in the

hidden action to maximize profit, while mitigating the manager’s incentive to exploit her hidden

information by falsifying earnings reports. Section Three discusses the intuition behind our primary

result, which is that compensation contracts contingent on reported earnings cannot provide managers

with the incentive both to maximize profits and to report those profits honestly. Section Four provides a

closed form solution to a specific parameterization of the compensation problem.           A final section

discusses some recent corporate episodes that provide support for our key modeling choices.




                                                     3
2.    Model



        We begin by describing the notation of the model, and then turn to a description of the

informational structure. A firm owner (the principal) is contracting with the firm’s manager (the agent).

We denote the actual profit of the firm as x, which is distributed on the interval [ x, x ] according to the

distribution F(x|a), where a is an action taken by the agent which effects the distribution of firm

profitability. We assume that F is a convex function of the action a, and that higher values of the action a

shift the distribution of profitability outcomes to the right, in the sense of first-order stochastic

dominance, so that Fa ≤ 0.3 The owner of the firm can observe neither a nor x. Instead, the owner

observes a report, R, about the firm’s earnings. This report comes from the manager, and it need not be

accurate. We define the extent of falsification of the report as e, where e ≡ R – x.

        The contracting problem is to design a compensation arrangement for the manager. Managerial

compensation is comprised of both salary and equity components. The salary received by the manager

consists of a base wage, w, which is a lump-sum transfer, and a bonus schedule, B(R), that is conditioned

on the observable, but potentially falsified, report R.4 The magnitude of equity stake is exogenously

determined, consisting of the claim on future profits of α x .5 We assume that, prior to the contracting

decision, the manager is required to purchase an equity stake in the firm, and that the actual value taken

by α reflects a known budget constraint on the part of the manager. We also assume that the manager

has insufficient resources to purchase the entire firm, so that α < 1.6 This compensation contract is set

before the manager chooses his action and before the firm’s level of earnings is determined. The return

to the risk neutral manager is denoted as



                              V ≡ B + α x – g(e) – h(a) + w                                              (1)




                                                      4
where h represents the manager’s disutility from taking actions that increase profitability, and g is the cost

to the manager of falsifying the earnings report by announcing a value of R that exceeds actual earnings,

x.   The expression g(e) covers all the costs to the manager of concocting and camouflaging the

falsification, including the expected value of any penalties imposed by the SEC on the manager. We

assume that g(0) = g'(0) = 0, g' > 0, and g'' > 0, so that there are no costs to correct reporting. The

marginal cost of falsifying a report is zero when evaluated at correct reporting, and is increasing in the

magnitude of the falsification. The expression h(a) represents the dollar-equivalent disutility cost of

taking the profit-enhancing action a, where we have simplified the manager’s objective function to be

additively separable and satisfying h(0) = h'(0) = 0, h' > 0, and h'' > 0.

        We now turn to the informational structure of the model, which is illustrated by the sequence of

events depicted in Figure 1. At the beginning (denoted Date 0), the equity position α of the manager is

observed, after which the salary contract for the manager, {B(R),w}, is selected in anticipation of what

follows. At Date 1, the selection of an action, a, is delegated to the manager. This is a hidden action,

since its value is never observed by the owner of the firm. Moreover, the manager selects a before he has

any information about the realized value of the firm’s profit, x, although the distribution F, including how

it depends on a, is common knowledge. Next, at Date 2, the manager observes the actual profit of the

firm, x. Since the value of x is never observed by the owner, this constitutes hidden information. At Date

3, after the selection of a and the observation of x have occurred, the manager chooses the earnings report

R, which implicitly determines the extent of earnings falsification, e. Finally, at Date 4 the compensation

contract {B(R),w} is implemented and the manager is paid.7

         Because the compensation contract is implemented after the manager possesses private

information, the revelation principle (Myerson, 1979) is applicable. This approach recognizes explicitly

the constraints on the implementation of contracts imposed by the private information environment. The

solution technique is to condition the contract on the private information, {B ( x) , R ( x) ,w} , and to recognize

that any implementable contract must satisfy the incentive constraint




                                                        5
                                V ( B( x) , R( x) ,w | x) ≥ V ( B( x̂) , R( x̂) ,w | x)                       (2)




for every x , x̂ ∈ [ x , x ] . When this incentive constraint is satisfied, a manager who possesses the private

information x would always prefer the contract {B ( x) , R ( x) ,w} over the alternatives {B( x̂) , R( x̂) ,w} for

every x̂ ≠ x .        The bonus schedule B(R) is then recovered from {B ( x) , R ( x)} by inverting R(x) and

substituting the resulting expression into B.8

           This approach is sometimes cast in the context of a “direct revelation mechanism,” which is a

two-step process where in the first stage the informed agent sends a message ~x regarding her type, and in

the second stage is assigned the contract {B( ~x ), R( ~x )} . In order for type-x agent to reveal truthfully her

type (so ~
         x = x ), the assigned contracts must satisfy the incentive constraint (2). Note that the direct

revelation mechanism is a theoretical construct used to characterize the optimal contract of interest, B(R).

Dye’s (1988) claim regarding the inapplicability of the revelation principle in this setting is a result of his

assumption that the manager’s message, ~x , must necessarily be the same as her earnings report, R(x~ ) . A

similar assumption led Lacker and Weinberg (1989) to argue that the revelation principle did not apply in

an insurance setting, an assertion that was demonstrated to be incorrect by Crocker and Morgan (1998).

Gresik and Nelson (1994) encounter a similar issue in their analysis of the optimal transfer price

regulation of a multinational.9

           After observing the actual earnings of the firm, the manager selects the earnings report that

maximizes her expected utility.10 The resulting decision is depicted in Figure 2 as the tangency of a type-

x manager’s indifference curve, V (x) , and the compensation frontier B(R) + w. Because the efficient

contract satisfies the incentive constraint (2), the manager’s optimizing choice is necessarily

{B ( x) , R ( x)} .

           Constraint (2), in conjunction with the envelope theorem, implies that




                                                                    6
                                                  dV
                                                     = Vx                                                (3)
                                                  dx



where, from (1), V x = α + g' ( R( x) − x) .11 The second-order condition for the maximization problem (2)

may be written as



                                        ∂ 2V
                                              = g' ' ( R ( x) − x) R' ( x) ≥ 0                            (4)
                                        ∂x∂x̂



at x̂ = x which, as a result of the concavity of g, requires that R be monotonically increasing. 12

        An efficient contract between the owner and the manager is a solution to the problem that

maximizes the expected payoff to the risk-neutral owner



                                           x
                               Max
                           B ( x ) ,R ( x ), a ,w
                                                  ∫ Π ( B ( x) , R( x) ,w|x) f ( x | a) dx               (5)
                                           x




where profits, denoted Π, are equal to x − B − α x − w and f is the density function associated with the

distribution F, subject to the incentive compatibility constraint (2), a participation constraint for the

manager, and the fact that the selection of a has been delegated to the manager. 13

        Because the contract is designed at a time when there is no private information (i.e., the manager

has not yet learned the value of x), the manager must be assured, ex ante, of receiving a reservation value

of utility that we, without loss of generality, assume to be zero. Thus, the participation constraint has the

form




                                                                    7
                              x
                              ∫ V ( B( x) ,R( x) ,w) f ( x | a) dx ≥ 0 .                                                 (6)
                              x




Because the manager selects her action, a, before she observes the value of actual profits, x, she will

select an action to maximize her expected utility



                                      x
                              Max ∫ V ( B( x) , R ( x) ,w|x) f ( x | a) dx ,                                             (7)
                                  a   x




the first-order condition for which may be written as



                                  x
                                  ∫ [Vf a − h' (a ) f ]dx = 0 .                                                          (8)
                                  x




The marginal cost to the manager of increasing effort is h'(a), while the marginal benefit is the expected

increase in managerial utility resulting from the effect of the action in changing the distribution of the

actual profit, x.

         Note that we are following Holmstrom’s (1979) first-order approach to the hidden action aspects

of the contracting problem. As noted by Laffont (1989), however, this may be invalid unless certain

sufficiency conditions are satisfied.      The most commonly invoked sufficiency conditions are those

identified by Mirrlees (1975) and Rogerson (1985), which are the monotone likelihood ratio condition (fa

/f is increasing in x) and the convexity of F as a function of the action a (Faa > 0). Jewitt (1988) derives a

somewhat different set of sufficient conditions that relaxes the requirement that F be convex. Our

problem, however, is substantially different. Differentiating the left-hand side of (8) with respect to a

                                                                               x
indicates that the hidden action problem will be concave in a if               ∫ [ B − g (e)] f aa dx − h' ' < 0. Integrating
                                                                               x




                                                            8
                                                                   x
by parts, and noting that Faa ( x) = Faa ( x ) = 0, yields - ∫ [ B' − g' R' + g' ]Faa dx − h' ' , which because of
                                                                   x


                                                               x
the first-order condition noted in footnote 11 reduces to - ∫ g' Faa dx − h' '. Convexity of F guarantees that
                                                               x


this expression is negative as long as g’ > 0, which will follow from conditions (i) and (ii) of the

Theorem below. Accordingly, we have assumed F to be a convex function of a.

         Before proceeding, it is useful to address the import of the assumption of manager risk neutrality

in conjunction with the ex ante participation constraint (6), and how our environment differs from those

considered in traditional analyses of situations either with only hidden actions or with only hidden

information.

         Consider first the case of a pure hidden action model, as in the “sharecropping” scenario

investigated by Holmstrom (1979) in which the agent’s (privately costly) action affects the probability

distribution of the observed crop size. In such a setting, the optimal contract reflects a tension between

incentivizing the agent to take the costly but productive action by making the wage depend on the

observed crop, on the one hand, and the allocative inefficiencies that result when a risk-averse agent

receives an uncertain payment from a risk-neutral principal, on the other. It is well known (Shavell,

1979) that, if the agent is risk-neutral with an ex ante participation constraint, then the optimal contract

entails a lump sum payment from the agent to the principal, and giving all of the observed crop to the

agent. This would result in the agent selecting the first-best action, denoted a*, and all of the expected

surplus exceeding that which is required by the participation constraint could be extracted by the principal

through w.14 The applicability of this approach in our model, however, is limited by the constraint on the

manager’s equity stake, α . When budgetary limitations preclude the manager from purchasing the firm

in its entirety, so that α < 1, managerial compensation can only be based partially on claims to future

earnings. The balance of the compensation package can be conditioned only on the (potentially falsified)

earnings report, R.15




                                                        9
         Now consider a pure hidden information environment, as in the costly state falsification model of

Crocker and Morgan (1998). In their sharecropping scenario, the risk-neutral agent receives the actual

crop, which is private information, and can expend resources to hide part of that crop from the principal.

In a setting with an ex ante participation constraint, they demonstrate that the optimal contract entails the

payment of a lump sum to the principal, which induces no falsification (i.e., is first-best) by the agent and

permits the principal to extract the entire surplus.16 The analogous approach in our model would be the

payment of a lump sum to the agent, which would result in no falsification and permit the full extraction

of surplus by the principal. Unfortunately, such a contract would not be optimal, as we show below,

because it would also provide the agent with no incentive to take any of the costly action, a, that increases

expected profits.

         The Hamiltonian expression associated with the problem of maximizing (5) subject to (2), (6),

and (8) may be written as



                                     H = Πf + φ(x)Vx + μ[Vfa -h'f] + λVf ,                                      (9)



where R is the control variable, V ( x) ≡ V ( B( x) , R( x) , w | x) is the state variable, μ and λ are the Lagrange

multipliers associated with constraints (8) and (6), respectively, and φ(x) is the costate variable for the

equation of motion Vx.



Theorem: A solution {V(x), R(x), φ(x), μ, w, a} to the optimal control problem solves the following

necessary conditions:

        (i)    − fg' + φg' ' = 0 ;

        (ii)   φ ( x) = − μFa ;

               x
        (iii) ∫ V ( B( x) ,R( x) ,w) f ( x | a) dx = 0 ;
               x




                                                           10
             x                           ⎡x                  ⎤
        (iv) ∫ ( x − g ) f a dx − h' + μ ⎢ ∫ Vf aa dx − h' ' ⎥ = 0 ;
             x                           ⎣x                  ⎦

               x
        (v) ∫ Vf a dx − h' (a) = 0 ; and
               x


        (vi) V x = α + g' ( R − x) .



Proof: Solving equation (1) for B and substituting the result into (9) yields



             H = [x – V- g(R-x) – h(a)]f + φ(x)[ α + g ' ( R − x) ] + μ[Vfa -h'f] + λVf              (10)



                                                                                          dφ    ∂H
since V x = α + g' ( R − x) . The Pontryagin (necessary) conditions for a maximum are        =−    and HR
                                                                                          dx    ∂V

= 0.   Differentiation yields



                                                dφ
                                                   = (1 − λ ) f − μf a                               (11)
                                                dx



and



                                           − g' ( R − x) f + φ ( x) g' ' ( R − x) = 0 .              (12)



Now, because w and a do not depend upon x, their optimal values are solutions to the point-wise

maximization17



                             x
                    Max ∫ [Πf + μ [Vf a − h' f ]+ λVf ]dx .                                          (13)
                      a, w   x




                                                                  11
The first-order condition for the optimal value of w is



                    x
                    ∫ (Π w f + μV w f a + λV w f ) dx = 0 ,                                             (14)
                    x




where the subscripts denote partial derivatives. Taking the appropriate derivatives, and noting that

x
∫ f a dx = 0 , yields the result that λ = 1, so the participation constraint (6) holds with equality and (11)
x



               dφ
reduces to        = − μ f a . Integrating both sides of this expression, in conjunction with the transversality
               dx

condition φ ( x) = 0 , implies that φ ( x) = − μFa . Similarly, the owner’s first-order condition for a may be

written as18

                    x                           ⎡x                  ⎤
                    ∫ ( x − g ) f a dx − h' + μ ⎢ ∫ Vf aa dx − h' ' ⎥ = 0 .                           (15)
                    x                           ⎣x                  ⎦

                                                                               QED.

        Conditions (i) and (ii) of the theorem characterize the optimal reporting function R, (iii) is the

manager’s participation constraint, (iv) identifies the optimal owner action, (v) is the delegation

constraint, and (vi) is the marginal information rent received by the manager. The equity stake plays a

role in the last four conditions of the theorem since, by (1), the utility of the manager depends on α .

        While the Theorem characterizes necessary conditions, those conditions will not be sufficient

unless the second-order conditions for incentive compatibility are satisfied as well.19 As noted earlier in

(4), these conditions are satisfied if the report, R, characterized by the Theorem is monotonically

increasing in the underlying profitability of the firm, x.20 If, alternatively, the solution to the necessary

conditions were not to satisfy R'(x) > 0, then the “ironing” techniques described in Mussa and Rosen

(1978) would be required in order to characterize an optimum.



                                                                   12
         Finally, we may use the conditions identified in the Theorem to recover the optimal bonus

schedule, B(x), by noting that the total surplus, x-g-h, must be divided between the owner and the

manager.

                                                                                    x
Corollary 1. The optimal bonus schedule is given by B ( x) = g ( R − x) + ∫ g' ( R (t ) − t )dt .
                                                                                    x



Proof: We may write



                                                                         x
                                  (1 − α ) x − B ( x) − w = x − g − h − [ ∫ V x (t )dt + α x − h + w]   (16)
                                                                         x




where the term on the left-hand side is the utility of the owner, and the term in brackets on the right-hand

side is the utility of the manager.21 Substituting for Vx, integrating, and rearranging terms yields the

desired result.

                                                                                                QED.



     We now turn to a discussion of our results.



3.     Discussion



         The principal methodological innovation of this theoretical formulation of the principal-agent

problem is that it embodies both the hidden action and hidden information aspects of the contract design

problem for managerial compensation. This is apparent in equation (9), as the multiplier μ reflects the

shadow cost of the delegation constraint associated with the selection of a by the manager, while the

costate variable φ(x) embodies the distortion effects of the incentive compatibility constraint that results

from the manager’s private information regarding x. The optimal compensation contract reflects a

tradeoff between two objectives: providing an incentive to the manager to select his action to increase


                                                           13
firm profits, and providing a disincentive for the manager to incur cost to falsify the earnings report she

makes. As long as the monotonicity condition (R'(x) > 0) is satisfied, compensation contracts that pay

bonuses based on reported firm profitability (so B'(R) > 0) will induce the manager at Date 1 to incur a

cost, h, of actions that increase actual expected firm profitability, x. But, such a compensation contract

also provides the manager with the incentive at Date 3 to incur a cost, g, of inflating reported earnings

through falsification. The optimal contract reflects an efficient balancing of these opposing effects.

        This tension is clear in the extreme cases where one or the other objective is not an issue. As part

(ii) of the Theorem indicates, when there is no reason to incentivize the manager, either because his

actions do not impact on firm profitability (Fa = 0), or if the incentive constraint is not binding (μ = 0) on

the manager’s choice, then the optimal value of the costate variable, φ, is uniformly zero. In such a case,

part (i) of the Theorem and the assumption that g'(0) = 0 together imply that R = x: there is no inflation of

earnings by the manager and Corollary 1 implies that the bonus schedule is uniformly zero. In this case,

the optimal contract simply involves a lump-sum payment high enough to ensure that the manager’s

participation constraint (6) is satisfied. Put differently, if the manager’s choice of action does not impact

on firm profits, then there is no reason to make the manager’s compensation depend on reported profits

and thereby provide an incentive to falsify earnings.

        Alternatively, in the absence of hidden information, which occurs when true earnings are

transparent to the owner, the value of the costate variable φ would be uniformly zero, and the contract

design problem would reduce to a standard hidden action problem. As is well known in a setting with

risk-neutral agents, the optimal contract induces the first-best level of effort, a*, by making the manager

the residual claimant. In this case, the manager’s compensation would be set equal to his (truthful) report

                                                x
of earnings, x, minus the lump-sum payment ∫ xf ( x | a* ) − h(a* ) .
                                                x


        We now consider the effect of the manager’s equity stake, α , on the form of the optimal

compensation contract {B ( x) , R ( x) , w} . As indicated by Corollary 1, the bonus schedule, B, does not

depend directly on the equity stake but, rather, only on the falsification costs g and the degree of


                                                      14
falsification R(x) – x. Moreover, the amount of falsification, R, which is characterized by conditions (i)

and (ii) of the Theorem, does not depend directly on α . The effect of the equity stake is manifested

through its impact on the multiplier, μ, associated with the delegation constraint and the choice of action,

a, which are jointly determined by conditions (iv) and (v) of the Theorem. In the extreme case where the

manager owns the whole firm, there is no need to provide incentives through the bonus schedule and the

first-best outcome can be achieved.



Corollary 2: If α = 1, then an efficient contract satisfies



        (i) B(R) = 0;

        (ii) R(x) = x;

        (iii) a = a*; and

        (iv) μ = 0.



Proof: Substituting for V from (1), we may write condition (v) of the Theorem as



                                             x                       x
                                             ∫ [ B − g ] f a dx + {α ∫ xf a dx − h' } = 0 .                   (17)
                                             x                       x




When α = 1, the term in braces equals zero when a = a*.                          Then it follows that we must have

x
∫ [ B − g ] f a dx = 0 , which is satisfied if B(x) = 0 because in this situation it must be true that R(x) = x and g =
x


0. Finally, turning to condition (iv) of the Theorem, when g = 0 the first two terms on the left-hand side

necessarily sum to zero at a*, which implies μ = 0 as well.

                                                                                    Q.E.D.




                                                        15
        The intuition is that the incentives provided by the manager’s equity stake relax the delegation

constraint and reduce the magnitude of the associated Lagrange multiplier, μ. Because there is less need to

incentivize the manager to take the profit-enhancing action, the effect of the equity stake is to flatten the

optimal bonus schedule, with a concomitant decrease in the amount of earnings manipulation by the manager.

And, as Corollary 2 indicates, the equity stake is the superior tool for managerial compensation. But, in the

event that the manager does not have the resources to buy the entire firm, so that α < 1, the second-best

approach is to supplement the equity stake with bonuses predicated on reported earnings, albeit at the cost of

increased incentives for socially costly earnings manipulation.

                 Finally, we turn to the liquidation of the manager’s equity stake. As noted earlier, shares in

the firm have a well-defined value at Date 0 because, conditional on the compensation package {B( R) , w,α } ,

the market can forecast the action, a, that will be taken by the manager and, hence, the probability distribution

of future firm profits. These shares also have a well-defined value at Date 4 that depends on the manager’s

earnings announcement. As long as the reporting function, R, is monotonic, the market participants can

always ascertain the actual profit of the firm by observing the manager’s (falsified) report.22 Thus, with fully

rational market participants, earnings manipulation in our model does not distort the market value of the

firm’s equity, and the manager of the firm can expect to obtain no capital gains from holding the firm’s stock.

Alternatively, one could imagine a setting with a more “gullible” market for which the value of the stock

depended directly on the earnings report. This would affect the manager’s reporting strategy, with

implications for the form of the optimal contract. It is straightforward to show that, were the market to be

completely gullible and value the equity stake at α R rather than α x , then the optimal bonus schedule B(R)

would be flatter than in the case of the fully rational market.23




4. An example




                                                      16
        To illustrate our formulation of the problem, we now derive closed-form solutions to the optimal

compensation problem for a specific example. We let F(x|a) = xa for x∈ [0,1] and a > 0. This implies that

f(x|a) = axa-1, fa = xa-1(1+aln(x)), Fa = xaln(x), E(x) = a/(1+a), and Ea =1/(1+a)2. Note that, because the

support of F is independent of the value chosen for a, Fa equals 0 at both x = 0 and x = 1. Since fa is

negative (positive) when ln(x) < -1/a (ln(x) > -1/a), a higher level of the action by the manager decreases

the probability of bad earnings outcomes and increases the probability of good outcomes.24 Finally, we

let g(R-x) = (R-x)2/2, and h(a) = a3/3.

        Before proceeding, and as a benchmark for the analysis that follows, note that the first-best level

of the manager’s action (that is, when the firm’s owner can select the action a, and when the actual value

of firm profitability, x, is freely observable) maximizes total surplus, Π + V.            This occurs when

E a = h' (a) , which in the current example occurs when a is equal to 0.618034. At the first-best outcome

R = x, so that there are no falsification costs (g = 0) and the total expected surplus (a/(1+a) – a3/3) is

equal to 0.303277.

        Now we consider the optimal compensation arrangement in the presence of the hidden action and

the hidden information. By part (ii) of the Theorem, we know that φ ( x) = − μx a ln( x) , and part (i) implies




                         μ
                 R=x−        xln(x) .                                                                    (18)
                         a




Turning to Corollary 1, substituting for R from (18) yields




                          1 ⎛ μ xln( x) ⎞  μ ⎛ x 2 ln( x) x 2 ⎞⎟
                                          2
                 B =        ⎜           ⎟ − ⎜⎜           − ⎟.                                            (19)
                          2⎝ a ⎠           a⎝ 2            4 ⎠




                                                       17
As a result, conditional on a and μ, the necessary conditions for the optimal compensation contract

{B(x), R(x), w} are equations (18), (19) and, for the flat wage portion of the contract w, the binding

participation constraint from part (iii) of the Theorem.

         In order for these conditions to be sufficient to characterize a maximum, the earnings report, R,

must be a monotonically increasing function of the underlying profit, x. Taking the appropriate derivative

yields



                                 μ
          R' ( x) = 1 −              (ln( x) + 1) ,                                                    (20)
                                 a



which is strictly positive on the interval [0, 1] only if, at a solution to (5), the optimal values of μ and a

satisfy μ < a.25

         To characterize the optimal values of a and μ, we turn to conditions (iv) and (v) identified by the

Theorem. Part (v) reduces to



                      α                  2μ
                                 +                = h' (a) ,                                           (21)
                   (1 + a)   2
                                     a (2 + a ) 3



while part (iv) yields

     ⎡ 1            μ 2 4(1 − a) ⎤              ⎡    2α           6μ                 ⎤
     ⎢           −             4 ⎥
                                   − h' (a) + μ ⎢−          −             − h' ' (a )⎥ = 0.            (22)
     ⎣ (1 + a)     2a (2 + a ) ⎦                ⎣ (1 + a)     a (2 + a)
               2      2                                   3             4
                                                                                     ⎦



Substituting for h' and h'', and solving (21) and (22) simultaneously, yields a and μ, the values of which

for various α are presented in Table 1. In this example, μ < a for every value of α , so the monotonicity

condition on R is satisfied and we have therefore characterized the optimal contract. Note that the value

of a that solves (5) is strictly less than the first-best level for every α <1, and the expected total surplus



                                                               18
generated is less than the first-best benchmark as well. As the equity stake of the manager increases, the

action taken by the manager increases towards the first-best value, and the distortion caused by the

delegation constraint, μ, declines.

        The optimal compensation contract B(R) implied by conditions (18) and (19) is plotted as B(R ) in

Figure 3 for the various values of α . The effect of increasing the equity stake is to reduce the need to

incentivize the manager through the bonus mechanism, with the result that the optimal bonus scheme

flattens out. Because the incentive constraint (2) is satisfied, the indifference curve of a manager who

possesses the private information x is tangent to the compensation function B(R) + w at {B(x), R(x)}, as

depicted in Figure 2. Finally, the amount of falsification, R-x, associated with the optimal compensation

contract for the manager is plotted as a function of the actual profit, x, in Figure 4, and declines as the

manager’s equity stake increases.




5. Conclusions



        Our model’s assumption that the compensation contract can condition on reported earnings, but

not on true earnings, is crucial, and some recent real-world episodes shed light on its appropriateness.

Consider the case of the Canadian telecommunications company Nortel, formerly known as Northern

Telecom. At Nortel, executives were assigned a cash bonus target. If Nortel delivered one quarter of

quarterly profit (pro forma earnings from continuing operations) before year-end 2003, the executive

would be awarded 20 percent of the bonus target. For the executive to earn the next 40 percent, Nortel

would have to have profits in two straight quarters. The final 40 percent would be payable if the company

achieved profits in four straight quarters by year-end 2004. In addition, there were stock option grants

based on achieving four separate “return on sales” targets.




                                                    19
        After posting a first-half 2003 profit, the company paid out more than $50 million in bonuses to

select officers. However, in April, 2004, Nortel announced a downward restatement of earnings focused

largely on profits from continuing operations, and fired its chief executive; in August, they fired seven

more top executives “for cause,” saying that they ought to have been aware that the accounting numbers

were not in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). A press release issued on

August 20, 2004 said that the company “would demand repayment by these individuals of payments

made under Company bonus plans...” In addition, the press release mentioned a class proceeding that had

commenced against the company and former officers and directors, alleging that the bonus payments

were paid based on falsely reported financial performance and diverted profits that ought to have been

shared with the shareholders. In January, 2005, when it released restated financial statements for 2001

through 2003, Nortel announced that a dozen executives who are still with the company and who received

bonuses on the original financial statements, but who were not implicated with the manipulation, would

voluntarily repay $8.6 million of cash bonuses and give back certain restricted stock previously received

as a bonus. In February of 2005, Nortel filed suit against three former executives who may have been

responsible for the prior manipulation, seeking to recover $10.4 million in prior bonus payments (see

Newman, 2005; Austen, 2005). This suit has not yet been resolved.

        In the most recent sign of a changing legal landscape, in January, 2006 an Alabama County

Circuit judge ordered Richard Scrushy, former chief executive of HealthSouth Corporation, to repay

$47.8 million in bonuses he received in 1997 to 2002, on the grounds that they were undeserved because

they were based on erroneous financial reports. In April, 2006 the Alabama Supreme Court upheld this

ruling.26

        In the United States, shareholders can file a derivative action, which is a lawsuit brought on

behalf of the corporation. There is also now a recourse under Section 304 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act

passed in 2002, by which CEOs and CFOs are required to return any bonus or profits from stock sales

should their companies be involved in a financial restatement due to misconduct. But the law is limited to

only these two types of corporate officers, and requires them to return the money even if they are not


                                                   20
deemed responsible for the misconduct.       Although its effect is yet to be determined, preliminary

indications are not encouraging. As Boyle (2006) notes, “Sanjay Kumar, the ousted CEO of Computer

Associates…pled guilty to charges that he had inflated the company’s sales….but it’s unclear whether he

will ever have to return more than $300 million in bonuses he received that were based in part on

fraudulent reports. So, why is nothing happening? First, because the law stinks. Section 304 of

Sarbanes-Oxley states that claw backs would occur in case of ‘misconduct’ but fails to spell out what

constitutes misconduct or specify whose misconduct qualifies. … ‘For a statute that contains a lot of

inartfully drafted provisions, this is among the most inartful’ says… a Stanford Professor of law and

business. It gets worse. Two U.S. district courts have ruled that Section 304 does not provide a ‘private

right of action,’ a legal term that means shareholders cannot sue under 304.”

        In principle, corporate board could include “clawback” provisions in employment contracts that

require executives to return money if they discover that the measures used to evaluate the executives were

based on fraudulent data, but these are almost never invoked. All in all, Beck (2004) concludes that

“most companies haven’t gotten any bonus money back.”

        There is, though, one somewhat related exception. According to Danner (2004), shareholder

pressure resulted in the energy company FPL Group Inc. announcing in August 2004 that it was

recouping $22.25 million of bonuses awarded to eight executives five days after a merger was approved

by shareholders, a merger that was called off three and a half months later after questions were raised

about the finances of the proposed merger partner. No accounting fraud was involved, however, nor did

the executives acknowledge any wrongdoing in the mediated settlement; the dispute revolved around

whether bonuses in the executives’ long-term incentive contract triggered by a “change-in-control” event

were conditioned on the consummation of the merger. Illustrating the rarity of this kind of occurrence,

one of the shareholder attorneys was quoted in the Associated Press (2004) story about the settlement

saying that “This is the only settlement we are aware of where executive compensation was challenged

and real money will be paid back to the company.”




                                                    21
        We conclude that our model’s assumption that executive compensation contracts cannot be

conditioned on actual current earnings describes well the effective regime in place in the United States, at

least until very recently. Public revelations of cases such as Nortel might lead to more clawbacks in

compensation agreements in the future, however, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act may also change the

interpretation of contracts that do not explicitly include such language, but the extent and effectiveness of

such changes are unclear at this time. The Nortel incident also suggests just how costly accounting

misstatements can be to a company. The new CEO of Nortel has said that nearly half of Nortel’s 1500

financial employees were involved in the effort to compile and restate its financial results. (Bagnall,

2004)

        In its special report on corporate governance written in the wake of the rash of corporate

accounting scandals in 2002, Business Week remarked sardonically that many company boards devote far

more time and energy to compensation than to assuring the integrity of the company’s financial reporting

systems (Byrne, 2002). This paper suggests that company boards should not treat these two concerns as

unrelated issues. Rather, an optimal compensation scheme should be designed with an eye on deterring

misleading reporting by the firm’s officers. It should not, though, eliminate earnings manipulation,

because doing so would excessively constrain the ability of the shareholders to incentivize the manager to

take the appropriate actions that maximize profits.

        A compensation structure in which the payout is contingent on reported earnings cannot

simultaneously incentivize the managers to maximize profits and to report those profits honestly. Having

other enforcement tools could make a difference. For example, SEC penalties for accounting fraud like

those provided for in the Sarbanes-Oxley bill could reduce the private incentive of managers to misreport

earnings, and thus allow the compensation contract to provide more incentive to take profit-maximizing

actions at any given level of costly falsification. This raises the intriguing question of whether the

appropriate regulatory regime would impose penalties on the corporation, on the manager, or both. In a

slightly different context, this question was addressed by Crocker and Slemrod (2005), who show that, as

a consequence of the informational asymmetry enjoyed by the manager, penalties levied directly on the


                                                      22
manager are more likely to be effective in reducing costly tax evasion than penalties directed at the

corporation’s shareholders.   The intuition is that the incentive effects of sanctions levied on the

shareholders are imperfectly transmitted to the tax officer through a second-best compensation contract,

so that penalties directly applied to the tax officer have more impact. A natural direction for future

research would explore the impact and optimality of accounting regulation in a model that recognizes the

existence and flexibility of compensation contracts between the owners of the firm and its decision

makers.




                                                  23
                                            References



ALEXANDER, C.R. AND M. COHEN. “Why Do Corporations Become Criminals? Ownership, Hidden
      Actions, and Crime as an Agency Cost.” Journal of Corporate Finance, Vol. 5 (1999), pp. 1-34.

ASSOCIATED PRESS. “Settlement over Bonuses Paid Before Merger Failed.” August 15, 2004.

AUSTEN, I. “Nortel Sues 3 Ex-Officers Over Big Bonuses.” New York Times, February 4, 2005, p. C-2.

BAGNALL, J. “Owens Vows to Clean Up Nortel’s Books: ‘I Didn’t Seek This Job, But I Love It.’”
     National Post, May 29, 2004.

BECK, R. “Battle Intensifies Over Executive Bonuses.” Associated Press. September 10, 2004.

BOYLE, M. “They Didn’t Earn It—They Should Return It.” Fortune, May 15, 2006.

BYRNE, J.A. “How to Fix Corporate Governance.” Business Week, May 6, 2002, pp. 68-81.

CHENG, Q. AND T. WARFIELD. “Equity Incentives and Earnings Management.” The Accounting Review,
      Vol. 80 (2005), pp. 441-476.

CROCKER, K. J. AND J. MORGAN. “Is Honesty the Best Policy? Curtailing Insurance Fraud through
      Optimal Incentive Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106 (1998), pp. 355-375.

----- AND J. SLEMROD. “Corporate Tax Evasion with Agency Costs.” Journal of Public Economics, 89
        (September 2005), pp. 1593-1610.

DANNER, P. “Execs Agree to Pay FPL Group.” The Miami Herald. August 14, 2004.

DECHOW, P., R. SLOAN, AND A. SWEENEY. “Causes and Consequences of Earnings Manipulation: An
     Analysis of Firms Subject to Enforcement Actions by the SEC.” Contemporary Accounting
     Research, Vol. 13 (1996), pp. 1-36.

DYE, R.A. “Earnings Management in an Overlapping Generations Model.” Journal of Accounting
       Research, Vol. 26 (1988), pp. 195-235.

ERICKSON, M., M. HANLON, AND E. MAYDEW. “Is There a Link Between Executive Compensation and
      Accounting Fraud?” Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 44 (2006), pp. 113-144.

FUDENBERG, D. AND J. TIROLE. Game Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1991.

GAO, P. AND R. SHRIEVES. “Earnings Management and Executive Compensation: A Case of Overdose of
        Option and Underdose of Salary?” Working paper, Northwestern University and University of
        Tennessee at Knoxville, 2002.

GRESIK, T. AND D. NELSON. "Incentive Compatible Regulation of a Foreign-Owned Subsidiary." Journal
       of International Economics, Vol. 36 (1994), pp. 309-331.



                                                 24
GUESNERIE, R. AND J.J. LAFFONT. “A Complete Solution to a Class of Principal-Agent Problems with an
      Application to the Control of a Self-Managed Firm.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 25
      (1984), pp. 329-369.

HANLON, M., L. MILLS, AND J. SLEMROD. “An Empirical Examination of Corporate Tax
     Noncompliance.” In A. Auerbach, J.R. Hines Jr., and J. Slemrod, eds., Taxing Corporate Income
     in the 21st Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

HOLMSTROM, B. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 10 (1979), pp. 74-
      91.

JEWITT, I. “Justifying the First-Order Approach to Principal-Agent Problems.” Econometrica, Vol. 56
       (1988), pp. 1177-1190.

JOHNSON, S., H. RYAN, AND Y. TIAN. “Executive Compensation and Corporate Fraud.” Working paper,
      Louisiana State University, 2003.

KE, B. “Why Do CEOs of Publicly Traded Firms Prefer Reporting Small Increases in Earnings and Long
       Duration of Consecutive Earnings Increases?” Working paper, Pennsylvania State University,
       2001.

LACKER, J.M. AND J.A. WEINBERG. “Optimal Contracts under Costly State Falsification.” Journal of
      Political Economy, Vol. 97 (1989), pp. 1345-63.

LAFFONT, J.J. The Economics of Uncertainty and Information. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1989.

MEZZETTI, C. “Mechanism Design with Interdependent Valuations: Efficiency.” Econometrica, Vol. 72
      (2004), pp. 1617-1626.

MIRRLEES, J.A. “The Theory of Moral Hazard and Unobservable Behavior—Part I.” Mimeo, Nuffield
      College, Oxford, 1975.

MUSSA, M. AND S. ROSEN. “Monopoly and Product Quality.” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 18
      (1978), pp. 301-317.

MYERSON, R.B. “Incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem.” Econometrica, Vol. 47
      (1979), pp. 61-73.

-----. “Optimal Coordination Mechanisms in Generalized Principal-Agent Problems.” Journal of
         Mathematical Economics, Vol. 10 (1982), pp. 67-81.

NEWMAN, A. “Giving Back the Bonus.” Business Week, January 24, 2005, p. 46.

ROGERSON, W. “The First Order Approach to Principal-Agent Problems.” Econometrica, Vol. 53 (1985),
      pp. 1357-1368.

SHAVELL, S. “Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal and Agent Relationship.” Bell Journal of
      Economics, Vol. 10 (1979), pp. 55-73.

YOUNG, S. “Qwest Trial Shows That Rank Is No Protection.” Wall Street Journal, April
      2, 2004, p. C1.


                                                  25
                                                                                              Crocker/Slemrod
                                                                                                          RJE
                                                                                                       Table 1




                     α                            μ                             a         Total surplus
                      0                     .367476                       .379291              .230369
                    .01                     .362283                       .381737              .232283
                     .1                     .315737                       .404015              .248015
                    .25                     .241670                       .441967              .268651
                     .5                     .137058                       .505180               290287
                    .75                    .0584028                       .564515              .300500
                    .99                   .00203353                       .616007              .303273
                    1.0                         0.0           (first best).618034              .303277



                                                    Table 1
Example: Values of the Shadow Cost of Delegation (μ), Action (a), and Total Surplus, for Various Values of α .




                                                       26
                                                                    Crocker/Slemrod
                                                                    RJE
                                                                    Figure 1




                       Symmetric             Manager
                       uncertainty          has private
                         about x           information
                                             about x



   0          1                      2                      3              4
   a is     Manager                Manager                Manager        Contract
observed     selects               observes               chooses     implemented,
   and          a                     x                      R         and manager
 contract   (Hidden                (Hidden                                is paid
{B(R),w}     Action)             Information)
 selected



                                 Figure 1
                            Sequence of Events
                                                                Crocker/Slemrod
                                                                RJE
                                                                Figure 2




                                                V(x)


                                                       B(R)+w




B(x)




  w

       R(x)                     R(x)                      R

                             Figure 2
         The Action and Transfer Chosen by a Type-x Manager
                                                                      Crocker/Slemrod
                                                                      RJE
                                                                      Figure 3




 B                                                        a=0

                                                          a = .1

.20
.15
.10                                                       a = .5
.05                                                       a = .75
      0                      .5                       1      R

                            Figure 3
Example: The Optimal Compensation Contract for Various Values of a.
                                                                           Crocker/Slemrod
                                                                           RJE
                                                                           Figure 4




 R-x              a=0

                  a = .1
  .30

  .20
                  a = .5
  .10
                  a = .75

     0                            .5                          1     x

                                       Figure 4
Example: Optimal Falsification as a Function of True Profits, for Various Values of a.
1
  It seems that the executives invested considerable effort in the alleged revenue enhancement scheme, as the
prosecution argues that “…the men drew up a series of bogus letters setting up a payment schedule that would
allow…revenues to register, while at the same time making a side deal that allowed [the customer] to hold off
paying until equipment and other components…were delivered and installed.”
2
  They do not find, however, a similar relationship with the presence of other tools used to incentivize executives.
There is, in addition, a literature that examines the origins of corporate crime generally. For example, Alexander
and Cohen (1999), studying 78 public firms that committed crimes between 1984 and 1990, conclude that crimes
occur less frequently among firms in which management has a larger ownership stake. Hanlon, Mills, and Slemrod
(forthcoming) address the cross-firm relationship between the form of executive compensation and the extent of
corporate tax noncompliance.
3
  Note that, since the support of x does not vary with a, it follows that Fa ( x) = Fa ( x ) = 0 . The convexity of F is
required to satisfy the second-order condition to the delegation problem, which is discussed in detail below.
4
  In the analysis that follows, we will close the model by normalizing the bonus associated with the lowest possible
earnings report to zero.
5
  Note that the equity claims of the manager have a well-defined value. Given the managerial compensation
arrangement {B( R) , w,α } , the selection of the managerial action, a, is known, as it solves equation (8) below.
Thus, the market can forecast the probability distribution function, F, of actual firm profits, and determine an
accurate valuation of the manager’s equity stake α x.
6
  As a result, the optimal compensation contracts that we characterize will be conditional on the manager’s equity
stake α and, as we show below, the optimal contract permits the attainment of first best when the manager’s budget
constraint does not bind ( α = 1). Thus, both parties would prefer the situation where the manager owned the entire
firm, but this is not feasible if the manager faces a budget constraint that precludes the purchase of all of the firm’s
equity.
7
  We will discuss the liquidation of the equity stake in Section Three below.
8
  Mezzetti (2004) demonstrates that a generalized mechanism is superior when the agent receives additional private
information by observing her payoff, and this information can be extracted in the second stage of the mechanism. In
our case, however, the agent’s private information is completely determined at Date 2, so that our use of the
standard mechanism entails no loss of generality.
9
  They demonstrate that, in order to characterize an optimal (incentive compatible) transfer pricing scheme when the
firm has private information regarding its costs, it is necessary to separate the message space (the report regarding
the cost of the intermediate good) from the action space (the resulting transfer price). This is an application of
Myerson’s (1982) “generalized” revelation principle.
10
   Note that this occurs at Date 3 in Figure 1, after the manager has already selected a.
               dV                                                              dV ( B ( xˆ ), R( xˆ ) | x)
11
   Note that       = (V B B' + V R R' ) + V x , and the term in parentheses is                             , which is zero at xˆ = x as a
               dx                                                                         dxˆ
consequence of (2). We are adopting the traditional first-order incentive compatibility approach to dealing with the
hidden information problem, as developed by Guesnerie and Laffont (1984) and described in Fudenberg and Tirole
(1991).
12
   This version of the second-order condition is noted in Fudenberg and Tirole (1991), p. 259. Alternatively, by
                                                                                                        ∂ ⎛ V R ⎞ dR
Theorem 1 of Guesnerie and Laffont (1984), the profile R(x) is implementable only if                        ⎜      ⎟•   ≥ 0 . In
                                                                                                        ∂x ⎜⎝ V B ⎟⎠ dx
general, the Spence-Mirrlees “single crossing” property allows the signing of the first term. In our model, the
convexity of g serves this purpose, as the first term reduces to g' ' .
13
   Note that, while we are assuming that the actual firm profit ultimately accrues to the owner, it does so at a future
date sufficiently remote such that current managerial compensation cannot be conditioned upon that profit. Even so,
the expected profit (5) of the owner is well defined ex ante because, given {B(x), R(x)}, the owner knows the hidden
action a that will be selected by the manager (determined by (8) below) and, as a result, the distribution of the actual
profit, f(x|a) is known by the owner beforehand. We discuss the practical relevance of this assumption in Section
Five.




                                                                  31
                                                    x
14
     The first-best action satisfies the condition ∫ xf a ( x | a* )dx = h' (a* ) . In this particular case, the wage would be
                                                    x
negative and equal to the expected earnings of the firm (conditional on a*) minus the cost to the manager of taking
the action, h(a*).
15
   Of course, setting the manager’s bonus, B, equal to the earnings report, R, is a feasible contract, but it is not
optimal, as we show below.
16
   The bulk of the analysis in Crocker and Morgan (1998) is dedicated to the case of the interim participation (i.e.,
“bankruptcy”) constraint, which requires that the agent have a large enough crop to pay the principal for each
possible realization of crop size.
17
   Note that Vx does not depend on either a or w, so that term is irrelevant.
18
   Note that, because λ=1, the maximization problem solved by a may be written as
      x                   ⎡x             ⎤
 Max ∫ (Π + V ) fdx + μ ⎢ ∫ Vf a dx − h' ⎥ , so that the optimal choice of a maximizes total surplus, subject to the
   a x
                          ⎣⎢ x           ⎦⎥
constraint that the selection of a be delegated to the manager.
19
   Recall that the first-order condition for incentive compatibility noted in footnote 11 is necessary but not sufficient
to induce truthful revelation by the manager who possesses private information about the firm’s actual profitability,
x.
20
   This is generally achieved by assuming a monotone hazard rate (see Fudenberg and Tirole (1991). This, however,
is not sufficient to guarantee R' > 0 in our setting. Instead, it is the shape of μFa /f which is critical, as we will see in
the example presented in Section Four.
21
   Note that we have crafted (16) in a fashion that normalizes the bonus paid for the lowest earnings report to zero
because, by the first two parts of the Theorem, R ( x ) = x .
22
   Of course, the manager can also infer the actual earnings of the firm ex post from the (invertible) earnings
announcement of the manager. But, the point of the theorem is that it is efficient for the owner to commit to paying
the manager bonuses based upon earnings announcements that are known to be inflated. This is similar to the result
obtained by Crocker and Morgan (1998) in an insurance setting, who show that the optimal contract requires
indemnification based upon claims that the insurer knows are partially falsified.
23
   To see this, replace α x with α R in the expressions for V and П. The conditions of the theorem are unchanged,
with the exception of (vi), which is now V x = g' ( R − x ) . Then, working through Corollary 1, and again
                                                                                              x

                                                                                              ∫
normalizing to zero the bonus paid to the lowest earnings report, yields B ( x ) = g + g ' (t )dt − α R ( x) +α x .
                                                                                              x
24
   In addition, F is convex in the hidden action a (Faa = xa(ln(x))2 > 0), so (8) is sufficient to characterize the
manager’s choice of hidden action.
25
   Note that the second term on the right-hand side of (18) is μFa /f , so that the value taken by R' turns on the
monotonicity of x – μFa /f.
26
   This is in spite of the fact that in 2005 a federal jury acquitted Scrushy of all charges, including conspiracy and
securities fraud, related to accusations that he oversaw the company recording as much as $2.7 billion of fake
revenues on the company’s books over six years, and correspondingly adjusted the balance sheets and paper trails.




                                                                 32
