NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SIMPLIFICATION AND SAVING
John Beshears
James J. Choi
David Laibson
Brigitte C. Madrian
Working Paper 12659
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12659
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

We thank Hewitt Associates for their help in providing the data. We are particularly grateful to Pam
Hess and Yan Xu at Hewitt, to Greg Stoner and other employees at the two companies studied in the
paper, and to Lori Lucas. We thank Hongyi Li, Brendan Price, and Dmitry Taubinsky for excellent
research assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the National Institute on Aging (grant
R01-AG021650 and T32-AG00186). Beshears acknowledges financial support from a National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those
of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of NIA, the Federal Government, or the
NBER. Laibson acknowledges financial support from the Sloan Foundation.
© 2006 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Simplification and Saving
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 12659
October 2006, Revised August 2010
JEL No. D12,D14,D83,G11
ABSTRACT
The daunting complexity of important financial decisions can lead to procrastination. We evaluate
a low-cost intervention that substantially simplifies the retirement savings plan participation decision.
Individuals received an opportunity to enroll in a retirement savings plan at a pre-selected contribution
rate and asset allocation, allowing them to collapse a multidimensional problem into a binary choice
between the status quo and the pre-selected alternative. The intervention increases plan enrollment
rates by 10 to 20 percentage points. We find that a similar intervention can be used to increase contribution
rates among employees who are already participating in a savings plan.
John Beshears
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
beshears@stanford.edu

David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-12
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@harvard.edu

James J. Choi
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu

Brigitte C. Madrian
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Many household financial decisions—for example, choosing a savings rate or asset
allocation, determining the optimal amount of life insurance, deciding when and how to
refinance a mortgage, or dividing assets among beneficiaries in a will—are complicated. One
potential consequence of this complexity is that individuals put off confronting these decisions.
Madrian and Shea (2001) and Iyengar, Huberman, and Jiang (2004) argue that the complexity of
the retirement savings decision discourages employees from timely enrollment in employersponsored savings plans, even when they prefer participation to non-participation. Unfortunately,
modest delays in savings plan enrollment each time a worker switches employers can lead to
substantial reductions in long-run wealth accumulation.
Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2009) (henceforth CLM) evaluate an intervention called
Quick Enrollment that is designed to simplify the retirement savings problem. Quick Enrollment
gives employees a mechanism to enroll in their employer’s savings plan at an asset allocation
and contribution rate pre-selected by the employer. This allows individuals to psychologically
collapse a complex, multidimensional savings and investment problem into a simpler binary
choice: remain at their status quo, or accept the pre-selected alternative.1 If workers believe that
their employer has been benign and judicious in choosing the pre-select, then the pre-select can
provide guidance on what a reasonable contribution rate and asset allocation might be. In
addition, the Quick Enrollment mechanism may be a more convenient way to enroll in the
savings plan than the standard phone or Internet channels. CLM find that Quick Enrollment
increased savings plan enrollment at two firms by 10 to 20 percentage points relative to a
standard opt-in enrollment regime.
In the current paper, we extend the analysis of CLM in four ways. First, we show that
providing repeated opportunities to use Quick Enrollment substantially increases the
effectiveness of this enrollment mechanism. In an employee population that received Quick
Enrollment forms in the mail, each annual mailing caused about 10% of the still-unenrolled
recipients to join the savings plan. The result was a cumulative enrollment increase after three
mailings of 21 percentage points relative to baseline, a 105% increase. Second, we show that
Quick Enrollment is just as effective at raising enrollment when its pre-selected contribution rate
1

Heterogeneity of optima in the population can easily be accommodated by offering more than one pre-select in the
Quick Enrollment menu. Of course, offering too many pre-selects will reintroduce the complexity that Quick
Enrollment is designed to attenuate.

2

is 4% of salary, rather than the lower 2 or 3% pre-selected contribution rates evaluated by CLM.
Third, we evaluate a complementary intervention called Easy Escalation, which is similar to
Quick Enrollment but allows already-participating employees to increase their contribution rate
to a pre-selected level—6% of salary at the company we study. We find that mailing an Easy
Escalation form to employees with low contribution rates causes about 15% of the recipients to
raise their contribution rate to the pre-select. Finally, CLM follow employees for a maximum of
11 months after their exposure to Quick Enrollment. We assess the effect of Quick Enrollment
up to 54 months after its implementation. We find that the participation increases produced by
Quick Enrollment are durable. Consistent with previous research on automatic enrollment (Choi
et al., 2002, 2004), we also find that employees who join the savings plan via Quick Enrollment
often remain at the pre-selects for years.
These results highlight the potential salutary effect of making a savings vehicle simpler,
and add to a growing body of evidence on the impact of simplification on economic outcomes.
Simplification of the information gathering process has been shown to affect parents’ choices of
schools for their children (Hastings and Weinstein, 2008), senior citizens’ Medicare Part D plan
choices (Kling et al., 2008), and investors’ mutual fund choices (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian,
2010). Simplifying the college financial aid application procedure increases both applications for
financial aid and subsequent college attendance (Bettinger et al., 2009).
Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation achieve their simplification without eliminating
any of the savings plan elections previously available to employees, although the pre-selected
elections are made salient. Therefore, like automatic enrollment (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Choi
et al., 2002, 2004), automatic contribution escalation (Thaler and Benartzi, 2004), and active
decisions (Carroll et al., 2009), Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation are forms of libertarian
paternalism (Sunstein and Thaler, 2003). Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation can easily be
integrated with these other interventions. For example, a company that automatically enrolls
employees in its savings plan can also distribute an Easy Escalation form that offers a limited
number of pre-selected contribution rates to which an employee can move from the default.
Reducing the costs—both cognitive and transactional—of opting out of the default can reduce
the welfare losses from being defaulted into a suboptimal savings and investment choice.2

2

Even defaults that are appropriate for the typical member of a population will generate welfare losses if population
optima are heterogeneous and defaults are sticky. Carroll et al. (2009) provide a theoretical analysis of how

3

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the Quick Enrollment and Easy
Escalation implementations at the two firms we study. Section 3 describes the data that we use to
analyze the effects of the interventions. Section 4 presents the results of our empirical analysis at
the first company, and Section 5 presents the results from the second company. Section 6
concludes.

2. Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation Implementations
2.1. Quick Enrollment at Company A
The first Quick Enrollment implementation we study was at a large health services
company—hereafter referred to as Company A—with approximately 40,000 employees.
Virtually all Company A employees in our data were immediately eligible for their employersponsored savings plan and could make both before-tax and after-tax contributions up to 100%
of pay, subject to U.S. Internal Revenue Service annual dollar contribution limits. Most
employees were also eligible for a 50% matching contribution from the company on the first 4%
or 6% of pay (depending on employee group) contributed to the plan.
Prior to July 2003, the company used a standard opt-in enrollment process: employees
were not enrolled in the savings plan unless they made an affirmative election. When they did
choose to enroll, they had to also (1) select a before-tax and an after-tax contribution rate whose
sum was between 0 and 100% of salary, and (2) specify how to allocate their contributions
across the eleven investment options offered in the plan.
In July 2003, Company A adopted Quick Enrollment on a trial basis in the form of a card
distributed to new employees attending orientation. Employees who checked the box on the card
and returned it were enrolled in the savings plan at a before-tax contribution rate of 2% of salary
and an after-tax contribution rate of 0% of salary, and their contributions were invested in a preselected asset allocation that was evenly split between a money market fund and a balanced fund.
Returning the Quick Enrollment card was not mandatory. Although the cards did tell employees
that if they wished to use Quick Enrollment they had to submit the card within two weeks of
orientation, the deadline was not actually binding, as late submissions were still processed.3 The

heterogeneity affects the optimal default regime. They find that high heterogeneity can lead to the optimal default
being one that is deliberately inappropriate for the median individual. High heterogeneity may alternatively lead to
active decisions being optimal instead of a default if procrastination is strong enough.
3
The deadline on the card was a specific date which changed according to when the orientation was held.

4

company reports that many of the Quick Enrollment cards were handed in during orientation
rather than taken home and mailed in. Employees could also enroll on their own at any
contribution rate and asset allocation (subject to plan limitations) using the standard phone or
Internet channels throughout this time.
The Quick Enrollment trial ended in December 2003, but in February 2004, Company A
adopted Quick Enrollment as a permanent feature of its new employee orientation. In March
2006, the company changed the Quick Enrollment pre-selects to a before-tax contribution rate of
4% of salary invested 100% in an age-appropriate target date retirement fund and an after-tax
contribution rate of 0% of salary. This change coincided with the introduction of target date
retirement funds to the plan investment menu.
Company A’s second Quick Enrollment implementation took place from mid-June 2004
through mid-October 2004 for seasoned employees (i.e., those who were not new hires) not
enrolled in the savings plan. This implementation occurred in conjunction with the adoption of a
new Web-based benefits management system for all employees. As part of the transition to this
new system, the company had employees meet individually with an outside vendor’s
representatives to help them register on the new system. These meetings were not designed to be
financial planning sessions, but representatives answered questions about company benefits—in
particular, about the firm’s life insurance products and savings plan. Non-enrolled employees
received the opportunity to enroll in the savings plan using a Web-based Quick Enrollment
interface. This implementation also offered an asset allocation pre-select split evenly between a
money market fund and a balanced fund, but enrolling employees had to choose a pre-tax
contribution rate without the guidance of a contribution rate pre-select. Employees did not have
the option to use the Web-based Quick Enrollment channel after the meeting.

2.2. Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation at Company B
The third Quick Enrollment implementation that we study is at Company B, a
manufacturing firm with approximately 20,000 employees. Almost all employees were
immediately eligible to participate in the savings plan and could contribute any combination of
before-tax and after-tax dollars up to 25% of pay, subject to the Internal Revenue Service dollar
contribution limits. The first 6% of pay contributed to the plan was matched by the company at a
rate that varied from 55% to 125%, depending on company profitability. Prior to 2004,

5

employees could invest their own contributions in nine investment options, including employer
stock. The investment menu grew to encompass twelve options in 2004. The match was invested
in employer stock and could not be fully diversified until age 55. Company B operated a
standard opt-in enrollment system until 2003, when it augmented this system with Quick
Enrollment.
Quick Enrollment at Company B was first implemented as a mailing in the latter half of
January 2003 to all employees at the firm who were not enrolled in the savings plan. Employees
who checked the form’s box and returned the card were enrolled in the plan at a 3% before-tax
contribution rate and a 0% after-tax contribution rate, with all contributions invested in a money
market fund. Although Company B employees were given a two-week deadline for returning the
Quick Enrollment card, as at Company A, this deadline was not binding in practice. Cards
returned after the deadline were held and processed in May 2003. A second Quick Enrollment
mailing was sent to non-enrolled employees in January 2004 with the same contribution rate and
asset allocation pre-selects as in 2003. A third Quick Enrollment mailing to those not enrolled
occurred in February 2005, offering the same contribution rate pre-select but an asset allocation
pre-select entirely invested in a lifestyle fund rather than a money market fund. In January 2004
and February 2005, Company B also sent Easy Escalation forms to already-enrolled employees
whose before-tax plus after-tax contribution rate was below the 6% match threshold. These
forms, similar to the Quick Enrollment forms, allowed employees to check a box to increase
their total contribution rate to the 6% match threshold while keeping the asset allocation they
already had in effect. Like in Company A, throughout this time, employees could use the
standard phone or Internet channels to enroll in the savings plan at any contribution rate and
asset allocation (subject to plan limitations) and change their current contribution rate or asset
allocation.

3. Data description
The data we use to analyze the impact of Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation come
from Hewitt Associates, a large U.S. benefits administration and consulting firm. The data are
repeated year-end cross-sections of all employees at Company A from year-end 2002 through
year-end 2008, and all employees at Company B from year-end 2002 to year-end 2006. These
cross-sections contain data on savings plan enrollment status, initial enrollment date, the

6

cumulative amount contributed during the calendar year to each investment option, and year-end
balances in each investment option. We also have a monthly history of contribution rates from
January 2002 to December 2008 for Company A, and from August 2002 to December 2006 for
Company B. Note that our data allow us to see contribution rates at a much higher frequency
than asset allocations.
Unfortunately, we know neither which nor how many Company A employees received
Quick Enrollment forms at new employee orientation. Attendance at orientation was not strictly
enforced, so many new hires never attended orientation and thus never received a Quick
Enrollment form. We will estimate the average impact of being in a new-hire cohort that, by
virtue of its hire date, potentially could have received Quick Enrollment forms at Company A’s
orientation. This will underestimate the true Quick Enrollment treatment effect because some of
this population was never treated.
Our data also do not tell us exactly which employees used the Quick Enrollment and
Easy Escalation forms at either Company A or Company B. However, we will see that in the
absence of Quick Enrollment or Easy Escalation, very few people chose the pre-selected
contribution rates (Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation) and asset allocations (Quick
Enrollment) offered on the forms. We can therefore infer that almost everybody who chose those
pre-selects upon being introduced to Quick Enrollment or Easy Escalation did so because of
these interventions.

4. Impact of Quick Enrollment at Company A
We begin by discussing the impact Company A’s second Quick Enrollment
implementation had on savings plan participation. Seeing these results first will aid in
understanding the subsequent analysis of the first Quick Enrollment implementation’s impact on
enrollment. We will then discuss the effect both implementations had on savings plan
contribution rate and asset allocation choices.

4.1. Impact of the second Quick Enrollment implementation on savings plan participation
Figure 1 shows the aggregate participation rate—defined as the percent of employees
currently contributing a positive amount to the savings plan—plotted against calendar time for
Company A. The sample is all employees who were continuously employed at Company A and

7

eligible to participate in its savings plan from January 1, 2002 through December 31, 2005. Note
that this sample excludes employees who received Quick Enrollment forms at new employee
orientation, so the impact of that Quick Enrollment implementation does not appear in Figure 1.
The shaded portion of Figure 1 corresponds to the period during which Web-based Quick
Enrollment was offered to seasoned non-enrolled employees.
The participation rate increased dramatically during the mid-June 2004 to mid-October
2004 rollout of Web-based Quick Enrollment and was close to flat outside that period. During
the 28-month period from the end of January 2002 to the end of May 2004, the savings plan
participation rate rose only 8.5 percentage points, or 0.3 percentage points per month. In contrast,
during the 5-month period from the end of May 2004 to the end of October 2004, the
participation rate increased 10.4 percentage points, or 2.1 percentage points per month, from
66% to 76%. Fully 30% of non-participating employees began participating in the savings plan
during this period. The bulk of the increase occurred by the end of August 2004; participation
only increased by 1.3 percentage points during September and October 2004. This likely
indicates that most of the individual employee meetings at which Quick Enrollment was offered
were completed prior to September. The participation rate was again stable after this Quick
Enrollment implementation ended, growing only 0.2 percentage points during the 13-month
period from the end of November 2004 to the end of December 2005, or 0.02 percentage points
per month. Importantly, the participation increase achieved during the Quick Enrollment window
shows no sign of subsequent reversal. Running a time-series regression of the monthly
participation rate change from February 2002 to December 2005 on a dummy variable for the
month being in the June 2004 to October 2004 window yields a coefficient of 1.9% that is
significant at the 1% level.

4.2. Impact of the first Quick Enrollment implementation on savings plan enrollment
To assess the impact distributing Quick Enrollment forms at new employee orientation
had on the savings plan enrollment of new hires at Company A, we compare employees hired
from February through June of 2002 or 2003 to employees hired from February through June of
2004 or 2005, and to employees hired from March through June of 2006.4 Hires during 2002 and

4

CLM analyze the impact of Quick Enrollment distribution at employee orientation only among employees working
at the company’s main location. Orientation sessions at Company A occurred only at the main location, so

8

2003 serve as the control groups, indicating what the enrollment path among new hires is without
Quick Enrollment until these early cohorts are eventually exposed to the second Quick
Enrollment implementation discussed above. Hires in 2004 and 2005 who attended orientation
were exposed to Quick Enrollment with a pre-select of a 2% before-tax contribution rate and an
asset allocation split equally between a money market fund and a balanced fund. Hires from
March 2006 onwards who attended orientation had a Quick Enrollment pre-select of a 4%
before-tax contribution rate and an asset allocation directed entirely to a target date retirement
fund. An employee is considered enrolled in the plan if she has signed up for the plan, even if
she is not currently contributing a positive amount.5 We will see in Section 4.5 that employees
rarely stop contributing once enrolled.
By comparing cohorts hired in the same months across years, we control for seasonality
in savings plan enrollment. We end our hire window in June because Quick Enrollment was
introduced on a trial basis in July 2003, so the June 2003 hire cohort is the last cohort not
potentially exposed to Quick Enrollment at orientation. We begin our hire window in February
for the 2002 to 2005 cohorts because Quick Enrollment was adopted on a permanent basis in
February 2004 after a one-month hiatus. We do not analyze the new hires from the second half of
2003, who were potentially given Quick Enrollment at orientation, because the annual companysponsored benefits fair held in October and November 2003 (at which additional Quick
Enrollment forms were distributed, making it different from previous years’ benefits fairs)
creates a potentially confounding effect on savings plan enrollment early in their tenure.6 The
Quick Enrollment pre-select change occurred in March 2006, which is why we begin the hire
window in March for the 2006 hire cohorts.
employees working at the main location were the most likely to attend orientation and receive Quick Enrollment
forms. We include the entire sample of new hires, regardless of work location, for two reasons. First, we wish to
examine outcomes for the 2005 and 2006 hire cohorts, but we do not have employee location data beyond 2004.
Analyzing enrollment for new hires at all locations allows us to maintain comparability between the earlier and later
cohorts. Second, employees at other locations were free to come to the orientation sessions, so some of them did
receive the Quick Enrollment forms as new hires.
5
We consider enrollment status instead of participation status (i.e. whether the employee is currently contributing)
for this analysis because we observe contribution rates only at each month-end. Therefore, we do not observe
contribution rates at the same tenure levels for somebody hired early in a month as for somebody hired later in a
month. In contrast, we know the exact day on which enrollment occurred, so we can compute enrollment rates at
equivalent tenure levels regardless of when in a month an employee was hired. The mismatch in the timing of the
contribution rate data is more important at low tenure levels; it is less of a concern in our analysis of contribution
rate persistence in Section 4.5 which examines outcomes at longer tenure levels.
6
In addition, the company initially used a slightly different version of the Quick Enrollment form in 2003 than the
one eventually adopted. See CLM for details.

9

Table 1 shows the characteristics of employees in each year’s hire cohorts. Across all
years, the average age is about 34 years and the percent male is about 27%. Average and median
nominal salary rise over time at a 5.2% and 6.5% annualized rate, respectively, probably
reflecting health care worker wage inflation.7 Between 2,310 and 2,757 workers are in each
cohort.8 Overall, it seems that the cohorts are substantially comparable across years.
Figure 2 shows the savings plan enrollment rate as a function of months since hire for
each year’s hire cohorts. New-hire enrollment rates are similar and extremely low during the first
year of tenure for employees hired from February to June in 2002 and 2003 (the thin gray and
thin black lines): about 6% one month after hire and 21% after twelve months. Enrollment rates
under Quick Enrollment (the thick gray, thick black, and dotted black lines) are dramatically
higher and do not differ much by hire year, even after the pre-selected contribution rate doubled
(from 2% to 4%) in 2006. The one-month enrollment rate of 17% and the twelve-month
enrollment rate of 42% are 11 and 21 percentage point increases, respectively, over the
enrollment rates of the 2002 and 2003 cohorts at similar tenure levels (both of these differences
are significant at the 1% level).9
Any effect from the second Quick Enrollment implementation would show up between
the first and ninth months after hire for the 2004 new-hire cohorts (the first to receive Quick
Enrollment during orientation), whereas the second Quick Enrollment implementation would not
affect the 2005 and 2006 new-hire cohorts at all. Figure 2 shows that at the end of nine months
after hire, the 2004 cohorts’ enrollment rate is only 3 percentage points higher than the 2005 and
2006 cohorts’ enrollment rate. Thus, the second Quick Enrollment implementation had only a
small effect on the 2004 cohorts’ enrollment behavior, perhaps because they had been very
recently exposed to Quick Enrollment during orientation.
In contrast, the second Quick Enrollment implementation had a large effect on the newhire cohorts that did not receive Quick Enrollment during orientation. Figure 2 shows that in the
2003 cohorts, enrollment rates increased from 21% to 46% between the thirteenth and 21st
7

The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that U.S. hospital employee wages and salaries rose at a 3.7% annualized
rate from 2002 to 2006. The BLS sample includes all hospital employees, whereas the Table 1 sample includes only
new hires, so the two figures are not exactly comparable.
8
CLM report much smaller sample sizes in their Table 3. The difference arises because the CLM sample is
restricted to employees who are at the main location and whose tenure extends through September 2004.
9
To test the significance of the participation differences between the pre- and post-Quick Enrollment cohorts, we
use the data underlying Figure 2 to run linear probability regressions of individual enrollment at tenure month 1 or
12 on a Quick Enrollment cohort dummy.

10

months after hire, which correspond to the window in which these cohorts experienced the
second Quick Enrollment implementation. This 25 percentage point increase is 15 percentage
points greater than the increase the 2002 cohorts experienced between their thirteenth and 21st
months after hire. The 2002 cohorts experienced their own 26 percentage point enrollment
increase when they encountered the second Quick Enrollment implementation between their 25th
and 33rd months after hire.
Figure 2 also shows that the immediate enrollment gains of the first Quick Enrollment
implementation do not appear to come at the expense of longer-run enrollment growth. Our best
counterfactual comes from the 2002 hire cohorts, whose enrollment rate grew nearly linearly at
1.2 percentage points per month from the end of their ninth month after hire to the end of their
24th month after hire, after which they were exposed to the second Quick Enrollment
implementation. The three Quick Enrollment hire cohort years experienced nearly linear 1.0
(2004 cohort), 1.2 (2005 cohort), and 1.3 (2006 cohort) percentage point per month enrollment
growth from the end of their ninth month after hire to the end of their 24th month after hire. The
fact that Quick Enrollment does not appear to cannibalize longer-run enrollment growth rates
may indicate that Quick Enrollment accelerates the enrollment of employees who would
otherwise not join the plan for many years.

4.3. Impact of Quick Enrollment on initial contribution rates
To assess the impact the first Quick Enrollment implementation had on the initial
contribution rate choices of new hires, we examine Figure 3, which shows the distribution of
total (before-tax plus after-tax) contribution rates among new employees 30 days after hire.10
Non-participants, who constitute the vast majority of the sample, are coded as having a
contribution rate of zero and included in the denominator used to calculate frequencies, but are
not shown in the graph in order to make it easier to see the differences among participants with
positive contribution rates.
The modal contribution rate prior to Quick Enrollment (the 2002 and 2003 hire cohorts)
was 6%, which was the match threshold for many Company A employees. Among the 2004 and
10

Because we only observe contribution rates at month-ends, we use the first recorded contribution rate for
employees who enrolled within 30 days of hire, and assign a zero contribution rate to employees who enrolled later.
If we instead look at contribution rates in effect at longer delays after hire, or just at before-tax contribution rates, we
continue to see a disproportionate number of employees choosing the Quick Enrollment pre-selects among the 2004
to 2006 cohorts.

11

2005 hire cohorts, whose Quick Enrollment forms featured a 2% contribution rate pre-select, the
fraction of employees contributing 2% increased 21-fold from 0.5% to 10.1%. Once the Quick
Enrollment contribution rate pre-select increased to 4%, the fraction of employees contributing
2% fell back to 0.8%, and the fraction contributing 4% rose 12-fold from 0.8% to 9.6%. The
increases in the fraction of employees at the Quick Enrollment pre-selects are significant at the
1% level.11 We find no evidence that Quick Enrollment moved people away from other positive
savings rates; the increase in employees contributing at the pre-selected contribution rate one
month after hire is close to the one-month enrollment increase in Figure 2. Consistent with the
longer-run enrollment trajectories discussed earlier, this suggests that Quick Enrollment does not
distort the choices of employees who would have promptly enrolled in the savings plan in the
absence of Quick Enrollment; rather, Quick Enrollment accelerates the participation of
employees who otherwise would not have enrolled for a long time.12
Unlike the first Quick Enrollment implementation, the second Quick Enrollment
implementation featured only an asset allocation pre-select, and no contribution rate pre-select.
The result is that no single contribution rate became much more popular under the second Quick
Enrollment implementation. Figure 4 is a histogram of total (before-tax plus after-tax)
contribution rates in effect at two dates—May 31, 2004 (shortly before the second Quick
Enrollment implementation began) and October 31, 2004 (shortly after the second Quick
Enrollment implementation concluded). The sample is the same as in Figure 1: all employees
who were continuously employed at Company A and eligible to participate in the plan from
January 1, 2002 through December 31, 2005. We see that the second Quick Enrollment
implementation increased the fraction of employees at each total contribution rate between 1%
and 6%, but caused little increase at higher contribution rates.

4.4. Impact of Quick Enrollment on asset allocation
The Quick Enrollment asset allocation pre-select had a strong influence on enrollees’
asset allocations. Only 0.4% of the February to June 2002 and 2003 hire cohorts who enrolled
11

To test the significance of the increase at the 2% contribution rate, we use the sample in Figure 3 to run a linear
probability regression of having a 2% total contribution rate on a dummy variable for being in the 2004 or 2005
Quick Enrollment hire cohorts. We run an analogous regression to test the significance of the increase at the 4%
contribution rate in the 2006 Quick Enrollment hire cohorts.
12
In contrast, Madrian and Shea (2001) find that at 3 to 15 months of tenure, 19% of participants at the default
contribution rate under automatic enrollment are employees who would have contributed at a different (usually
higher) positive contribution rate in the absence of automatic enrollment.

12

within thirty days of hire split their contribution flows13 evenly between the money market fund
and the balanced fund while not trading (i.e., making transfers between investment funds in the
savings plan) during their first calendar year of enrollment.14 In contrast, 54% of the 2004 and
2005 cohort members who enrolled within thirty days of hire maintained this asset allocation,
which was their Quick Enrollment pre-select, for their contribution flows while not making any
trades during their first calendar year of enrollment. Seventy-eight percent of the 2006 cohort
members who enrolled within thirty days of hire made all of their 2006 contributions to a target
date retirement fund, which was the Quick Enrollment pre-select they received, while not
making any trades in 2006. Since the target date retirement funds were added to the investment
menu concurrently with the pre-select change, we do not know how many of these employees
would have allocated 100% of their contributions to a target date retirement fund if that had not
been the pre-select.
We see similar results for the second Quick Enrollment implementation. Seventy-nine
percent of employees who joined the savings plan during the second Quick Enrollment rollout
(from June to October 2004) enrolled at the asset allocation pre-select of 50% in the money
market fund and 50% in the balanced fund for their contribution flows during all of 2004 while
not trading in 2004. Only 0.1% of the employees who enrolled between June and October of
2002 chose that contribution flow allocation while not trading in 2002. (We do not consider the
June to October 2003 enrollees in this comparison because many of the July to October 2003
enrollees joined as new hires during the trial period for the first Quick Enrollment
implementation.)

4.5. Contribution rate pre-select persistence under Quick Enrollment
Choi et al. (2002, 2004) have shown that automatic enrollment defaults are quite
persistent; a substantial fraction of participants remain at the defaults for years after enrollment.
We find that persistence at the pre-selected Quick Enrollment elections is also high.

13

We draw a distinction between the asset allocation for contribution flows and the asset allocation for balances.
The former is the mix of assets in which incremental 401(k) contributions are initially invested. The latter is the mix
of all accumulated assets currently held in the portfolio. We will focus on the former in this paper because it is not
directly affected by capital gains.
14
The first calendar year of enrollment encompasses the period between enrollment and December 31 of the
enrollment year. The second calendar year of enrollment is the entire subsequent year from January 1 to December
31.

13

Table 2 shows the persistence of savings plan participation (i.e., currently contributing a
positive amount) and the initially chosen contribution rate among new hires who enrolled in the
savings plan within 30 days of hire (“early participators”) at Company A. The first two columns
show persistence among early participators in the combined 2002 and 2003 cohorts, who did not
receive Quick Enrollment forms at new employee orientation. The sample in these columns is all
employees who enrolled within 30 days of hire. The experience of early participators under
Quick Enrollment is shown in the remaining columns, first for employees hired in 2004 and
2005, when the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select was 2%, and then for employees
hired in 2006, when the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select increased to 4%. The
sample in the Quick Enrollment columns is restricted to employees who enrolled within 30 days
of hire at the relevant Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select—those who are very likely
to have used Quick Enrollment to initiate savings plan participation.15
Savings plan participation is very persistent for early participators in all of the cohorts,
both before and after Quick Enrollment: 95% continued to contribute one year after enrollment,
over 90% at two years after enrollment, and 87% or more at three and four years after
enrollment. There is no meaningful difference between the savings plan persistence of early
participators hired before versus after Quick Enrollment, or between early participators in the
Quick Enrollment cohorts with a 2% versus a 4% pre-selected contribution rate. This is
consistent with the research of Choi et al. (2002, 2004), who find little difference in savings plan
attrition rates between employees hired before versus after automatic enrollment.
Persistence at initial contribution rates is also high, but weaker than the persistence of
participation status. Two years after enrollment, well over half of early participators in all
cohorts were still at their initial contribution rate. Early participators who enrolled at the Quick
Enrollment contribution rate pre-select exhibit less persistence at their initial contribution rate
than early participators hired before Quick Enrollment. Two years after enrollment, 54% of the

15

Our data do not indicate which employees actually used Quick Enrollment. We identify an employee as having
used Quick Enrollment if the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select is our first contribution rate observation
for the employee. As shown in Figure 3, very few employees (less than 1%) in the standard enrollment cohorts
enrolled at either of the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-selects (2% or 4% of pay). We could identify Quick
Enrollment utilization by observing who enrolled at both the relevant contribution rate pre-select and the asset
allocation pre-select. However, we only observe asset allocations at an annual frequency, while we observe
contribution rates at a monthly frequency. Using annual asset allocations to identify Quick Enrollment utilization
would exclude Quick Enrollees who changed their asset allocation before the end of their first calendar year of
enrollment, which would cause us to infer that Quick Enrollees are more inertial than they really are.

14

2004-2005 early participators who started at the 2% pre-select and 55% of the 2006 early
participators who started at the 4% pre-select were still contributing at their initial contribution
rate. By contrast, 63% of the 2002-2003 pre-Quick Enrollment early participators remained at
their initial contribution rate two years after enrollment, about 8 to 9 percentage points more than
the two Quick Enrollment early participator groups. Four years after enrollment, 37% of the
2004-2005 Quick Enrollment early participators persisted at their initial 2% contribution rate,
compared to 48% of the 2002-2003 early participators who retained their initial contribution rate,
a difference of 11 percentage points. The lower persistence of the Quick Enrollment contribution
rate pre-selects may be due to the fact that all employees using Quick Enrollment in the 20042005 cohort and many of those using it in the 2006 cohort16 were foregoing matching
contributions if they remained at the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select. Consistent
with this hypothesis, the modal contribution rate to which Quick Enrollment early participators
moved is the 6% match threshold.

4.6. Asset allocation pre-select persistence under Quick Enrollment
In Table 3, we examine the persistence of the asset allocations enrollees initially selected
for their contribution flows. Panel A of Table 3 shows the asset allocation persistence among
new employees enrolling in the savings plan within 30 days of hire; in Panel B, we examine the
asset allocation persistence of employees who enrolled in the savings plan during the second
Quick Enrollment implementation. Because our data include contribution rates at a monthly
frequency, we were able to examine contribution rate persistence at specific months of tenure in
Table 2. Asset allocations of contribution flows, however, are only available on an annual basis
in the form of the total dollars contributed to each investment option during each calendar year.
Therefore, we evaluate asset allocation persistence on a “calendar year of enrollment” basis.17
This means that the contribution rate persistence values in Table 2 cannot be directly compared
to the asset allocation persistence values in Table 3.
We classify an employee as being at her initial asset allocation if she has never traded in
the savings plan and the allocation of her contribution flows in the current and preceding
16

Recall that some participants’ contributions are matched up to 4% of pay, while others are matched up to 6% of
pay. With a Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select of 4%, participants with a 6% match threshold would be
foregoing matching contributions if they stayed at the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select, while those
with a 4% match threshold would not.
17
The first calendar year of enrollment is the calendar year in which the employee enrolled in the savings plan.

15

calendar years has never deviated from the allocation of her contribution flows during the
calendar year in which she enrolled.18 For the Quick Enrollment cohorts, an employee is
classified as being at the pre-selected asset allocation if she has never traded and the allocation of
her contribution flows during a calendar year has never to date deviated from the Quick
Enrollment pre-select offered to her.19
The persistence of the initial asset allocation chosen by early participators in the standard
enrollment cohorts is remarkably similar to the persistence of the asset allocation pre-select (50%
money market fund and 50% balanced fund) among early participators in the 2004-2005 Quick
Enrollment cohorts. During the fourth calendar year of enrollment, 56% of the standard
enrollment early participators retained their initial allocation, while 59% of the 2004-2005 Quick
Enrollment early participators were still at their asset allocation pre-select. In contrast, the asset
allocation of the 2006 Quick Enrollment early participators—100% in an age-appropriate target
date retirement fund—is considerably stickier, perhaps because target date retirement funds are
marketed as customized solutions to the asset allocation problem and are thus viewed by
employees as attractive investment vehicles. During their third calendar year of enrollment, 85%
of the 2006 Quick Enrollment early participators were still at their asset allocation pre-select,
versus only 67% of the 2004-2005 Quick Enrollment early participators who were still at their
asset allocation pre-select and 64% of the 2002-2003 standard enrollment early participators who
were still at their initial asset allocation.
Panel B of Table 3 compares the asset allocation persistence of employees who enrolled
in the savings plan two years before the second Quick Enrollment rollout with that of employees
who enrolled during the second Quick Enrollment rollout (June to October 2004) and maintained
the asset allocation pre-select for all of their 2004 contribution flows.20 We find that those who
enrolled during the second Quick Enrollment implementation exhibit considerably more asset
allocation persistence than those who enrolled two years prior. During their fourth calendar year
18

There is one equity fund that was discontinued and had its balances automatically transferred to a replacement
equity fund in 2003. We treat contributions to the new fund as equivalent to contributions to the old fund and ignore
trades from the old fund to the new fund for the purposes of calculating persistence.
19
This definition allows an employee who has stopped contributing to the savings plan to still be counted as
persisting at the asset allocation pre-select, even if she made no contributions for an entire calendar year.
20
For the second Quick Enrollment implementation, we rely on asset allocation to identify likely Quick Enrollment
utilization. We cannot use the initial contribution rate to identify likely Quick Enrollees (as we did for the first
Quick Enrollment implementation at new employee orientation) because this second implementation did not specify
a single contribution rate pre-select, but allowed employees to choose any contribution rate in conjunction with the
pre-selected asset allocation.

16

of enrollment, 85% of the second Quick Enrollment sample were still at the asset allocation preselect for their contribution flows and had never traded, in contrast to the 60% of the standard
enrollment sample who were still at their initial flow asset allocation and had never traded—a
difference of 25 percentage points. Because the second Quick Enrollment implementation
encouraged enrollment among employees who had not enrolled despite potentially long tenures
at the company, it may have attracted a particularly inertial population.

4.5. Effect of Quick Enrollment on average contribution rates
Figure 5 shows the cumulative impact of the two Quick Enrollment implementations on
the average total contribution rate of all savings-plan-eligible employees at Company A. Nonparticipants are included in the average at a zero contribution rate. The average total contribution
rate before the trial Quick Enrollment implementation in July 2003 was nearly constant at about
3.6% of pay. This average began rising after July 2003, and the rise accelerated during the
second Quick Enrollment rollout from June to August 2004 before leveling out at about 4.2% of
pay from October 2004 to December 2008. The 16% (0.6% of pay) difference between the end
of June 2003 and the end of October 2004 is significant at the 1% level.

5. Impact of Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation at Company B
5.1. Impact of Quick Enrollment on enrollment
As described in Section 2, Company B mailed Quick Enrollment cards to non-enrolled
employees in late January 2003, January 2004, and February 2005. We examine the effect of
these implementations on savings plan enrollment in Figure 6. The Quick Enrollment sample
consists of employees who were not enrolled in the savings plan on February 1, 2003, which is
just before the processing of the initial Quick Enrollment mailing at this firm. We compare the
enrollment experience of this cohort to three similarly defined cohorts before Quick Enrollment:
employees who were not enrolled as of March 1, 200021, as of February 1, 2001, or as of
February 1, 2002. In the graph, these cohorts’ enrollment series are truncated after January 2003,
when they would have first received Quick Enrollment. Each cohort has over 2,000 employees in

21

We use March 1, 2000 as the formation date for 2000 non-participant cohort rather than February 1, 2000 because
there was an anomalous spike in enrollment in February 2000—five times the activity seen in surrounding months.

17

it. Time on the x-axis in Figure 6 is calculated relative to the baseline date on which each cohort
of non-enrollees is defined.
For the 2003 cohort, Quick Enrollment forms were first processed during month 1
(February 2003); the final processing of forms from the 2003 mailing took place in month 4
(May 2003). Forms from the 2004 Quick Enrollment mailing were largely processed in month 13
(February 2004). Those from the 2005 mailing were largely processed in months 26 (March
2005).
Figure 6 shows that the 2000-2002 non-enrolled cohorts (the thin gray, thin black, and
dotted black lines) all experienced similar slow and steady enrollment increases over time. On
average across cohorts, only 4% were enrolled 4 months after baseline, 11% at 13 months, and
20% at 26 months. In contrast, the enrollment rate of employees who were not participating at
the time of the first Quick Enrollment mailing (the thick black line) increased discretely by 12
percentage points between months 0 and 1, and again by 3 percentage points between months 3
and 4, which are exactly when the Quick Enrollment forms were processed. We see another
sharp enrollment jump of 10 percentage points between months 12 and 13, and a 5 percentage
point jump between months 25 and 26, coinciding with the 2004 and 2005 Quick Enrollment
mailings. The cumulative impact of the three Quick Enrollment mailings is large: at 26 months,
the 41% enrollment rate of the 2003 Quick Enrollment cohort is more than double the 20%
enrollment rate of the 2000 cohort. Calculating the causal effect of each Quick Enrollment
mailing as the difference in enrollment growth between cohorts with versus without Quick
Enrollment during the months corresponding to form processing windows, each mailing on
average converted about 10% of previously non-enrolled recipients into savings plan
participants. The enrollment rate differences at months 4, 13, and 26 are all significant at the 1%
level.

5.2. Impact of Easy Escalation on movements to the match threshold
Recall that participants contributing less than the 6% match threshold were mailed an
Easy Escalation form in January 2004 and February 2005. Figure 7 shows the impact of the 2004
and 2005 Easy Escalation mailings on employee contribution rates. Each bar represents the
fraction of employees with a positive contribution rate below 6% at the end of month t – 1 who
changed their contribution rate to 6% during month t. Usually, only a small fraction of low

18

contributors changed their contribution rate to 6%. The notable exceptions occurred in February
2004 and in February/March 2005, which coincide with the processing of the Easy Escalation
forms. Fifteen percent of low contributors increased their contribution rate to 6% in February
2004, and 17% did so in February and March 2005 combined, compared to about 1% on average
in the other months. A time-series regression of the monthly fraction of low contributors who
change their contribution rate to 6% on a dummy for the month being February 2004, February
2005, or March 2005 yields a coefficient of 9.8% that is significant at the 1% level. Because
these three months correspond to two Easy Escalation mailings, the effect of each mailing is
9.8% × 3 ÷ 2 = 14.7%.

5.3. Persistence of the pre-selects
Panel A of Table 4 shows that once employees enroll in Company B’s savings plan, the
persistence of their participation is extremely high, and this persistence does not vary much by
whether enrollment occurred through the standard channel or via Quick Enrollment. The sample
in the last three columns is employees who enrolled in the plan from February to May 2003 (the
first Quick Enrollment processing period), February to March 2004 (the second Quick
Enrollment processing period), or March to April 2005 (the third Quick Enrollment processing
period) at the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select. As a comparison, the sample in the
first column is employees who enrolled from February to May 2002, one year prior to the first
Quick Enrollment processing period. The numbers in the table cells are the fraction of the sample
that is still contributing to the savings plan at various times since enrollment. Across all the
columns, no more than 6% of participants stopped contributing to the savings plan within one
year of enrollment, and no more than 9% within three years of enrollment. These attrition rates
are similar to those reported in Table 2 for Company A.
Because of the confounding impact of the Easy Escalation implementations, we do not
calculate the persistence of the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select at Company B. We
do, however, examine the persistence of the asset allocation pre-select in Panel B of Table 4.22
The sample in each column is the same as in Panel A. In the first column, an employee is
counted as persisting at her initial asset allocation if she has never reallocated assets in the
22

Three funds were discontinued and had their balances automatically transferred to three replacement funds in
2003. We treat contributions to the new funds as equivalent to contributions to the old funds and ignore trades from
the old funds to the new funds for the purposes of calculating persistence.

19

savings plan and the allocation of her contribution flows during the current and preceding
calendar years has never deviated from the allocation of her contribution flows during her first
calendar year of participation. In the last three columns, an employee is classified as being at the
pre-selected asset allocation if she has never reallocated assets in the savings plan and the
allocation of her contribution flows during the current and preceding calendar years has never
deviated from the Quick Enrollment pre-select offered to her.
Among employees who enrolled in the savings plan from February to May 2003 or
February to March 2004 at the Quick Enrollment contribution rate pre-select, about 80%
remained at the asset allocation pre-select through their second calendar year of enrollment, 70%
or more through their third calendar year, and 64% through their fourth calendar year.
Persistence is noticeably higher in the March to April 2005 enrollment cohort, perhaps because
the asset allocation pre-select was changed to a lifestyle fund instead of a money market fund;
93% remained at their pre-select through their second calendar year of enrollment. All Quick
Enrollment groups exhibit higher persistence than those who enrolled via standard enrollment, as
was the case for Company A’s second Quick Enrollment implementation that targeted seasoned
non-enrolled employees. Among the February to May 2002 standard enrollment cohort, only
64% retained their initial asset allocation through their second calendar year of enrollment, 53%
through their third calendar year, and 46% through their fourth calendar year.

5.4. Impact of Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation on the average contribution rate
Figure 8 shows the average before-tax plus after-tax contribution rate at Company B over
time among employees who were continuously employed and eligible for the savings plan from
August 1, 2002 to December 31, 2006. Unlike in Figure 5, we use a balanced panel to construct
the average contribution rate because new hires at Company B after February 2005 were not
exposed to Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation.
Prior to February 2003, the average total contribution rate was fairly steady at about 6.4%
of pay. This average rose a little in February 2003, when the first Quick Enrollment mailing was
sent, and continued to rise through February 2005, when the last Quick Enrollment and Easy
Escalation forms were sent. From March 2005 to December 2006, the average contribution rate
held steady at about 6.9%, a 0.5 percentage point (8%) increase relative to the pre-February 2003

20

period. The difference between the average at the end of January 2003 and the end of February
2005 is significant at the 1% level.

6. Conclusion
Madrian and Shea (2001), Iyengar, Huberman, and Jiang (2004), and Choi, Laibson, and
Madrian (2009) have argued that the complexity of the retirement savings decision discourages
employees from timely enrollment in employer-sponsored savings plans, even when individuals
would prefer participation to non-participation. Quick Enrollment is a low-cost intervention that
reduces this complexity by allowing employees to enroll at a contribution rate and asset
allocation pre-selected by the employer. We find that Quick Enrollment increased savings plan
enrollment by 10 to 20 percentage points at two companies relative to a standard enrollment
mechanism in which employees must actively select both a contribution rate and an asset
allocation. As is the case with automatic enrollment, we find that the participation gains
generated by Quick Enrollment do not subsequently reverse, and employees using Quick
Enrollment often stay for years at the pre-selected contribution rate and asset allocation offered
to them. We find that a similar mechanism, Easy Escalation, can also be used to increase the
contribution rates of already-participating employees, causing roughly 15% of low contributors
to increase their contribution rate to the match threshold each time they receive an Easy
Escalation form.
Although the Quick Enrollment and Easy Escalation interventions that we have studied in
this paper were applied to employer-sponsored savings plan enrollment, there are many other
decision domains where simplification could be fruitfully employed to help overcome
individuals’ tendency to procrastinate. Simplified menus could also complement an active
decision approach to decision-making (Carroll et al., 2009) by reducing the costs of taking action
when a prompt choice is mandatory.

References
Bettinger, Eric P., Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopolous, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, 2009. “The
Role of Simplification and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R
Block FAFSA Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 15361.

21

Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick,
2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4),
pp. 1639-1674.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2009. “Reducing the Complexity Costs
of 401(k) Participation: The Case of Quick Enrollment.” In David A. Wise, editor,
Developments in the Economics of Aging (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 5782.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, 2010. “Why Does the Law of One Price
Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual Funds.” Review of Financial Studies 23(4), pp.
1405-1432.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002. “Defined
Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, and the Path of Least
Resistance.” In James Poterba, editor, Tax Policy and the Economy 16, pp. 67-114.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004. “For Better or
For Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior,” In David Wise, ed.,
Perspectives in the Economics of Aging (Chicago: University of Chicago Press): pp. 81121.
Hastings, Justine S., and Jeffrey M. Weinstein, 2008. “Information, School Choice, and
Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123(4), pp. 1373-1414.
Iyengar, Sheena S., Gur Huberman and Wei Jiang, 2004. “How Much Choice Is Too Much?:
Contributions to 401(k) Retirement Plans,” In Olivia Mitchell and Stephen Utkus, eds.,
Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance (Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press): pp. 83-96.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian Wrobel, 2008.
“Misperception in Choosing Medicare Drug Plans.” Harvard University working paper.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea, 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): pp. 11491187.
Sunstein, Cass R., and Richard H. Thaler, 2003. “Libertarian Paternalism.” American Economic
Review 93(2), 175-179.
Thaler, Richard H., and Shlomo Benartzi, 2004. “Save More Tomorrow™: Using Behavioral
Economics to Increase Employee Saving.” Journal of Political Economy 112(1), S164S187.

22

Table 1. Employee characteristics by hire cohort, Company A
Feb-Jun 2002 hires

Feb-Jun 2003 hires

Feb-Jun 2004 hires

Feb-Jun 2005 hires

Mar-Jun 2006 hires

Average age (years)

33.5

34.1

34.2

33.6

33.6

Percent male

29.4

27.5

25.8

27.4

26.9

Avg. annual income

$23,706

$21,468

$24,017

$24,920

$29,020

Median annual income

$17,273

$16,890

$19,043

$19,755

$22,240

Number of employees

2,618

2,310

2,644

2,639

2,757

Note: Age is calculated as of the end of the calendar year of hire. Compensation is annualized pay during the calendar year of hire.

Table 2. Persistence of participation and contribution rates, Company A

Time since
enrollment
12 months
24 months
36 months
48 months

Standard enrollment
(Feb-Jun, 2002-2003)
Contributing
At initial
positive amount
contribution rate
95%
74%
92%
63%
90%
55%
87%
48%

Quick Enrollment at 2%
(Feb-Jun, 2004-2005)
Contributing
At pre-selected
positive amount
contribution rate
95%
69%
91%
54%
90%
41%
90%
37%

Quick Enrollment at 4%
(Mar-Jun, 2006)
Contributing
At pre-selected
positive amount
contribution rate
95%
78%
91%
55%
-----

Note: The standard enrollment sample is employees with hire dates from February to June of 2002 or 2003 who enrolled within 30 days of hire.
The Quick Enrollment samples are employees with hire dates from February to June of 2004 or 2005, or March to June of 2006, who enrolled
within 30 days of hire and whose first recorded contribution rate is the Quick Enrollment pre-select. Employees are dropped from the sample if
they are no longer at the company at a given time since enrollment. The cells report the fraction of each column’s sample that is still contributing a
positive amount to the plan, is still at the initial contribution rate, or is still at the pre-selected contribution rate.

Table 3. Persistence of asset allocations, Company A

Calendar year
of enrollment
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year

Calendar year
of enrollment
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year

Panel A: New hires who enrolled within 30 days of hire
Standard enrollment
Quick Enrollment at 2%
Quick Enrollment at 4%
(Feb-Jun, 2002-2003)
(Feb-Jun, 2004-2005)
(Mar-Jun, 2006)
% at initial allocation
% at pre-selected allocation
% at pre-selected allocation
92%
83%
93%
76%
73%
90%
64%
67%
85%
56%
59%
-Panel B: Newly enrolling seasoned employees
Standard enrollment
Quick Enrollment
(Jun-Oct, 2002)
(Jun-Oct, 2004)
% at initial allocation
% at pre-selected allocation
96%
100%
77%
95%
65%
90%
60%
85%

Note: In Panel A, the standard enrollment sample is employees with hire dates from February to June of 2002 or 2003 who enrolled within 30 days
of hire. The Quick Enrollment samples are employees with hire dates from February to June of 2004 or 2005, or March to June of 2006, who
enrolled within 30 days of hire and whose first recorded contribution rate is the Quick Enrollment pre-select. In Panel B, the standard enrollment
sample is all employees who enrolled between June and October of 2002. The Quick Enrollment sample is all employees who enrolled between
June and October 2004 and whose 2004 contribution flow allocation was equal to the Quick Enrollment pre-select. Employees are dropped from
the sample if they are no longer at the company at the end of a given calendar year since enrollment. In the standard enrollment samples, an
employee is classified as being at her initial asset allocation if she has never traded in the savings plan and the allocation of her contribution flows
during the current and preceding calendar years has never deviated from the allocation of her contribution flows during her first calendar year of
participation. In the Quick Enrollment samples, an employee is classified as being at the pre-selected asset allocation if she has never traded in the
plan and the allocation of her contribution flows during a calendar year has never to date deviated from the Quick Enrollment pre-select offered to
her.

Table 4. Persistence of participation and asset allocation, Company B

Time since enrollment
12 months
24 months
36 months

Calendar year
of enrollment
1st year
2nd year
3rd year
4th year

Panel A: Percent still contributing positive amount
Standard enrollment
Quick Enrollment
Quick Enrollment
(Feb-May 2002)
(Feb-May 2003)
(Feb-Mar 2004)
94%
98%
97%
92%
95%
94%
92%
91%
-Panel B: Asset allocation persistence
Quick Enrollment
Quick Enrollment
Standard enrollment
(Feb-May 2003)
(Feb-Mar 2004)
% at pre-selected
% at pre-selected
(Feb-May 2002)
% at initial allocation
allocation
allocation
95%
92%
91%
64%
79%
81%
53%
70%
74%
46%
64%
--

Quick Enrollment
(Mar-Apr 2005)
99%
--Quick Enrollment
(Mar-Apr 2005)
% at pre-selected
allocation
98%
93%
---

Note: The standard enrollment sample is employees who enrolled between February and May of 2002. The Quick Enrollment samples are
employees who enrolled between February and May of 2003, between February and March of 2004, or between March and April of 2005 and
whose first contribution rate is the Quick Enrollment pre-select. An employee is classified as being at her initial asset allocation if she has never
reallocated assets in the savings plan and the allocation of her contribution flows during the current and preceding calendar years has never
deviated from the allocation of her contribution flows during her first calendar year of enrollment. An employee is classified as being at the preselected asset allocation if she has never reallocated assets in the savings plan and the allocation of her contribution flows during the current and
preceding calendar years has never deviated from the Quick Enrollment pre-select offered to her. Employees are dropped from the sample if they
are no longer at the company at a given time since enrollment (Panel A) or at the end of a given calendar year since enrollment (Panel B).

90

Percent of employees

80
70
60
50
2nd
QE
rollout

40
30
20
10

Oct-05

Jul-05

Apr-05

Jan-05

Oct-04

Jul-04

Apr-04

Jan-04

Oct-03

Jul-03

Apr-03

Jan-03

Oct-02

Jul-02

Apr-02

Jan-02

0

Figure 1. Savings plan participation rate by date, Company A seasoned employees.
Participation in the savings plan is defined as having a positive before- or after-tax contribution
rate. The sample is employees continuously employed by Company A and eligible for the
savings plan from January 1, 2002 through December 31, 2005.

Percent of new hires

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

66

72

78

Months of tenure
Standard enrollment (2002 hires)

Standard enrollment (2003 hires)

Quick Enrollment at 2% (2004 hires)

Quick Enrollment at 2% (2005 hires)

Quick Enrollment at 4% (2006 hires)
Figure 2. Savings plan enrollment rate by tenure, Company A new-hire cohorts. Each series
represents employees hired between February and June of the year indicated, except for the 2006
series, which represent employees hired between March and June. Employees are dropped from
the sample at a given tenure level if they are not eligible for the savings plan or have left the
company.

12

Percent of new hires

10
8
6
4
2
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

> 10

Initial contribution rate (percent of salary)
Standard enrollment (2002-2003 hires)
Quick Enrollment at 2% (2004-2005 hires)
Quick Enrollment at 4% (2006 hires)
Figure 3. Histogram of before-tax plus after-tax contribution rates 30 days after hire,
Company A new-hire cohorts. Each series represents employees hired between February and
June of the year indicated, except for the 2006 series, which represent employees hired between
March and June. Non-participants are coded as contributing 0% of their salary but are not shown
in this graph. Employees not eligible to participate in the plan within thirty days of hire are
excluded from the sample.

Percent of employees

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

> 10

Contribution rate (percent of salary)
Before Quick Enrollment (May 31, 2004)
After Quick Enrollment (October 31, 2004)
Figure 4. Histogram of before-tax plus after-tax contribution rates, seasoned Company A
employees. Each series represents the total contribution rate elections in effect on May 31, 2004
or October 31, 2004. Non-participants are coded as contributing 0% of their salary but are not
shown in this graph. The sample is employees continuously employed by Company A and
eligible for the savings plan from January 1, 2002 through December 31, 2005.

4
3.5

2
1.5
1
0.5

QE offered to all nonenrolled employees

2.5

QE permanently adopted
at new employee orientation

3
QE trial at new employee
orientation begins

Average employee contribution rate
(percent of pay)

4.5

Jul-08

Jan-08

Jul-07

Jan-07

Jul-06

Jan-06

Jul-05

Jan-05

Jul-04

Jan-04

Jul-03

Jan-03

Jul-02

Jan-02

0

Figure 5. Average before-tax plus after-tax contribution rate by date, Company A. Nonparticipants are included in the average as contributing zero. The sample is employees who were
actively employed by Company A and eligible to participate in the savings plan in a given
month.

Percent enrolled in savings plan

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

3

6

9

12

15

18

21

24

27

30

33

Time since baseline (months)
Standard enrollment (2000)

Standard enrollment (2001)

Standard enrollment (2002)

Quick Enrollment (2003)

Figure 6. Savings plan enrollment rate among initially non-enrolled cohorts, Company B.
Each cohort is the set of savings-plan-eligible employees who were not enrolled as of March 1,
2000 or February 1 of 2001, 2002, or 2003. Time since baseline is the number of months elapsed
since March 1, 2000 or February 1 of 2001, 2002, or 2003. Employees are dropped from the
sample at a given month if they have left the company.

14
12
10
8
6
4
2

Dec-06

Sep-06

Jun-06

Mar-06

Dec-05

Sep-05

Jun-05

Mar-05

Dec-04

Sep-04

Jun-04

Mar-04

Dec-03

Sep-03

Jun-03

Mar-03

Dec-02

0
Sep-02

Percent of participants under 6% in prior
month moving to 6% this month

16

Figure 7. Percent of participants below a 6% total contribution rate at the end of the prior
month who move to a 6% total contribution rate this month, Company B. The sample in
each month is restricted to employees eligible for the savings plan in that month who contributed
a positive amount less than 6% of pay to the savings plan at the end of the previous month.

7.0
6.5

QE and EE mailings

5.5
5.0
4.5

QE and EE mailings

6.0
QE mailing

Average employee contribution rate
(percent of pay)

7.5

Nov-06

Aug-06

May-06

Feb-06

Nov-05

Aug-05

May-05

Feb-05

Nov-04

Aug-04

May-04

Feb-04

Nov-03

Aug-03

May-03

Feb-03

Nov-02

Aug-02

4.0

Figure 8. Average before-tax plus after-tax contribution rate, Company B. The sample is
employees continuously employed and eligible for the savings plan from August 2002 to
December 2006.

