                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SCHOOL QUALITY AND THE BLACK-WHITE ACHIEVEMENT GAP

                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                          Steven G. Rivkin

                                        Working Paper 12651
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12651


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




Support for this work has been provided by the Packard Humanities Institute. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2006 by Eric A. Hanushek and Steven G. Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
School Quality and the Black-White Achievement Gap
Eric A. Hanushek and Steven G. Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 12651
October 2006
JEL No. H4,H7,I2,J15,J7,I1

                                                ABSTRACT

Substantial uncertainty exists about the impact of school quality on the black-white achievement gap.
Our results, based on both Texas Schools Project (TSP) administrative data and the Early Childhood
Longitudinal Survey (ECLS), differ noticeably from other recent analyses of the black-white achievement
gap by providing strong evidence that schools have a substantial effect on the differential. The majority
of the expansion of the achievement gap with age occurs between rather than within schools, and specific
school and peer factors exert a significant effect on the growth in the achievement gap. Unequal distributions
of inexperienced teachers and of racial concentrations in schools can explain all of the increased achievement
gap between grades 3 and 8. Moreover, non-random sample attrition for school changers and much
higher rates of special education classification and grade retention for blacks appears to lead to a significant
understatement of the increase in the achievement gap with age within the ECLS and other data sets.

Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu

Steven G. Rivkin
Amerst College
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 5000
Amherst, MA 01002-5000
and NBER
sgrivkin@amherst.edu
    Schools, Peers, and the Black-White Achievement Gap
                            By Eric A. Hanushek and Steven G. Rivkin

         Cognitive skills appear strongly correlated with black and white gaps in school attainment

and in wages, and this has motivated aggressive policies to raise the quality of education for

blacks. 1 The landmark decision in Brown v Board of Education that attacked racial segregation of

schools was the modern beginning of concerted federal, state, and local actions directed at

improving black achievement. 2 Along with subsequent court cases, Brown ushered in a profound

change in both school and peer characteristics, while contemporaneous increases in school

spending, brought on in part by school finance litigation, further raised the resources devoted to

black students in the public schools. Nonetheless, racial disparities have been stubbornly resistant

to policy, raising the possibility that schools really cannot be effective policy instruments. 3

         Table 1 provides a stark picture of the black-white differences in academic, economic, and

social outcomes that have survived the schooling policies of the last decades. Among men and

women 20 to 24 years old, blacks are far less likely to complete or be in the process of completing

college, far less likely to work, and far more likely to be in prison or other institution. The rates of

incarceration and non-employment for young black men paint a particularly dire picture.

         These outcomes, combined with the weak and often contradictory statistical evidence on

the effects of specific school policies on achievement, raise substantial doubts that schools are an

important determinant of achievement inequality. 4 Moreover, recent research generally provides


1
  O'Neill (1990) and Neal and Johnson (1996) provide evidence on wage differences, and Rivkin (1995)
provides evidence on differences in educational attainment and employment.
2
   Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
3
   Neal (2006) documents black-white gaps in both quantity and quality of schooling and shows evidence
that convergence of earlier periods slowed or stopped in the 1980s and 1990s.
4
   Earlier optimism about narrowing gaps (Jencks and Phillips (1998)) largely dissipated with new evidence
that the black-white achievement gap stayed constant or even grew during the 1990s (National Center for
Education Statistics (2005)). In terms of the specific policies that have been pursued, direct evidence on the
benefits of school desegregation remains limited. Review of the evidence surrounding desegregation actions
provides limited support for positive achievement effects (Schofield (1995)); Guryan (2004) does, however,
find that desegregation reduced the probability of dropping out of high school. Accumulated evidence does
not provide strong support for the belief that higher expenditure typically leads to substantial improvements


                                                                                                            2
Table 1. Distribution of 20 to 24 year olds by School Status, Employment Status, Years of Schooling, and
Institutionalization Status in 2000 (percentage by Gender and Race)

                                                                      High School Graduate
                                 High school dropout                                                       College Graduate
                                                           Attending college      Not Attending college                            Total
            Institutionalized
                                  Not                      Not                       Not                    Not                 observations
                                           Employed                  Employed                 Employed               Employed
                                employed                 employed                 employed                employed
Men
 Blacks          14.1%           10.3%        6.7%        12.7%         13.2%      15.0%       23.3%       1.2%       3.8%        10,459
 Whites          2.7%            4.2%         9.5%        13.6%         22.5%       6.3%       29.0%       2.3%       10.0%       53,820

Women
 Blacks          0.9%            10.3%        5.6%        15.6%         20.0%      17.2%       21.3%       2.2%       7.0%        10,728
 Whites          0.3%            6.4%         4.7%        13.9%         26.8%       9.8%       19.5%       3.1%       15.5%       50,664

Note: Row percentages add to 100 percent.
Source: Author calculations from Census 2000 Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS).
additional support for that view. For example, Fryer and Levitt (2004, 2005) find that a substantial

racial achievement gap exists at entry to school and increases with age but that the majority of the

increase occurs within schools and is not explained by quantifiable school characteristics. 5

Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2005) document a large third grade achievement gap in North

Carolina that does not increase with schooling. Our past work, on the other hand, highlights

substantial achievement impacts of specific peer and teacher inputs whose distributions differ

substantially by race, suggesting possible school based explanations of at least a portion of the

black-white achievement differences. 6

         We trace the racial achievement gap as it evolves from kindergarten to the end of middle

school and are able largely to reconcile the disparate findings. The resolution involves several

elements. First, prior analyses have not accurately decomposed changes in the racial gap with age,

and correction of this decomposition alters the basic picture. Second, a variety of survey

difficulties, non-uniform measurement errors over time, and differential missing test data lead to

substantial distortions in the apparent racial achievement gaps that, if uncorrected, mask the true

character of racial gaps. Finally, careful attention to differences in and the effects of specific peer

and school factors yields a clear explanation of the expansion of the gap with age.

         We use data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey (ECLS) – the basis for the

Fryer and Levitt work – for analysis through grade 5 and the Texas Schools Project (TSP) panel

data for grades 3 through 8. Although the richer and more extensive TSP data offer the clearest

picture of school influences, they are not nationally representative and do not provide achievement

results in the earliest grades.


in the quality of instruction, particularly with regard to higher pay for teachers with a masters degree or
substantial experience (Hanushek (2003)).
5
  Note that Murnane, Willett, Bub, and McCartney (2005) cannot replicate either the basic school patterns of
the achievement gap or the influence of measured family background on the gaps when they go to a different,
but in some ways richer, data base. Neal (2006) finds little evidence of a growing gap past entry to school and
discounts the role of schools in either creating or ameliorating any gaps.




                                                                                                             3
        Differences in the achievement distributions for blacks and whites at school entry

complicate comparisons if growth rates differ systematically by initial achievement either due to

actual differences in skill acquisition or limitations in the measurement of achievement. Several

hypotheses have been offered that suggest that the gap may grow more rapidly for initially high

achieving blacks. On the one hand, blacks who excel in the early grades may face the strongest peer

pressure against academic success. Alternatively, higher achieving blacks may fall further from the

center of their school’s achievement distribution and be less likely to participate in an academic

program that facilitates continued excellence. 7 Importantly, we consider the effects of test

measurement error and regression to the mean on the pattern of racial achievement differences.

         Our results differ sharply from the other recent analyses of the black-white achievement

gap. First, we find that the majority of the expansion of the achievement gap with age occurs

between rather than within schools in both the ECLS and TSP data. The contrast with the findings

of Fryer and Levitt (2005) appears to result from a problem with their achievement decomposition.

Second, we find that identifiable school factors – the rate of student turnover, the proportion of

teachers with little or no experience, and student racial composition – explain much of the growth

in the achievement gap between grades 3 and 8 in Texas schools. Unfortunately, the structure of

the ECLS does not permit the estimation of the causal effects of these variables for the grades and

test instruments in that sample. Nonetheless, the similar race differences in school and peer

characteristics in the TSP and ECLS data and the much larger increases in the between-school

component of the racial achievement gap in the early ECLS grades suggest the impact of schools is

likely to be as large if not larger in the earlier grades.

         Importantly, a comparison of the TSP data and the ECLS strongly suggests that nonrandom


6
  Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004a) investigate the effects of student mobility, Rivkin, Hanushek, and
Kain (2005) investigate the effects of teacher experience, and Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2006) investigate
the effects of racial composition.
7
  Fryer and Levitt (2005) consider a related hypothesis through comparing performances of blacks and whites
on alternative cognitive tests and suggest that blacks may indeed be doing more poorly on tests of higher




                                                                                                          4
attrition due in large part to student and family mobility leads the ECLS to understate significantly

the increase in the achievement gap with age. In addition, the much higher rates of special

education classification and grade retention for blacks, particularly for boys, indicates that the

select sample of tested students provides an incomplete picture of the academic difficulties

experienced by blacks relative to whites in both administrative and survey data.

        The next section describes the ECLS and TSP data sets used in this analysis. Section 2

documents changes in the racial achievement gap with age for all blacks and whites and by initial

achievement and gender. This section also decomposes the gap into within-and between-school

components to illustrate the potential importance of schools in explaining growth in the

achievement differential. Section 3 describes the empirical model and estimates of the effects of

specific school and peer factors on achievement. The final section summarizes the findings and

discusses potential implications for policy.

1. ECLS and TSP Data
        This paper employs both the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey Kindergarten Cohort

(ECLS) and Texas Schools Project (TSP) data sets in the investigation of the black-white

achievement gap. The ECLS is designed to be a nationally representative sample for grades K-5,

and the TSP data contain administrative information on the universe of Texas public school

students for grades 3-8. Together these data span the elementary and middle school years, and the

stacked panels contained in the TSP data facilitate the estimation of school and peer group effects

on achievement.

A. ECLS Data

        The ECLS is a survey of the National Center for Education Statistics that is designed to

provide extensive information on the early school years. To date six waves of data have been

collected, beginning with the base year kindergarten survey in fall 1998. Follow-up surveys were



order skills. Murnane, Willett, Bub, and McCartney (2005) further question the impact of test content and
score calculations on the pattern of achievement gaps.


                                                                                                            5
completed in the spring of kindergarten, the spring of the subsequent academic year and every two

years thereafter for all students and in the fall of the year following kindergarten for a much smaller

sub-sample. Students remaining with their cohort were thus surveyed twice in kindergarten, once or

twice in first grade, in third grade, and in fifth grade. Because the fall survey for the first grade was

administered to only a subset of students, we do not use information from that wave.

        Importantly, only a sub-sample of students who changed schools was included in the

follow-up waves. Given the high mobility rate of blacks and difficulties tracking some movers, this

sampling approach potentially contaminates racial achievement comparisons. As we illustrate

below, it appears that nonrandom selection into the follow-up waves distorts the black-white

comparisons in ways that understate the growth of the achievement gap with age.

        Standardized mathematics and reading tests were administered in each of the waves along

with child surveys that elicit information on race, ethnicity, family financial circumstances,

parental education and employment, and a number of other variables. Information on teacher,

school, and student demographics was also collected from schools and teachers each academic year,

and sampling weights were provided in order to make the data nationally representative.

        A two stage adaptive testing procedure was used to measure achievement. Students first

completed a short pretest that sorted them into categories on the basis of the number correct.

Students were administered different tests depending upon the pretest score, and test administrators

used item response theory algorithms to grade the examinations. Theoretically the tests are

vertically scaled such that a given point differential reflects a given difference in knowledge

throughout the scale regardless of whether the differential reflects different scores on the same test

or results for different grades.

        Because of the relatively small sample size, limited and potentially noisy information on

family background, and concerns about the possibility of omitted variables bias that cannot be

mitigated using the panel data techniques employed in the analysis of the TSP data, we do not use

the ECLS data in the estimation of school, peer, and teacher effects. Rather we use the test scores to


                                                                                                       6
describe the evolution of the racial achievement gap for this cohort and use the information on

teachers and peers to characterize racial differences in the school environment.

B. TSP Data

        The TSP data set is a unique stacked panel of school administrative data constructed by the

UTD Texas Schools Project. The data we employ track the universe of Texas public elementary

students as they progress through school. For each cohort there are over 200,000 students in over

3,000 public schools. Unlike many data sets that sample only small numbers from each school,

these data enable us to create accurate measures of peer group characteristics. We use data on four

cohorts for grades three (the earliest grade tested) through eight. The most recent cohort attended

8th grade in 2002, while the earliest cohort attended 8th grade in 1999.

        The student data contain a limited number of student, family, and program characteristics

including race, ethnicity, gender, and eligibility for a free or reduced price lunch (the measure of

economic disadvantage). The panel feature of the data, however, is exploited to account implicitly

for a more extensive set of background characteristics through the use of a value added framework

that controls for prior achievement. Importantly, students who switch schools can be followed as

long as they remain in a Texas public school.

        Beginning in 1993, the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) was administered

each spring to eligible students enrolled in grades three through eight. The tests, labeled criteria

referenced tests, evaluate student mastery of grade-specific subject matter. This paper presents

results for mathematics. Because the number of questions and average percent right varies across

time and grades, test results are standardized to a mean of zero and variance equal to one.

        Notice that the persistence of a constant differential in terms of relative score does not

imply a constant knowledge gap. If the variance in knowledge grows with age and time in school,

as we believe most likely, any deterioration in the relative standing of blacks on the achievement

tests would understate the increase in knowledge inequality.

        The student database is linked to teacher and school information. The school data contain


                                                                                                       7
detailed information on teachers including grade and subject taught, class size, years of experience,

highest degree, race, gender, and student population served. Although individual student-teacher

matches are not possible, students and teachers are uniquely related to a grade on each campus.

Students are assigned the average class size and the distribution of teacher characteristics for

teachers in regular classrooms for the appropriate grade, school, subject, and year.

3. The Facts about Racial Achievement Gaps

        Beginning with the “Coleman report,” Equality of Educational Opportunity (Coleman et al.

(1966)), test score decompositions have been used to learn about the contribution of schools to the

variation in achievement. The logic is simply that school policies mainly affect differences across

schools, so a finding that only a small proportion of achievement variance occurs between schools

is suggestive of a limited role of schools as opposed to family and other factors that vary both

within and between schools. There are of course reasons why this rough logic might fail, 8 but it is

a useful starting point for understanding the basic pattern of achievement gaps.

         Fryer and Levitt (2004, (2005) report that most of the black-white achievement differences

lie within schools, but their approach fails to capture accurately the contributions of the within- and

between-school components. Although there is a simple and well-known decomposition of the

variance of achievement into between- and within-school components, this calculation does not

carry over to consideration of the mean achievement gap. Specifically, except in the special and

uninteresting case of identical enrollment shares for blacks and whites across schools, the

between-school component of the mean gap does not equal the average overall gap minus average

within school gap as captured by the coefficient on an indicator for blacks from a school fixed

effect achievement regression. Given the uneven distribution of whites and blacks among schools,

this calculation produces erroneous measures of the within- and between- school contributions by


8
  In particular, sorting by families and teachers leads to systematic differences in family and community
background among schools that is correlated to school and teacher quality, and differences in the quality of
instruction exist within schools (see, for example, Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)).



                                                                                                           8
ignoring the implications of the distribution of blacks and whites among schools.

         An example illustrates the problem with setting the between-school component equal to

the overall gap minus the fixed effect coefficient. Consider a sample of 1,000 schools where all but

one is completely segregated. The fixed effect estimator of the “within” component of the

achievement gap would come entirely from the single school containing both black and white

students. This one school has virtually no effect on the overall gap and no information on the

difference between the segregated black and white schools. Nonetheless, if the within school

difference in this one school happened to be larger than the overall gap, this approach would imply

that the between-school contribution was negative and that differences among schools actually

reduced the overall achievement gap.

         Equation (1) shows the appropriate weighting of the two components such that the

between-school component (first term in brackets) and the within-school component (second term

in brackets) adds up to the racial difference in average achievement ( Aw − Ab ). 9 The first term

shows explicitly how differences in the distributions of blacks and whites among schools with

different average levels of achievement determines the between-school component, where nds/nd is

the share of demographic group d in school s. 10

                           n ws        n           ⎛ 1    1 ⎞
(1)       Aw − Ab = [∑          As − ∑ bs As ] + [⎜⎜    +   ⎟⎟∑ ( Aws − Abs )α s (1 − α s )ns ]
                       s   nw        s nb          ⎝ n w nb ⎠ s

The second term is a weighted average of black-white achievement differences within each school,

where αs equals the proportion of the black and white students in school s who are black and 1- αs

equals the proportion who are white. Notice that the weight for school s is neither proportional to

the school’s share of total enrollment of blacks or whites nor its share of enrollment in schools with

both blacks and whites. Rather the weight for school s depends non-linearly on both total



9
 The appendix provides a derivation of this decomposition.
10
  nb is the total number of black students, and nbs is the number of black students in school s, with parallel
definitions for white students (w).


                                                                                                                 9
enrollment and the distribution by race: schools with higher total enrollment and more equal

enrollment shares receive greater weight. Notice that in a decomposition based on equation (1) the

within school contribution in the above example with the single integrated school would approach

zero, meaning that essentially all of the differential would correctly be attributed to the

between-school component.

A. Different Views of Average Black-white Achievement Differences

        Table 2 decomposes the black-white achievement gap into within- and between-school

components using the sample of students in the ECLS with a complete set of test scores and

applying the sampling weights relevant for students who participated in the five waves used in this

paper. 11 The top row shows that the overall gap begins at 5.4 points and increases by 2.5 points

during kindergarten, 4.4 points during first grade, 5.7 points during grades two and three, and by

1.4 points during grades four and five. Although the gap continues to widen through fifth grade, the

pace slows following first grade.

        The second row shows that virtually all of the grade-to-grade increases in the overall gap

occur between schools. The increase in the between-school component accounts for 12.8 points out

of the total increase of 14 points throughout the period. Note that if we instead relied on the black

coefficient from a school fixed effect regression in the decomposition, the within-school

component would appear to increase by 11 points, accounting for almost 80 percent of the overall

gap during this period. 12

        Table 3 reports mean scores for grades 3, 5, and 8 from the TSP data calculated over all

test-takers and over those who remain with their initial cohort for all grades. 13 (Note that these



11
    Scores are scaled according to item response theory (IRT), permitting them to be equated across grades.
These calculations use the sampling weights from the survey (where the decomposition follows equation 1
based on weighted student counts for each school). Calculations not using the sampling weights are very
similar in both magnitude and pattern.
12
    This is very similar to the pattern estimated by Fryer and Levitt.
13
   We do not report all grades, because movement from elementary to junior high or middle school produces
a great deal of temporary test volatility in grades 6 and 7 that disappears within a year following the
transition.


                                                                                                        10
Table 2. U.S. Average Black-white Math Test Score Gap from ECLS
(average white score minus average black score)

                                                                 Grade
                                K (fall)       K (spring)          1               3                5
Overall                          5.4              7.9             12.3            18.0             19.4
Between school                   4.0              6.2             10.3            15.0             16.8
Within school                    1.4              1.8             2.0             3.1              2.6

  Race coefficient from
 regression with school           4.5             6.0             8.8             15.8             15.6
      fixed effects

Observations
 blacks                         1,165            1,276           1,283           1,249             1,249
 whites                         5,972            6,520           6,535           6,439             6,410

Note: Scores are calculated in ECLS according to Item Response Theory. Averages calculated with sample
weights to account for non-random aspects of sampling and attrition.




Table 3. Texas Average Black-white Math Test Score Gap from TSP
                               intact cohort                             entire sample
                                   grade                                     grade
                        3           5             8              3              5          8
Overall               0.59        0.65          0.70            0.70          0.73        0.76
Between school        0.19        0.25          0.28            0.24          0.27        0.31
Within school         0.39        0.40          0.42            0.46          0.46        0.44

Observations
 blacks             87,941      87,941         87,941         145,282      143,524       142,073
 whites             336,948     336,948        336,948        503,835      507,789       497,924


Note: Standardized test scores (mean=0, s.d.=1) from TAAS.
comparisons are calculated in terms of standard deviations, because no IRT scores are available for

the Texas tests). 14

         A comparison of the gaps produced by the repeated cross sections (right panel) and the

sample of students with a complete set of test observations who progress with their class (left panel)

highlights the importance of grade retention, special program assignment, and other factors that

determine test taking patterns. The probability of grade retention and of special education

classification is higher for those in the lower portion of the achievement distribution, implying that

blacks in the complete cohort sample will tend be a more select group than whites in the complete

cohort sample. Across grades, the sample of blacks will tend to have been in school longer on

average than whites because of grade retention, and this works to narrow the black-white gap when

taken as a snapshot at a given grade level. Both the lower 3rd grade test score gap and larger increase

in the gap between 3rd and 8th grade for the complete cohort sample can be attributed to these

differences in grade retention and special education classification.

         In the complete panel sample, the gap rises from 0.59 standard deviations at the end of 3rd

grade to 0.65 in 5th grade and to 0.70 in 8th grade. The pattern of achievement gap change is similar

to that observed in the ECLS. Not only does the yearly rate of increase diminish with age, but also

the between-school component accounts for over 75 percent of the change in the gap between third

and eighth grades (0.09 of the 0.11 total increase).

         Although the purposeful sorting of families into communities and school districts means

that family and community factors contribute to the between school gaps, the patterns observed in

Tables 2 and 3 leave open the possibility that school quality differences account for much of the

rise in the racial achievement gap during the elementary and middle school years.

B. Differences by Initial Achievement

         Tables 2 and 3 show that the growth in the average black-white achievement gap declines


14
   Murnane, Willett, Bub, and McCartney (2005) suggest that the different units of analysis can affect the
results, but we have no way to deal with that issue here.


                                                                                                        11
with age and occurs predominantly between schools, but an important question is whether the

changes are similar across the initial achievement distribution. Investigating such heterogeneity is

complicated by the fact that test scores measure actual knowledge with error, meaning that the

kindergarten or third grade scores are not perfectly correlated with knowledge. If students are

categorized by their initial scores and if test measurement errors are uncorrelated over time, those

placed in high achievement categories will tend to draw less positive errors in the subsequent year,

while those placed in the lower categories will tend to draw more positive errors in the subsequent

year. Consequently regression to the mean will account for a portion of the observed difference in

test score changes across categories.

        Such regression to the mean also complicates black-white comparisons because of

differences in the actual initial skill distribution. Table 4 illustrates the general problem using a

stylized trivariate distribution of actual skill and measurement error that is randomly distributed

and does not differ by race. The top panel reports the assumed distributions of actual skill for blacks

and whites, where the distribution for blacks is more concentrated in the lower categories than the

distribution for whites. The bottom panel describes the resulting distribution of observed test

scores, where Pij is the probability that a student with true ability in category i is observed in

category j (e.g., PLH is the probability that someone with low ability will have an observed test score

in the high ability category). Comparison of the top and bottom panels shows that the observed test

score distributions distort the actual race differences in skill even with the assumption of random

measurement error distributions that do not differ by race. A higher proportion of whites than

blacks are misclassified into the lowest observed skill category, while the opposite is true for the

highest observed skill category. Such systematic misclassification leads to higher expected

achievement gains for whites than blacks throughout the distribution as a result of the regression to

the mean phenomenon.

        The pattern illustrated in Table 4 invalidates the simple categorization of students on the

basis of initial test scores. To overcome this problem, we use a test in a different subject to


                                                                                                        12
Table 4. Simulated Observed and Actual Test Score Distributions for Blacks and
Whites (Pij = probability of being actual category i but observed as category j)

Initial Actual Skill Distributions
                                     Low   Middle       High
       Blacks                        0.4   0.4          0.2
       Whites                        0.2   0.4          0.4

Observed Test distribution
      Blacks
             Low             0.4*PLL + (0.4*PML + 0.2*PHL)
             Middle          0.4*PMM + (0.4*PLM + 0.2*PHM)
             High            0.2*PHH + (0.4*PLH + 0.4*PMH)
      Whites
             Low             0.2*PLL + (0.4*PML + 0.4*PHL)
             Middle          0.4*PMM + (0.2*PLM + 0.4*PHM)
             High            0.4*PHH + (0.2*PLH + 0.4*PMH)
categorize students by initial mathematics skill level, based on the assumptions of positive

correlations across subjects in true skill and of no correlation in the test measurement errors across

subjects. This scheme severs the link between initial category and expected difference in the error

realizations for the initial and subsequent periods.

         Table 5 and Figures 1 and 2 report changes with age in the overall and between-school

components of the black-white achievement gap in mathematics for the ECLS and TSP samples,

respectively. The ECLS sample is divided into six initial achievement categories on the basis of

kindergarten reading scores, and Table 5 shows that the black-white gap increases much more prior

to 3rd grade than between 3rd and 5th grade except for the highest category where the gap declines

following 1st grade and in the period as a whole. 15 Although the largest increase occurs in the

bottom category, the overall increase in the lower five categories does not vary much by initial

reading achievement. Finally, the bulk of the overall changes in all categories results from

between- rather than within-school changes.

         Similar to the national trends from the ECLS for grades K thru 5, Figure 1 shows that

growth in the achievement gap for the TSP sample tends to be noticeably larger in the earlier grades

(3rd to 5th). 16 However, in contrast to the pattern observed in Table 5, Figure 1 reveals a pronounced

ordering in the magnitude of change by initial achievement categories, particularly following 5th

grade (solid bars). Between grades 5 and 8 the overall gap increases in only one of the seven bottom

categories and by only 0.01 standard deviations, while the gap increases by at least 0.05 standard

deviations in all but one of the next six groups and by at least 0.09 standard deviations in the top

three groups. For the grade span as whole, the gap increases by at least 0.25 standard deviations in

the top three groups, between 0.17 and 0.21 in five of the next 6 groups, and by less than 0.10 in the

seven lowest categories.


15
   We use the spring kindergarten rather than the fall kindergarten test to divide students in the ECLS because
of the lack of dispersion in the fall kindergarten reading test distribution. The distribution of scores and
evolution of the racial achievement gaps by kindergarten reading category are found in Appendix Table a1.
16
   Appendix Table a1 reports the overall and between school gaps for the TSP sample.


                                                                                                           13
Table 5. U.S. Average Black-white Math Test Score Gap by Spring
Kindergarten Reading Test Score Category from ECLS

                             Spring Kindergarten reading test score category
                         1          2          3          4          5       6
 Overall
 kindergarten           2.2         3.6         4.9         6.1        5.4       8.2
 1st grade              5.7         6.4         7.8         9.7        13.7      10.4
 3rd grade             14.9        12.8        15.1        13.0        15.6      9.4
 5th grade             16.8        14.1        15.7        13.3        15.6      6.6

 Between School
 kindergarten    2.3                3.0         3.8         5.4        5.3       7.4
 1st grade       5.6                5.5         6.2         8.1        13.2      9.2
 3rd grade      14.4               10.8        12.8        11.0        14.6      8.6
 5th grade      16.1               11.9        13.1        11.0        14.7      6.6

 Observations
 blacks                208         412         324          170        65        39
 whites                382        1,315       2,078        1,567       562       218


Notes: Students are categorized by kindergarten reading score. Scores are divided into 20 intervals of equal
length with results reported for categories with at least 30 blacks. (Because the IRT scaling spans all grades,
the top categories are not relevant for kindergarten). Cell sizes fluctuate slightly from grade to grade.
                                               Figure 1. 3rd to 5th Grade and 5th to 8th Grade Changes in the Math
                                                         Achievement Gap by 3rd Grade Reading Category

                               0.20




                               0.15




                               0.10
Increase in b-w gap (s.d.'s)




                               0.05                                                                                             3rd to 5th gap change
                                                                                                                                5th to 8th gap change



                               0.00
                                       1   2     3    4    5   6     7      8      9      10      11   12   13   14   15   16



                               -0.05




                               -0.10
                                                                   3rd Grade Reading Category
                                                                     (lowest = 1, highest = 16)
                                   Figure 2. Between School Changes in the Math Achievement Gap by 3rd Grade
                                                               Reading Category



                               0.20




                               0.15
Increase in b-w gap (s.d.'s)




                               0.10




                                                                                                                           3rd to 5th gap change
                               0.05
                                                                                                                           5th to 8th gap change



                               0.00
                                       1   2   3   4   5    6     7      8     9     10      11   12   13   14   15   16



                               -0.05




                               -0.10
                                                                3rd Grade Reading Category
        Similar to the pattern observed in the ECLS sample, Figure 2 shows that between-school

changes account for the bulk of the overall changes observed between 3rd and 5th grade in Texas

across the initial reading achievement distribution. However, following 5th grade there is a marked

divergence in the impacts of the between-school component by 3rd grade reading category. The

between-school gap actually declined in each of the bottom seven categories, and in six of the

seven this decline leads to a reduction in the overall differential despite offsetting changes in the

within-school component in most. In contrast, the between-school gap does not fall in any of the

remaining groups and tends to move in the same direction as the within-school changes.

Consequently the overall gap increases for students in the upper reading achievement categories,

though as previously noted the magnitude of the gap expansion following 5th grade tends to be

much smaller than the changes observed between grades 3 and 5.

C. Differences by Gender

        The recent widening of the gender gap in high school and college completion, which is

particularly pronounced for blacks, raises the possibility of a gender differential in the evolution of

the elementary school achievement gap. Appendix Tables a2 and a3 report overall gender

differences for the ECLS and TSP samples, respectively, and Appendix Tables a4 and a5 report

gender differences by initial reading achievement.

        The tables provide little or no evidence of differential patterns by gender, and particularly

no evidence of a sharp drop in the relative achievement of black boys during these grades. This

holds across the initial reading achievement distribution and for both total changes and the

within-and between-school components.

D. Nonrandom attrition and test taking

        Nonrandom attrition from the samples of students with test results potentially complicates

the measurement of the black-white achievement gap including differences by gender in both the

ECLS and TSP data. Nonrandom sampling in follow-up surveys, race differences in special

education classification and grade retention, and other sources of missing test data have the


                                                                                                    14
potential to distort achievement comparisons and understate academic difficulties experienced by

many students (as previously shown in Table 3).

        The high rate of school transfers for blacks elevates the importance of sampling a

representative set of movers in the ECLS, and the test score pattern observed in Appendix Table a6

for students who remain in the sample for all five waves raises doubts that the ECLS succeeded in

procuring a 50 percent random sub-sample of movers in the follow-up surveys. 17 In contrast to

white movers whose average scores are slightly lower than those of stayers, blacks who move

between first and third grade score significantly higher on average than non-movers and those who

switch schools in other periods. This achievement pattern seems particularly unlikely, because the

2000 U.S. Census shows that average income, mother’s education, and the probability of living in a

two parent household were far lower for black children 6 to 8 years old who switched residences

within the previous year than for black children who did not move. 18 The ECLS pattern also differs

markedly from the pattern observed for public school switchers in Texas (see Appendix Table a7)

and suggests that its included black movers are a biased sample of all blacks who switched schools

during these grades. Moreover, the sampled black movers tend to realize substantial academic

gains with age relative to other blacks, in sharp contrast both to the whites in the ECLS and to

Texas movers who tend to lose ground relative to non-movers.

        The apparent ECLS sampling difficulties highlight the value of being able to track school

switchers with administrative data, but such tracking does not insulate the TSP data from all causes

of nonrandom selection. As Texas public school students age the racial gap in remaining on grade

and having a test widens, particularly for boys. A substantially higher percentage of black than

white boys is retained in grade each year, and the race differential in the proportion of boys excused

from test taking due to special education classification exceeds ten percentage points (Appendix


17
    The intent was to movers whose first language was English at a rate of 50 percent and other movers at a
slightly higher rate.




                                                                                                        15
Table a8). Those excused from the test or retained score far lower on average than other students in

the previous year (see Appendix Table a9), meaning that the attrition from the test sample almost

certainly attenuates estimates of the achievement gap and its growth with age.

        Clearly the test data provide only a partial measure of academic progress, and we attempt

to provide a more complete picture by describing the special education and retention patterns for

the entire elementary and middle school experience. Table 6 describes the joint distributions of

special education classification and retention by race and gender for grades K thru 8. Both retention

and special education classification are considerably higher for blacks, particularly for boys. By

middle school over one quarter of black boys receive special services, almost twice the rate for

white boys or black girls. In addition, the high failure rates, concentrated in grades one and seven,

highlight the lack of academic progress for many black boys.

        In sum, the test score patterns and rates of special education and retention depict a sizeable

deficiency in academic progress for black girls and an even larger deficit for black boys. Although

the largest increases in the test score gap occur in the early school years, the nonrandom selection

out of the test sample would appear to lower the observed growth in the gap in later grades from

what it would be in the absence of such attrition. Moreover, the high rates of retention in the early

grades mean that many can quit school legally close to the beginning or even prior to the start of

high school, raising doubts that surveys of high school students provide a valid comparison of the

academic progress of blacks and whites.

4. School and Peer Effects on Achievement Gaps

        A key issue is the extent to which specific teacher and school variables account for the

growth in the achievement gap during the school years. Although some recent studies including

Fryer and Levitt (2004) have not found that observed school factors account for much if any of the

growth in the achievement gap, these results are inconsistent with other research that highlights the


18
   From the 2000 Census data, within state movers come, for example, from families with a single parent 60
percent of the time and 18 percent have less than a high school education. For nonmovers, the comparable


                                                                                                       16
Table 6. Distribution of Texas Public School Students by Special Education and Grade Retention Status,
by Race, Gender, and Grade


                                                                        Grade
                                          1       2       3       4               5       6       7       8
Boys
Blacks
1. Not retained/not special education   78.9%   80.9%   77.8%   75.5%           73.4%   71.4%   70.1%   72.5%
2. Not retained/special education        8.2%   14.6%   18.4%   22.7%           25.3%   25.6%   25.1%   25.2%
3. Retained/not special education       10.2%   3.5%    2.9%    1.4%            0.9%    2.4%    3.9%    1.7%
4. Retained/special education            2.8%   1.0%    0.9%    0.4%            0.5%    0.6%    0.9%    0.6%
Whites
1. Not retained/not special education   80.5%   83.0%   81.4%   11.2%           80.9%   80.9%   80.6%   82.0%
2. Not retained/special education       10.7%   14.8%   16.9%   18.0%           18.3%   17.6%   17.2%   16.7%
3. Retained/not special education        0.2%   1.4%    1.1%    0.5%            0.5%    1.1%    1.7%    0.9%
4. Retained/special education            2.6%   0.7%    0.7%    0.3%            0.3%    0.4%    0.5%    0.4%
Girls
Blacks
1. Not retained/not special education   86.9%   90.0%   88.1%   87.0%           85.4%   84.3%   83.6%   85.3%
2. Not retained/special education        4.1%   7.2%    9.2%    11.8%           13.7%   14.1%   13.8%   13.3%
3. Retained/not special education        7.7%   2.6%    2.3%    1.0%            0.6%    1.3%    2.4%    1.1%
4. Retained/special education            1.3%   0.5%    0.5%    0.2%            0.2%    0.3%    0.3%    0.3%
Whites
1. Not retained/not special education   88.5%   90.5%   89.6%   89.6%           89.6%   89.7%   89.6%   90.6%
2. Not retained/special education        5.8%   8.0%    9.2%    9.8%            9.9%    9.6%    9.1%    8.6%
3. Retained/not special education        4.3%   1.1%    0.9%    0.4%            0.3%    0.6%    1.0%    0.6%
4. Retained/special education            1.4%   0.4%    0.4%    0.2%            0.2%    0.2%    0.2%    0.2%
significant effects of specific school and peer factors that clearly differ by race.

         Our primary goal here is to assess whether schools have a discernible impact on the growth

of the racial achievement gap. At any grade, the white-black gap in average achievement ( ΔA ) can

be written in terms of underlying mean characteristics ( X ) of whites (w) and blacks (b), the

impacts of these (β) on achievement, and a stochastic term ( ε ) such as:

                            ΔA = A w − A b
         (2)                    = X w β w − X b βb + (ε w − ε b )
                                = ( X w − X b ) β w + ( β w − βb ) X b + (ε w − ε b )

         If X i and β i , i ∈ {w, b} , are vectors of the mean characteristics affecting achievement

and their respective impacts on achievement, the white-black achievement gap can be decomposed

into a weighted difference in mean characteristics and a weighted difference in achievement impact

parameters along with mean stochastic terms, as shown in the last line of Equation (2). Assuming

that the expected value of the mean errors is zero, equation (2) highlights the fact that racial

differences in both characteristics and parameters contribute to the evolution of the

achievement gap. Importantly, if β w ≠ β b , achievement gaps can change over time even if

blacks and whites face the same average inputs within schools.

         We pursue a conservative estimation strategy that concentrates on that portion of the

achievement variance that can be credibly related to the causal influence of specific school factors

previously shown to be significant determinants of achievement and that are distributed differently

by race. Consequently we ignore other factors such as school leadership that are likely distributed

more favorably for whites than blacks. Further, because the ECLS data offer virtually no chance of

identifying the causal impact of any of the school factors, we limit our analysis just to the Texas

data. This is unfortunate because the Texas analysis begins with grade 3 and thus does not include

the earlier grades where there are larger changes in achievement gaps.


figures are 40 percent and 12 percent, respectively.

                                                                                                       17
A. Empirical Model

        A wide range of studies have sought to relate various schooling factors to student outcomes,

but they have had mixed success, especially when viewed from the perspective of causal influences

(see Hanushek (2003)). The central problem in modeling the impact of teacher and school variables

is the non-randomness and interdependence of the allocation of students and teachers among

schools. Both school resources and racial composition, for example, are the outcomes of decisions

made by families, school officials, legislators, and in some cases judges, and these are likely to

interrelate with a range of factors that directly and indirectly influence achievement.

        Equation (3), a specialized version of the general achievement relationships depicted in

equation (2), highlights the key identification issues that must be addressed in the absence of

random assignment. Here achievement (A) for student i in grade G and school siG is modeled as a

function of student, family, teacher, and peer factors:

(3)      AiG = α iG + φ FiG + δ TiGsiG + λ PiGsG + ρ SiGsiG + eiG

where P is a vector of peer variables in grade G, T is a vector of teacher variables, S is a vector of

nonteacher school factors (such as class size), F is a vector of student and family background

variables, α is an individual intercept specific to grade G, and e is a stochastic term capturing other

unmeasured influences.

        If all variables in T, P, and S were uncorrelated with α and e, OLS would yield unbiased

estimates of δ, λ, and ρ (the basic parameters needed to estimate the contribution of the schooling

component in equation 2). But as noted above, the complications inherent in the determination of

peer and school characteristics bolstered by prior empirical evidence strongly suggest that typically

available controls do not account adequately for potentially confounding factors.

        Because the pattern of school, teacher, and peer effects is so inextricably bound up in the

selection of schools by families and school personnel, we focus on the variations in key school

inputs that occur within schools over time to identify the fundamental school related parameters of



                                                                                                     18
interest. In particular, we exploit the stacked panel nature of our data to eliminate the first order

factors that thwart identification of the school parameters.

         Our basic estimation includes full sets of school-by-grade and school attendance

zone-by-year fixed effects in order to isolate exogenous variation in racial composition, teacher

experience, student turnover, and other school inputs. School attendance zones are defined by

middle schools, meaning that there can be more than one elementary school in each zone. 19 These

attendance zone-by-year fixed effects remove in a very general way all variation over time in

neighborhood and local economic conditions that likely affect mobility patterns including such

things as the introduction of new race-related school policies or the myriad changes documented to

occur in “transitional neighborhoods.” An economic shock that reduces neighborhood employment

and income would not bias the estimates; nor would a shock to local school finances or the quality

of the local school board, because each of these would affect all grades in a school. The

school-by-grade fixed effects also account for the possibility that achievement trends vary

systematically with changes in teacher experience, peer turnover, or school racial composition as

students age.

         These fixed effects do not control for any school decisions on classroom placement that

might be related to race or student background. For this analysis, we measure teacher and peer

variables at the grade rather than classroom level, avoiding the complication introduced by the

selective placement of students into classrooms. 20

         In this framework, the remaining variation comes both from mobility induced changes and


19
   It was not computationally feasible to include separate school–by-year fixed effects, but the fact that the
attendance zone-by-year fixed effects have little impact on the middle school estimates when
school-by-grade fixed effects are included indicates that this is highly unlikely to exert a meaningful impact
on the results.
20
   While alternative approaches for dealing with classroom placement would be possible, our data do not
support classroom specific analysis. Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2003) find significant variations in the
racial composition of classrooms by district, school, classroom, and academic track in middle school but
much less so in primary school. They do not address implications for student performance, but given that the
school-by-year and school-by-grade fixed effects account for any persistent placements for a grade and
year-to-year school wide changes, such within-school differences should have minimal effect on the
estimates in this paper.


                                                                                                          19
from persistent cohort-to-cohort differences within schools. Importantly, neither mobility nor

cohort differences are purely random, and evidence indicates the mobility affects both movers and

other students in the destination school. Moreover, the evidence shows that movers tend to have

lower prior achievement, indicating that determinants of learning in prior periods were less

conducive to achievement. Finally, and most important, we know that there are dramatic

differences in the level and pattern of mobility by race (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004a)).

Therefore, we include indicators for both family initiated and structural moves and control for

student differences (captured by α) that may be related to racial composition and student and

teacher turnover.

         One central concern is that the cumulative nature of knowledge acquisition induces bias

whenever school parameters are estimated solely from contemporaneous information. Consider

Equation (4), which recognizes that the individual heterogeneity, α, is a function of prior school

and family variables, peer composition in previous grades, and unobserved “ability,” γ. 21

               G −1                 G −1                 G −1                 G −1                      G −1
(4) α iG = φ   ∑θ
               g =1
                      G−g
                            Fig + δ ∑ θ G − g Tigsig + λ ∑ θ G − g Pigsig + ρ ∑ θ G − g Sigsig + (γ i + ∑ θ G − g γ i )
                                     g =1                g =1                 g =1                      g =1


This formulation captures the possibility that family, teacher, and peer interactions in grades prior

to G establish the knowledge base for learning during grade G and therefore affect achievement at

the end of grade G. In a very general manner, the effects of prior period variables are assumed to

decline exponentially as a function of time from the present at a constant rate (1-θ), where

0 ≤ θ ≤ 1 . 22




21
   Boardman and Murnane (1979) and Todd and Wolpin (2003) also highlight the importance of unobserved
ability and the cumulative nature of learning.
22
   At the extreme of θ =0, past inputs are not relevant for current achievement, i.e., having a good fourth
grade teacher does not have any implications for math achievement at the end of the fifth grade. On the other
hand, θ =1 implies no depreciation of the influence of past inputs, i.e., that the impact of a good fourth grade
teacher on 4th grade achievement equals her impact on 5th grade achievement and achievement in all future
grades. For convenience, we assume that the effects of prior variables decay at the same rate, although this is
not essential for the development below.


                                                                                                                          20
         The term γ captures student differences that remain constant during the schooling years

including early childhood influences, prenatal care, heredity, and other systematic factors. Notice

that our formulation is learning-based in that the value of γ affects the quantity of skills and

knowledge acquired at each grade, and these increments to achievement are subject to depreciation.

This explicitly permits the affects of ability on achievement to increase with age. 23

         Equation (4) includes a mixture of time invariant and time varying individual differences

that could potentially bias estimates of racial composition effects. Panel data on student

achievement permit dealing directly with the most severe problems. We estimate specifications

that include lagged achievement as an independent variable. 24 Prior work using the Texas

administrative data shows that first differenced specifications that account for student fixed effects

and also include school-by-grade fixed effects produce estimates that are very similar to those

produced by specifications with school-by-grade and school-by-year fixed effects 25. Therefore we

use lagged achievement alone to account for unobserved heterogeneity.

B. Baseline Results

         Although the analysis considers commonly studied school factors such as class size,

teacher education and average experience, it focuses more on the effects of student turnover, racial

composition, and initial teacher experience. These latter factors have been identified in our prior

work and that of others as systematic determinants of school achievement and their distributions in




23
    The exact formulation and interpretation depends, however, on the measurement of achievement. If
measured with vertically integrated tests, differences in γ would contribute to a widening of the skill
distribution over time as long as θ were not equal to zero. On the other hand, if skills were measured in
distributional terms (as we do here with standardized scores), the complicated final term in parentheses could
be replaced with γ i , because ability induced differences in relative achievement would remain constant over
time.
24
   We employ this specification because models that use test score gain as the dependent variable or include
student fixed effects without also including lagged achievement as a control impose unrealistic assumptions
on the learning process. Rivkin (2005) compares a number of common, education production function
specifications.
25
   Computational limits preclude the estimation of models that include student, school by grade, and school
by year fixed effects.


                                                                                                          21
some cases likely impacts differ substantially by race. 26 Preliminary work showed no systematic

effect of teacher post-graduate schooling and that the small effect of average experience was driven

by gains made in the early years of teaching (which we consider below).

         Table 7 reports estimates from lagged achievement models with just observables and with

school-by-grade and school-by-year fixed effects, each separately based on elementary and middle

school samples where effects are allowed to vary by race. The regressions are based on a total of

1,448,458 observations, but, because of the dimensionality of the problem, the estimates are

obtained by first aggregating the student level observations to school-grade-race-year cells and

weighting the observations by the number of students in the cell. 27 All specifications include

average lagged test score, the proportions of those eligible for a subsidized lunch, classified as

special needs, female, black, and having a family initiated school change, and indicators for the

first grade offered in a school and grade-by-year. Preliminary work showed that proportions of

students who were Hispanic and Asian were not significantly related to achievement of blacks and

whites and that exclusion of these variables had virtually no effect on the remaining estimates.

Absolute values of t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by school are reported.

         The estimates for both the elementary and middle school samples show that the inclusion

of the fixed effects has its largest impact on the racial composition coefficients, highlighting the

importance of controlling for the myriad factors related to the systematic sorting of teachers and

students among schools. These include both unobserved determinants of learning and differences

in the extent to which the curriculum focuses on tested material. Henceforth we concentrate on the


26
    Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004a) demonstrate that both individual moves and overall school mobility
rates have a direct impact on student performance and differ dramatically between black and white students.
Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005) finds that teacher experience is important in the first two years of a
teaching career (but not thereafter) and that class size has small effects in earlier grades. These patterns are
consistent with a number of other high-quality recent works including Rockoff (2004), Boyd et al. (2005),
and Kane, Rockoff, and Staiger (2006). Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2006) find increased concentration of
black students has a particularly deleterious effect on black achievement. This finding is consistent with
Guryan (2004), Angrist and Lang (2004), and Hanushek and Raymond (2005).
27
    Only black and white nonHispanic students who remain with their cohort and have nonmissing test scores
for grades three through eight are included in the sample, and a small number of observations are excluded



                                                                                                            22
Table 7. Estimated Effects of School and Student Characteristics on
Mathematics Achievement, Texas Public Schools

                                             elementary school                          middle school
                                                           Attendance                                ‘Attendance
                                                        zone-by-year and                           zone-by-year and
                                                        campus-by-grade                            campus-by-grade
                                                          fixed effects                              fixed effects
Black Students
proportion students new to school          -0.097            -0.098                 -0.237             -0.124
                                           (2.07)            (2.10)                 (4.60)             (2.29)

proportion students black                  -0.037            -0.107                 -0.096             -0.163
                                           (1.65)            (3.30)                 (3.38)             (4.12)
Teacher Experience
 proportion 0 years                        -0.133            -0.154                 -0.049             -0.069
                                           (3.47)            (4.76)                 (2.33)             (2.97)

 proportion 1 year                         -0.015            -0.011                 -0.042             -0.046
                                           (0.50)            (0.39)                 (1.44)             (2.37)
White Students
proportion students new to school          -0.064            -0.110                 -0.099             -0.092
                                           (2.90)            (4.24)                 (3.46)             (2.46)

proportion students black                  -0.007            -0.027                 -0.009             -0.077
                                           (0.34)            (1.00)                 (0.45)             (2.08)
Teacher Experience
 proportion 0 years                        -0.086            -0.084                 -0.026             -0.042
                                           (7.52)            (6.34)                 (2.66)             (3.31)

 proportion 1 year                         -0.043            -0.034                 -0.021             -0.012
                                           (3.83)            (2.75)                 (2.10)             (1.26)

      Observationsa                                 34,680                                   20,933

Notes: absolute value of t statistics computed from robust std errors controlling for grouping by school in
parenthesis. All specifications include black and female dummies, indicators for, subsidized lunch eligibility,
special education participation, and a nonstructural move (all fully interacted with black), and a full set of
grade-by-year variables.

a. Observations refer to cells that aggregate the 1,446,458 individual student observations into
school-grade-year-race aggregates of all variables.
fixed effects specifications.

         The estimation results provide strong evidence that higher levels of student turnover

negatively affect achievement and that the impact is comparable for both blacks and whites and

across schooling levels. This mobility externality is consistent with educator concerns about

maintaining a coherent instructional program in the face of high student mobility and is particularly

important given the prevalence of high turnover schools for low income and black students

(Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004a)). Ten percent higher student turnover in a school

(approximately one standard deviation change across schools) results in approximately a 0.01

standard deviation lower annual growth in achievement.

         Having a higher proportion of teachers with little or no experience also adversely affects

achievement,, and the costs are substantially higher for blacks and for elementary school students. 28

The coefficients show that having a new teacher reduces achievement by 0.15 and 0.08 standard

deviations for blacks and whites respectively from what it would be with a teacher with at least two

years of prior experience. The negative impacts of new teachers at middle school are roughly half

as large as these.

         Consistent with other recent work on racial composition, the negative effect of a higher

proportion of black is highly significant for blacks and much larger for blacks than for whites. 29 In

contrast to teacher experience, the magnitude of the proportion black effect on black students

increases with age: a 10 percentage point increase in percentage black reduces achievement by

roughly 0.011 standard deviations in elementary school and by 0.016 standard deviations in middle

school. For whites, racial composition is insignificant at the elementary level, and the comparable



because of missing information on teachers Preliminary work showed that the school-by-grade fixed effect
estimates produced from the cell means were virtually identical to those produced by the student level data.
28
    The underlying cause of the larger impact of new teachers on black students cannot be addressed with our
data. It could reflect that new teachers on average have more difficulty reaching black students or, similar to
Lazear (2001), that the return to experience is disproportionately higher in schools attended by blacks,
perhaps because of higher levels of disruption (for which new teachers are less prepared).
29
   The differential effect of racial composition is consistent with the findings of Guryan (2004), Angrist and
Lang (2004), and Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2006).


                                                                                                           23
middle school impact for a ten percent change in the percentage of schoolmates who are black is

0.008 standard deviations.

         The fixed effect specifications use exogenous variation across cohorts and grades within

schools to quantify the importance of between school differences in teacher and peer characteristics

in explaining the racial achievement gap. Purposeful student and teacher sorting among schools

complicates efforts to isolate credible between-school variation that can be used to identify causal

effects of specific factors. Importantly, the fixed effects approach assumes that estimates based on

the within-school variation accurately reflect the effects of between school differences. The

assumption is potentially problematic in the case of racial composition, where between-school

differences in percent black might be expected to reflect far greater differences in social

environment or other influences on learning. However, prior work finds little or no evidence of

nonlinearities in the effect of school proportion black on achievement and, more importantly, finds

that coefficients identified from non-movers are very similar in magnitude to coefficients identified

from a sample of school switchers (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2006)).

         The impact of these teacher and peer characteristics on the racial achievement gap depends

of course on racial differences in their distributions. Table 8 illustrates the pronounced differences

in the share of teachers with little or no experience, in student turnover, and in student racial

composition in both the ECLS and TSP data. 30 Black students are 4-5 percent more likely to have a

new teacher and also attend schools with a 4-5 percent higher rate of student turnover (percent new

to the school each year). 31 As is well known, even with dramatic improvement after Brown, blacks

remain far more likely than whites to attend school with a high black enrollment share (Welch and

Light (1987), Clotfelter (2004), Rivkin and Welch (2006)). In Texas public schools there is a 28


30
    Although class size is also frequently mentioned for consideration in the early grades, there are virtually
no racial differences in average class size in either the ECLS or TSP data.
31
    These differences for teacher experience are consistent with teacher mobility patterns and are frequently
related to teacher preferences. Schools with higher student turnover and minority enrollment tend to have a
higher proportion of inexperienced teachers (Greenberg and McCall (1974), Murnane (1981), Lankford,
Loeb, and Wyckoff (2002), Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004b)).


                                                                                                            24
Table 8. Black-white Differences in Teacher and Peer Characteristics for ECLS and TSP Samples


                                      United States (3rd grade) [ECLS]          Texas (3rd-8th grade) [TSP]
                                    Blacks    Whites           B-W       Blacks     Whites               B-W
proportion students new to school   0.170     0.130           0.040      0.226       0.181              0.045

teacher experience
 proportion 0 years                  0.079    0.039          0.040       0.095        0.069            0.026

 proportion 1 year                   0.086    0.050          0.036       0.082        0.067            0.015

proportion students black                                                0.361        0.090            0.271

Proportion of students in schools where;
0% students are black                 0.002   0.087          -0.085
0-5% of students are black            0.034   0.544          -0.510
5-10% of students are black           0.023   0.100          -0.077
10-25% of students are black          0.190   0.171           0.019
>25% of students are black            0.750   0.098           0.652
percentage point differential in average black enrollment share, and the ECLS data also provide

clear evidence that blacks are much more likely to attend schools with high black enrollment

shares. 32

         Together the estimates reported in Table 7 and racial gaps in characteristics described in

Table 8 raise the possibility that these three characteristics account for a substantial portion of the

growth in the racial achievement gap. To quantify the impact of these factors, we simulate the

contributions of the differential incidence of each variable to the annual and cumulative

achievement gaps with a framework based on equations 2-4. Table 9 describes annual and

cumulative impacts on achievement gaps obtained by multiplying the coefficients by the changes in

characteristics for whites and blacks necessary to eliminate average race differences in these

variables. 33 All variable effects are assumed to be constant across grades within elementary and

middle schools and to depreciate exponentially at an annual rate of 30 percent (one minus the

coefficient on lagged test score, θ ). Notice that a constant racial difference in a factor and constant

effect for all grades (e.g., student turnover) contributes to an increase in the achievement gap with

age because the simulation captures the cumulative nature of knowledge acquisition.

         Not surprisingly given the size of the black-white differential, the simulation in Table 9

shows that school proportion black accounts for a much larger share of the growth in the gap than

student turnover and teacher experience. Together the latter two cumulatively account for roughly

0.02 standard deviations or about 19 percent of the increase in the achievement gap between grades

3 and 8. On the other hand, the black concentration in schools attended by blacks accounts for

almost 0.1 standard deviations or roughly 83.9 percent of the increase in the gap between 3rd and 8th


32
    The racial composition information in the ECLS data set aggregates all students in schools with 25
percent or more black students into a single category, even though 75 percent of black students in the sample
fall in this top category. See Table 8.
33
   The simulated changes in turnover, racial composition and teacher experience for blacks and whites are
proportional to the black and white enrollment shares, respectively.. Elementary school estimates are used for
grades 4 and 5, and middle school estimates are used for grades 6-8. In Texas, 80 percent of middle schools
include grade six, while the remainder place grade six in elementary schools. These proportions do not differ
by race. For simplicity, our simulation assumes that all grade six students attend middle school.


                                                                                                          25
    Table 9. Impact of Equalizing Teacher Experience, Student Turnover, and Student Proportion Black

                              on the White-Black Achievement Gap between 3rd and 8th Grade
                                      (negative impacts indicate reduction in white-black achievement gap)

                                       Elementary schools                    Middle schools                         Total
                                          (grades 3-5)                        (grades 6-8)                      (grades 3-8)
                                    Annual        Cumulative             Annual       Cumulative         Cumulative       Percent of
                                    Impacta         Impactb              Impactc       Impactb            Impactb     increase in gapd
proportion students new to           -0.004          -0.007               -0.005        -0.012             -0.015          12.6%
school

proportion students black            -0.028           -0.048              -0.036          -0.080           -0.096          83.9%

Teacher Experience
 proportion 0 years                  -0.003           -0.006              -0.002          -0.004           -0.006          5.0%



 proportion 1 year                   0.000             0.000              -0.001          -0.001           -0.001          1.2%

Total                                -0.036           -0.062              -0.044          -0.097           -0.118         102.8%




Notes: a.   Calculated from coefficients in Table 7, column 2.
       b.   Calculated with depreciation (1-θ)=0.3.
       c.   Calculated from coefficients in Table 7, column 4.
       d.   The achievement gap in Texas increases by 0.115 standard deviations between grade 3 and 8.
grade. The unequal distributions of these three characteristics account for all of the growth in the

overall achievement gap, providing strong support for the belief that deficiencies related to the

school experience inhibit the academic progress of blacks vis-à-vis whites during these grades.

        The similarly large black-white differences in teacher experience, student turnover, and

proportion black observed in the ECLS data – in combination with the much more rapid growth in

the achievement gap in the early grades – strongly suggests that the impact of school quality

differences is at least as large if not larger in the early elementary grades. 34

        The simulation does rely on the assumption of a linear effect of proportion black on

achievement. This constitutes an important assumption given the magnitude of the black-white

difference in average school proportion black. Although nonlinearities cannot be ruled out, other

research using the TSP data finds little or no evidence of nonlinear effects up to a quartic in school

proportion black (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2006)).

B. Differences by initial achievement

        In considering the pattern of changes in the racial achievement gap over time, we observed

that the largest changes were found for students at the higher end of the initial skill distribution.

Differences in either the black-white gaps in the characteristics or variable effects by initial skill

could produce such a pattern.

         Appendix Table a10 provides little or no evidence of systematic differences by initial skill

grouping in the racial disparities in teacher experience, student turnover, student racial composition,

or other school or peer characteristics such as peer average 3rd grade mathematics achievement.

Thus it does not appear that the pattern of differences in school or peer characteristics accounts for

the higher growth in the achievement gap at the higher end of the initial reading test distribution.

        To test formally for systematic parameter differences by initial achievement, we divide

students into two groups – those in one of the top four categories (high scorers) and the rest – and




                                                                                                     26
re-estimate the prior models allowing for differential impacts. 35 Table 10 reports regression results

for models that fully interact the school variables with the indicators for black and high scorers.

These estimates show that the effects of the proportion of teachers with no prior experience are

systematically smaller for blacks and whites with higher 3rd grade reading scores, while the adverse

effect of a higher proportion black is larger for blacks in higher reading categories. These findings

hold across elementary and middle schools. In combination with the large racial difference in

school proportion black, these estimates suggest that the differential impact of racial concentration

contributes to the higher growth in the black-white gap for students in the upper portion of the 3rd

grade reading distribution.

5. Conclusions
        By any measure, black-white differences in schooling outcomes are a matter of enormous

concern. The early progress toward racial convergence that followed Brown v. Board of Education

and the civil rights legislation of the 1960s has slowed if not stopped over the past two decades

(Neal (2006)). The implications of this slowdown for earnings inequality and the economic

well-being of blacks have been magnified by the substantial increase in the return to skill

experienced over the past 30 years.

        The differences in measured skills between blacks and whites are enormous. By age 17,

the average black student is performing at around the 20th percentile of the white distribution. 36

This performance feeds directly into further schooling and into the labor market, continuing the

cycle of inequality.

         Our work concentrates, however, on achievement differences in elementary and middle




34
   Note, however, that the direct estimates of these factors on early achievement by Murnane, Willett, Bub,
and McCartney (2005) does not show their importance for achievement. They further suggest that racial
composition is simply a proxy for SES.
35
   Preliminary estimates stratified the data into even finer categories. While these results fluctuated from
category to category, the overall pattern was also present there.
36
   See data on the National Assessment of Educational Progress, or NAEP (National Center for Education
Statistics (2005)).


                                                                                                        27
Table 10. Impact of Student Characteristics on Achievement by 3rd
Grade Reading Category

                                                             elementary                  middle school
                                                               school
proportion students new to school
whites in low test score group                             -0.085    (2.48)              -0.114    (2.84)

whites in high test score group                            -0.109    (4.71)              -0.093    (2.90)

blacks in low test score group                             -0.139    (2.65)              -0.179    (3.11)

blacks in high test score group                            -0.088    (1.79)              -0.127    (2.66)
proportion students black
whites in low test score group                             -0.052    (1.65)              -0.107    (2.73)

whites in high test score group                            -0.019    (0.77)              -0.078    (2.20)

blacks in low test score group                             -0.066    (1.93)              -0.148    (3.63)

blacks in high test score group                            -0.142    (4.84)              -0.202    (5.03)

proportion of teachers with 0 yrs experience
whites in low test score group                             -0.138    (7.19)              -0.060    (3.75)

whites in high test score group                            -0.054    (4.48)              -0.032    (2.91)

blacks in low test score group                             -0.121    (3.98)              -0.087    (3.59)

blacks in high test score group                            -0.180    (3.91)              -0.043    (1.90)
proportion of teachers with 1 yr experience
whites in low test score group                             -0.050    (2.72)              -0.031    (1.91)

whites in high test score group                            -0.017    (1.51)              -0.001    (0.44)

blacks in low test score group                             -0.062    (1.96)              -0.048    (2.10)

blacks in high test score group                             0.069    (2.61)              -0.040    (1.91)

observations                                                     59,901                         38,007
Notes: students in top four reading categories classified as high; absolute value of t statistics computed from
robust standard errors controlling for grouping by school in parenthesis. Estimation uses the exhaustive set
of school-year-grade-race-initial achievement cells. All specifications include achool-by grade and
attendance zone-by-year fixed effects, female and black, and high initial achievement dummies, and
indicators for, subsidized lunch eligibility, special education participation, and nonstructural moves (fully
interacted with black), and grade-by-year fixed effects.
school, building upon several recent studies on the determinants of early achievement gaps. 37 In

contrast to doubts raised by a number of authors concerning the importance of schools, our work

finds that differences in school quality play a fundamental role in the growth of achievement

differences with age. Decompositions of achievement differences into between- and within-school

components show that changes occurring between schools account for a preponderance of the

increase with age, particularly prior to 5th grade. After 5th grade, further increases in racial

achievement differences are concentrated among students with higher levels of initial achievement.

Finally, although there is little or no evidence of gender differences in either the average growth in

the black-white gap or changes by initial achievement, the much lower test taking rates of black

boys indicates that the achievement comparisons do not capture the educational difficulties of

many black boys, particularly those at the lower end of the initial achievement distribution. 38

         The substantial contribution of changes in achievement gaps between schools is consistent

with an important role for schools, and we find that the imbalanced racial distribution of specific

characteristics of teachers and peers – ones previously found to have significant effects on

achievement – can account for all of the growth in the achievement gap following third grade. 39

Specifically, differences in school mobility rates, in the prevalence of beginning teachers, and in

the racial composition of schools combine to exacerbate early racial achievement gaps.

         The analysis also finds systematic differences in effects by initial achievement. Having a


37
    Fryer and Levitt (2004, (2005) and Murnane, Willett, Bub, and McCartney (2005) have addressed the
early time period of racial achievement, and both have raised questions about whether or not schooling plays
a role in achievement. In a larger set of papers, James Heckman argues that early investments are much more
productive than later schooling investments and discounts any significant role for schools; see, among others,
Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006), Heckman (2006). This paper does not discount the
potential importance of early learning deficits but instead is best thought of as providing more balance in
terms of changes that are possible after students enter schooling.
           38
              The low rates of test taking for blacks and to a lesser extent whites among those who participate
in all five waves in the ECLS sample raise the possibility that the reported growth in achievement differences
understates the actual increase during the early elementary school years.
39
    These findings differ from those of Fryer and Levitt (2004), Murnane, Willett, Bub, and McCartney
(2005) and others who do not focus on those variables for which there exist large differences by race and
strong evidence that they are important determinants of achievement. Murnane et al. find that racial
composition appears to be a simple proxy for SES and that initial teacher experience has no impact, but they
are unable to claim that they have credibly identified causal impacts.


                                                                                                           28
teacher with no prior experience appears more costly for students with lower initial achievement,

while the adverse effect on blacks of a higher proportion black appears to rise with initial

achievement and to explain a portion of the more rapid increase in the racial achievement gap

among those with higher initial achievement. 40

         All in all, the central finding is that school quality plays an important role in the

determination of achievement and racial achievement differences. Indeed, the impact of schools is

almost certainly much larger than we show here: As Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005) indicate,

easily quantifiable variables do not explain the bulk of the variance in teacher and school quality.

Our analytical strategy focuses entirely on identifying causal impacts, and thus a portion of the

systematic influences of schools is undoubtedly ignored because we could not ensure that any

relationships observed is truly causal. 41

         Nonetheless, implications for policy remain uncertain. Perhaps the most easily identified

policies focus on reducing the share of teachers with little or no experience in schools with large

minority enrollment shares. However, because a substantial portion of the current appears to result

from the preferences of teachers, the solutions are far from clear (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin

(2004a)). Similarly, the high turnover of students in schools attended by blacks in part results from

the high mobility of black students – itself potentially caused by larger economic issues.

         Of course the largest contribution to the achievement gap comes from the strong

relationship between achievement and proportion black for blacks in the Texas public schools. Yet

again implications for policy are unclear. As Rivkin and Welch (2006) report, housing patterns



40
    Our data do not permit disentangling the possible avenues for the teacher experience effects. It may be
that teachers improve more in their teaching of lower achieving students for whom learning comes less
easily, it may be that students tend to be more disruptive in schools with more lower achievers and that an
important component of the return to experience is learning to manage disruption, or it may be low achievers
are much more likely to attend schools that struggle to find teachers skilled in the teaching of mathematics.
We are unable to unravel these possibilities.
41
    One example is the possible importance of the race match of students and teachers. Ehrenberg and
Brewer (1995), Dee (2004), and Hanushek, Kain, O'Brien, and Rivkin (2005) find that black students do
better when matched with a black teacher. However, because we cannot investigate classroom linkages here,
we cannot pursue this element of schools.


                                                                                                         29
account for the bulk of school segregation, and court decisions limit inter-district desegregation

programs. In addition, our sample covers a period without much systematic desegregation activity,

and the relationship between achievement and racial composition might depend upon both

programmatic and historical factors that determine school attendance patterns in a given district.

Moreover, racial composition effects may vary by the intensity of desegregation efforts.

Consequently, any newly designed active initiatives to increase substantially black exposure to

whites might produce a different relationship between achievement and racial composition.

        We conclude that, although we identify specific school and peer factors that systematically

affect racial achievement gaps, policy directed at just these factors is unlikely to be very successful.

Instead, a broader set of policies aimed at improving the quality of schools attended by blacks –

such as improving teacher quality – will be required. In addition, the large gaps at school entry

highlight the importance of developing effective early childhood interventions.




                                                                                                     30
        Appendix

        This appendix develops the decomposition presented in equation (1). We begin by expressing the
average achievement for blacks (and whites) as equal to the weighted average of school average
achievement for the respective group d:
                         nws         n
        Aw − Ab = ∑          Aws − ∑ bs Abs
                     s   nw        s nb

Addition and subtraction of the overall school average achievement of all blacks and whites As from each
term yields

                    ⎡n                    ⎤     ⎡n                    ⎤
                             n
                                       [          ]      n
        Aw − Ab = ∑ ⎢ ws As + ws Aws − As ⎥ − ∑ ⎢ bs As + bs Abs − As ⎥  [         ]
                  s ⎣ nw     nw           ⎦ s ⎣ nb       nb           ⎦

Reorganizing terms produces between and within school components.

                    ⎡n              ⎤     ⎡n                           ⎤
                             n
                                                       [  n
                                                                  ]
        Aw − Ab = ∑ ⎢ ws As − bs As ⎥ + ∑ ⎢ ws A ws − As − bs Abs − As ⎥ [         ]
                  s ⎣ nw     nb     ⎦ s ⎣ nw               nb          ⎦

Expressing the school average achievement components As in the second summation term equal to the
weighted average of the average achievement levels of blacks and whites in the school yields

            ⎡n       n      ⎤     ⎡n ⎡           ⎛n        n        ⎞⎤ n ⎡            ⎛n        n        ⎞⎤ ⎤
Aw − Ab = ∑ ⎢ ws As − bs As ⎥ + ∑ ⎢ ws ⎢ A ws − ⎜⎜ ws Aws + bs Abs ⎟⎟⎥ − bs ⎢ A bs − ⎜⎜ ws Aws + bs Abs ⎟⎟⎥ ⎥
          s ⎣ nw     nb ⎦ s ⎢⎣ n w ⎣             ⎝ ns       ns      ⎠⎦ n b ⎣          ⎝ ns       ns      ⎠⎦ ⎥⎦

Next, each term in brackets in the second summation term can be simplified by multiplying the
denominators and numerators by ns where necessary. Then the 1/nw and 1/nb terms can be moved outside
the summation yielding

                n ws        n           ⎛ 1    1 ⎞
Aw − Ab = [∑         As − ∑ bs As ] + [⎜⎜    +   ⎟⎟∑ ( Aws − Abs )α s (1 − α s )ns ]
            s   nw        s nb          ⎝ n w nb ⎠ s
 Appendix Table a1. Texas Black-white Math Test Score Gap by 3rd Grade Reading Test Score Category
 (students with complete observations)




                1         2       3          4    5       6       7        8       9       10       11       12       13       14       15       16
 Overall
 3rd grade    0.51       0.49   0.43     0.41    0.37    0.41    0.35     0.32    0.30     0.30     0.27     0.24     0.22     0.21     0.18     0.16
 5th grade    0.61       0.61   0.49     0.52    0.47    0.50    0.46     0.45    0.41     0.41     0.39     0.36     0.36     0.37     0.31     0.34
 8th grade    0.58       0.56   0.48     0.47    0.46    0.51    0.44     0.50    0.42     0.47     0.44     0.43     0.43     0.46     0.44     0.44
 Between School
 3rd grade    0.41       0.37   0.32     0.27    0.24    0.29    0.22     0.18    0.16     0.16     0.12     0.10     0.09     0.09     0.07     0.05
 5th grade    0.48       0.44   0.37     0.36    0.33    0.35    0.28     0.27    0.24     0.23     0.21     0.19     0.19     0.21     0.17     0.20
 8th grade    0.41       0.37   0.33     0.31    0.28    0.34    0.25     0.28    0.24     0.27     0.22     0.24     0.22     0.25     0.25     0.25

 blacks         1,464   1,895   1,472   2,254    3,063   2,528   3,574    5,838   4,131    4,525    7,957    9,809    7,215    9,996   11,518    6,092
 whites         1,481   2,082   1,852   2,738    4,246   3,665   6,156   10,776   8,367   10,333   21,083   31,009   29,399   51,422   82,721   61,935

 Overall change
 3rd to 5th     0.10    0.12     0.06    0.11     0.10   0.09    0.11     0.13    0.11     0.11     0.12     0.12     0.14     0.16     0.13     0.18
 5th to 8th     -0.03   -0.05   -0.01    -0.05   -0.01   0.01    -0.02    0.05    0.01     0.06     0.05     0.07     0.07     0.09     0.13     0.10

 Change in between school
 3rd to 5th    0.07   0.07      0.05     0.09     0.09    0.06   0.06     0.09    0.08     0.07     0.09     0.09     0.10     0.12     0.10     0.15
 5th to 8th    -0.07 -0.07      -0.04    -0.05   -0.05   -0.01   -0.03    0.01    0.00     0.04     0.01     0.05     0.03     0.04     0.08     0.05

Source: Author calculations from TSP data.
 Appendix Table a2. U.S. Black-white Math Test Score Gap by Gender (unweighted data)

                                                   boys                                                        girls

 grade                         fall k     spring k           1      3       5                 fall k   spring k         1       3       5

 overall                       6.3           8.6            13.8   20.0    20.4                5.8       8.1           12.1    18.9    19.9
 between school                5.0           7.0            11.2   16.0    16.8                4.7       6.3           9.6     14.9    16.0
 within school                 1.2           1.5            2.6     4.0    3.6                 1.1       1.8           2.5      4.0     4.0

 blacks                        587          646          648        623     631                578       630            635     626     618
 whites                       3,026        3,326        3,328      3,258   3,247              2,946     3,194          3,207   3,181   3,163


 Source: Author calculations from ECLS data.


 Appendix Table a3. Texas Public School Black-white Math Test Score gap by Gender (TAAS standardized test scores)

                                   boys                                               girls
 grade                 3             5                8                     3       5          8
 overall             0.60          0.66              0.71                  0.57    0.64       0.70
 between school      0.19          0.25              0.28                  0.19    0.25       0.29
 within school       0.41          0.41              0.43                  0.38    0.39       0.41

 blacks                           40,163                                           47,711
 whites                           166,267                                          170,431

Source: Author calculations from TSP data.
 Appendix Table a4. U.S. Black-white Math Test Score Gap by Gender and Spring Kindergarten Reading Test Score
 Category

                                       boys                                             girls

                      1          2            3    4      5               1        2             3       4       5
 Overall
 kindergarten        2.3        4.0        5.4     7.1    3.9            1.7      2.8            4.3     5.0     6.2
 1st grade            5.7       6.9       10.1    11.1   12.6            5.2      5.4            5.7     8.3    14.0
 3rd grade           15.4      13.9       16.0    14.5   13.6           12.5     10.5           13.9    11.6    16.4
 5th grade           16.9      14.9       15.9    14.2   16.2           15.0     12.2           15.3    12.5    15.0

 Between School
 kindergarten   2.4             3.5        4.2     7.0    4.0            1.8      2.5            3.9     4.3     6.0
 1st grade       5.6            6.3        8.3    10.3   12.4            5.2      4.5            5.3     7.0    13.7
 3rd grade      14.7           12.7       14.5    13.0   13.0           12.3      9.2           12.3     9.9    16.4
 5th grade      16.8           13.4       14.2    12.5   15.9           14.4     10.4           13.5    11.0    15.0

 blacks              123        208       149      85     25              85      204            175     85      40
 whites              266        756      1,000    776    251             116      559           1,078   791     311

Source: Author calculations from ECLS data.
 Appendix Table a5. Texas Black-white Math Test Score Gap by Gender and 3rd Grade Reading Test Score Category (intact cohort)
                                                               reading test score group
              1       2       3      4       5      6      7      8       9        10    11     12      13        14      15                   16
 1. Boys
 Overall
 3rd grade  0.50 0.51       0.41   0.43    0.38   0.41   0.34    0.31    0.33     0.30  0.25   0.25    0.20      0.21    0.19                  0.16
 5th grade  0.58 0.57       0.43   0.43    0.40   0.46   0.42    0.41    0.37     0.38  0.37   0.34    0.34      0.34    0.30                  0.34
 8th grade  0.61 0.61       0.49   0.43    0.40   0.49   0.42    0.45    0.40     0.43  0.43   0.42    0.42      0.44    0.43                  0.44
 Between
 3rd grade  0.43 0.41       0.32   0.31    0.27   0.32   0.23    0.18    0.20     0.19  0.13   0.12    0.08      0.09    0.09                  0.06
 5th grade  0.48 0.46       0.37   0.32    0.35   0.34   0.30    0.27    0.24     0.26  0.22   0.19    0.20      0.20    0.17                  0.20
 8th grade  0.49 0.47       0.35   0.32    0.29   0.35   0.27    0.29    0.24     0.27  0.23   0.24    0.23      0.25    0.25                  0.25

 blacks         781     960      788     1,171   1,559   1,223   1,804   2,911   1,980   2,156   3,696    4,365     3,119   4,136    4,594    2,361
 whites         891    1,215    1,081    1,587   2,433   2,085   3,487   6,046   4,521   5,578   11,143   16,015   14,802   24,835   38,339   27,540

 2. Girls
 Overall
 3rd grade     0.48    0.44     0.42     0.36    0.31    0.38    0.34    0.32    0.26    0.27     0.26     0.21     0.21     0.20     0.17     0.15
 5th grade     0.61    0.62     0.52     0.58    0.50    0.50    0.47    0.47    0.42    0.42     0.39     0.37     0.36     0.39     0.32     0.34
 8th grade     0.54    0.52     0.46     0.50    0.49    0.51    0.45    0.52    0.43    0.49     0.43     0.44     0.41     0.47     0.45     0.42
 Between
 3rd grade     0.47    0.39     0.36     0.29    0.25    0.29    0.24    0.20    0.16    0.17     0.13     0.09     0.09     0.09     0.07     0.05
 5th grade     0.49    0.47     0.40     0.44    0.35    0.40    0.31    0.29    0.28    0.24     0.23     0.21     0.21     0.23     0.19     0.21
 8th grade     0.44    0.35     0.31     0.36    0.31    0.37    0.27    0.30    0.25    0.27     0.23     0.24     0.23     0.26     0.25     0.25

 blacks         679     932      684     1,080   1,502   1,303   1,765   2,925   2,149   2,369   4,251    5,437     4,093   5,857    6,916    3,728
 whites         589     867      769     1,150   1,806   1,577   2,661   4,720   3,841   4,742   9,920    14,967   14,568   26,556   44,337   34,356

Source: Author calculations from TSP data.
Appendix Table a6. Average Mathematics Test Score by Mobility, Race, and Grade in ECLS for Students Who Participate in
all Five Survey Waves (weighted by sampling weights)
                                                                      Grade
                                              fall K    spring K     spring 1st   spring 3rd    spring 5th    number
Blacks
no school change                              19.3        27.9         48.5          77.8         97.5          702
moves between K and first grade               18.9        27.0         49.2          77.3         95.2           76
moves between first and third grade           20.4        29.1         50.8          83.5         106.4         106
moves between third and fifth grade           18.8        27.2         48.0          77.8         95.3          169

Whites
no school change                              25.3        36.3         62.0          97.7         118.5        4,085
moves between K and first grade               24.2        34.9         62.0          96.4         116.7         295
moves between first and third grade           23.9        34.6         60.2          96.6         117.2         487
moves between third and fifth grade           24.5        35.9         60.3          96.0         117.0         738


Source: Author calculations from ECLS data.
Appendix Table a7. Average Mathematics Test Score by Mobility, Race, and Grade in Texas

                                                                              Grade
                                                          3       4       5           6    7       8
Blacks
no school change                                         -0.19   -0.21   -0.26    -0.20   -0.24   -0.31

moves to another Texas public school                     -0.34   -0.46   -0.50    -0.45   -0.49   -0.48
between 3rd and 8th grade

Leaves the Texas public schools                          -0.82   -0.85   -0.93    -0.98   -0.97   -0.86
between 3rd and 8th grade

Whites
no school change                                         0.42    0.42    0.40     0.44    0.45    0.41

moves to another Texas public school                     0.25    0.18    0.18     0.21    0.22    0.22
between 3rd and 8th grade

Leaves the Texas public schools                          0.04    0.00    -0.07    -0.09   -0.10   -0.01
between 3rd and 8th grade

Source: Author calculations from TSP data
Appendix Table a8. Distribution of Texas Public School Students by Test and Grade Retention Status, by Race, Gender, and
Grade

                                                    Grade                                    Grade
                                  4           5        6       7       8       4       5       6        7       8
                                                    blacks                                   whites
girls
has test score                  88.2%       89.3%   88.6%    89.3%   87.8%   93.3%   94.3%   94.1%    94.0%   92.5%
no test score:
special education               8.4%        9.1%    9.2%     7.5%    7.5%    4.1%    4.1%    4.1%     3.7%    4.0%
other                           2.5%        1.0%    1.1%     1.6%    3.9%    2.2%    1.2%    1.2%     1.5%    3.0%

Retained in grade               0.8%        0.6%    1.1%     1.6%    0.8%    0.4%    0.4%    0.5%     0.8%    0.5%

boys
has test score                  80.3%       81.2%   79.9%    80.8%   79.1%   90.3%   91.2%   90.6%    90.5%   88.9%
no test score:
special education               15.9%       16.8%   16.8%    14.4%   14.3%   7.0%    7.0%    7.0%     6.4%    7.1%
other                            2.7%       1.1%    1.4%     1.8%    5.2%    2.1%    1.2%    1.3%     1.6%    3.2%

Retained in grade               1.2%        0.9%    2.0%     3.1%    1.7%    0.6%    0.6%    1.1%     1.6%    1.0%

Source: Author calculations from TSP data
Appendix Table a9. Average Mathematics Test Score by Test and Grade Retention Status in the Subsequent Year

                                                     Grade                                    Grade
                                       3      4         5      6       7       3       4        5       6       7
                                                     blacks                                   whites
girls
has test score                       -0.31   -0.36   -0.39    -0.30   -0.30   0.31    0.29     0.28    0.35    0.39
no test score
special education                    -1.90   -2.12   -2.23    -2.22   -2.10   -1.37   -1.69   -1.87    -1.72   -1.62
other                                -0.70   -0.83   -0.82    -0.85   -0.86   0.13    0.11     0.10     0.09    0.02

retained                             -1.68   -1.59   -1.65    -1.65   -1.48   -1.04   -1.15   -1.07    -0.96   -0.96

boys
has test score                       -0.38   -0.38   -0.45    -0.41   -0.41   0.31    0.31     0.28    0.32    0.34
no test score
special education                    -1.84   -2.03   -2.20    -2.20   -2.07   -1.15   -1.51   -1.63    -1.65   -1.61
other                                -0.78   -0.80   -0.90    -1.07   -1.12    0.13    0.15    0.09    -0.01   -0.16

retained                             -1.66   -1.55   -1.61    -1.60   -1.55   -0.92   -0.97   -0.86    -0.98   -1.01

Source: Author calculations from TSP data.
 Appendix Table A10. Racial Gap (black minus white) in Peer and School characteristics by 3rd Grade Reading Test Category

                                                                           reading test score group
                       1        2       3      4       5       6       7         8        9       10    11      12          13    14      15      16
 Peer Variables
 proportion          0.049    0.039   0.032   0.030   0.038   0.036   0.036    0.035   0.033   0.035   0.036   0.036   0.038     0.038   0.041   0.042
 new to school

 proportion           0.35    0.32     0.29   0.30    0.30    0.30    0.29     0.28    0.28     0.28   0.28     0.28    0.28     0.28    0.29    0.30
 Black

 teacher experience
 proportion 0
 years              0.047     0.029   0.027   0.025   0.025   0.023   0.021    0.026   0.021   0.021   0.023   0.023   0.022     0.025   0.024   0.028

 proportion 1 year   0.013    0.019   0.013   0.009   0.008   0.012   0.012    0.012   0.012   0.011   0.012   0.015   0.013     0.014   0.015   0.015

Source: Author calculations from TSP data.
References

Angrist, Joshua D., and Kevin Lang. 2004. "Does school integration generate peer effects?
        Evidence from Boston's Metco Program." American Economic Review 94,no.5
        (December):1613-1634.

Boardman, Anthony E., and Richard J. Murnane. 1979. "Using panel data to improve estimates of
      the determinants of educational achievement." Sociology of Education 52(April):113-121.

Boyd, Don, Pam Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2005. "How
       Changes in Entry Requirements Alter the Teacher Workforce and Affect Student
       Achievement." Working Paper 11844, Cambridge, MA, National Bureau of Economic
       Research (December).

Clotfelter, Charles T. 2004. After Brown: The rise and retreat of school desegregation. Princeton,
        NJ: Princeton University Press.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2003. "Segregation and resegregation in
        North Carolina's public school classrooms." North Carolina Law Review 81,no.4
        (May):1463-1511.

Coleman, James S., Ernest Q. Campbell, Carol J. Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander M. Mood,
      Frederic D. Weinfeld, and Robert L. York. 1966. Equality of educational opportunity.
      Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006. "Interpreting
       the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation." In Handbook of the Economics of Education,
       edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Dee, Thomas S. 2004. "Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment."
       Review of Economics and Statistics 86,no.1 (February):195-210.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Dominic J. Brewer. 1995. "Did teachers' verbal ability and race matter
       in the 1960s? Coleman revisited." Economics of Education Review 14,no.1 (March):1-21.

Fryer, Roland G., Jr., and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. "Understanding the black-white test score gap in
        the first two years of school." Review of Economics and Statistics 86,no.2 (May):447-464.

———. 2005. "The black-white test score gap through third grade." WP 11049, National Bureau
    of Economic Research (January).

Greenberg, David, and John McCall. 1974. "Teacher mobility and allocation." Journal of Human
       Resources 9,no.4 (Fall):480-502.

Guryan, Jonathan. 2004. "Desegregation and black dropout rates." American Economic Review
       94,no.4 (September):919-943.

Hanushek, Eric A. 2003. "The failure of input-based schooling policies." Economic Journal
      113,no.485 (February):F64-F98.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Daniel M. O'Brien, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2005. "The market for
      teacher quality." Working Paper No. 11154, National Bureau of Economic Research
      (February).

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2004a. "Disruption versus Tiebout
      improvement: The costs and benefits of switching schools." Journal of Public Economics
      Vol 88/9-10:1721-1746.

———. 2004b. "Why public schools lose teachers." Journal of Human Resources
    39,no.2:326-354.

———. 2006. New evidence about Brown v. Board of Education: The Complex Effects of School
    Racial Composition on Achievement. University of Texas at Dallas (revised March 2006).

Hanushek, Eric A., and Margaret E. Raymond. 2005. "Does school accountability lead to improved
      student performance?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24,no.2
      (Spring):297-327.

Heckman, James J. 2006. "Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
      Children." Science 312,no.5782 (June 30):1900 - 1902.

Jencks, Christopher, and Meredith Phillips, eds. 1998. The black-white test score gap. Washington,
        DC: Brookings.

Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. "What Does Certification Tell
       Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City." Working Paper No.
       12155, National Bureau of Economic Research (April).

Lankford, Hamilton, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2002. "Teacher sorting and the plight of
       urban schools: A descriptive analysis." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
       24,no.1 (Spring):37-62.

Lazear, Edward P. 2001. "Educational production." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116,no.3
        (August):777-803.

Murnane, Richard J. 1981. "Teacher mobility revisited." Journal of Human Resources 16,no.1
      (Winter):3-19.

Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, Kristen L. Bub, and Kathleen McCartney. 2005.
      "Understanding trends in racial/ethnic achievement gaps during elementary school." In
      Brookings-Wharton papers on urban affairs, 2005, edited by Gary Burtless and Janet
      Rothenberg Pack. Washington: Brookings.

National Center for Education Statistics. 2005. NAEP 2004: Trends in Academic Progress, Three
       Decades of Student Performance in Reading and Mathematics. Washington, D. C.: U.S.
       Department of Education.

Neal, Derek. 2006. "Why has black-white skill convergence stopped?" In Handbook of the
       Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam:
       Elsevier.
Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The role of pre-market factors in black-white
       differences." Journal of Political Economy 104,no.5 (October):869-895.

O'Neill, June. 1990. "The role of human capital in earnings differences between black and white
        men." Journal of Economic Perspectives 4,no.4 (Fall):25-46.

Rivkin, Steve G., and Finis Welch. 2006. "Neighborhood segregation and school integration." In
        Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch.
        Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Rivkin, Steven G. 1995. "Black/white differences in schooling and employment." Journal of
        Human Resources 30,no.4 (Fall):826-852.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. "Teachers, schools, and academic
        achievement." Econometrica 73,no.2 (March):417-458.

Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. "The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
       from Panel Data." American Economic Review 94,no.2 (May):247-252.

Schofield, Janet Ward. 1995. "Review of research on school desegregation's impact on elementary
        and secondary school students." In Handbook of research on multicultural education,
        edited by James A. Banks and Cherry A. McGee Banks. New York: Macmillan
        Publishing:597-616.

Todd, Petra E., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2003. "On the specification and estimation of the
       production function for cognitive achievement." Economic Journal 113,no.485
       (February):F3-33.

Welch, Finis, and Audrey Light. 1987. New evidence on school desegregation. Washington, D.C.:
       U. S. Commission on Civil Rights.
