                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CURRENT MID ANTICIPATED DEFICITS,
               INTEREST RATES AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY



                       Olivier J. Blanchard



                      Working Paper No. 1265




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 19814




I thank Eliana Cardoso, Rudiger Dornbusch, Benjamin Friedman and nir
discussants, Ethuond Malinvaud and Stephen Marris for useful
suggestions and discussions. I also thank the Sloan Foundation for
financial support. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1265
                                                   January 1984



                      Current and Anticipated Deficits,
                    Interest Rates and Economic Activity


                                  ABSTRACT




     There is widespread feeling that current deficits, in Europe and the U.S.,

may hurt rather than help the recovery. This paper examines some of the issues

involved, through a sequence of three models.

     The first model focuses on sustainability and characterizes its

determinants. It suggests that the issue of sustainability may indeed be

relevant in some countries.

     The second model focuses on the effects of fiscal policy on real interest

rates, and in particular on the relative importance of the level of deficits and

the level of debt in determining interest rates.

     The third model focuses on the effects of fiscal policy on the speed of the

recovery. It shows how a sharply increasing fiscal expansion might be initially

contractionary rather than expansionary.




                                                   Olivier J. Blanchard
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Massachusetts Institute
                                                   of Technology
                                                   Cambridge, MA 02139
       The size of fiscal deficits is becoming a major source of concern.

In Europe and Japan, the large current deficits are inhibiting the use

of further, even temporary, fiscal expansion; indeed at the bottom of a

recession, most governments are attempting to reduce spending and increase

tax revenues. In the United States on the other hand, where current

deficits are large and anticipated deficits much larger, there is wide-

spread concern that they may slow or even prevent a complete recovery.

       The perception that deficits may hurt rather than help the recovery

is clearly at odds with the traditional view that deficits, although they

will in general increase interest rates, will nevertheless increase demand

and economic activity. Although no unified or well articulated "new

view" has emerged, challengers of the traditional view insist on the

abnormally large size of current deficits. Such deficits, they argue,

may be simply unsustainable, a possibility never considered by the

traditional view. They may be so large and so prolonged that the increase

in real interest rates may more than offset their direct expansionary

effect. The purpose of this paper is to see whether this new view has

some validity, and more generally to reexamine the relation between debt,

deficits, interest rates and economic activity.

       The first issue taken up in the paper is that of sustainability.

Is it the case that some countries are running unsustainable deficits

and may be forced, at some time in the future, to repudiate the debt

either explicitly or through inflation depreciation? If this was the

case, the increased uncertainty generated by deficits might well offset

their expansionary effect. The purpose of the first model is thus to

clarify the notion of sustainability and to think about its determinants.

A casual examination of the evidence suggests that sustalnability may
                                     —2—




indeed have become a relevant issue in some European countries.

       The second issue taken up is that of the relation between real

rates, debt and deficits.. Even if deficits are sustainable, they will

affect interest rates. Do interest rates, however, depend on the level of

debt, or on the level of deficits or on both? These are the questions

addressed in the second model of the paper. Central to this set of issues

is the question of the horizon of agents, as we know that if agents have

infinite horizons, interest rates may depend neither on debt nor on deficits.

The main element of the model is thus the derivation of an aggregate

consumption function which does not satisfy Ricardo—Barro equivalence.

The model shows that long real rates depend on the anticipated sequence

of debt, or equivalently on the current level of debt and the anticipated

sequence of deficits.

       The third and last issue is that of potentially perverse effects

of deficits on output. Can deficits increase real rates by so much as

to decrease aggregate demand and output? The third model builds on the

previous one but allows for an effect of aggregate demand on output.

Its main conclusion is that, although current deficits are expansionary,

the anticipation of growing deficits may well reduce economic activity.

This suggests that the fiscal program of the current U.S. administration

could, be currently contractionary rather than expansionary.

       The paper has four sections. Section I presents briefly the basic

facts about debt, current and anticipated deficits and spending levels.

Section II focuses on sustainability. Sections III and IV characterize

the relation between debt, deficits, interest rates and output.
                                    —3




Section I. Basic Statistics

       The relevant basic statistics are presented for the U.S. and eight

EEC countries in Table 1.

       Focusing first on debt, we find that the average ratio of debt to

GOP is relatively low by historical standards. There are, however, wide

variations of this ratio across countries, from 16% in Denmark to 98% in

Ireland. (These inter—country variations are no wider than intra—country

variations over time: the ratio fell in the U.S. from 100% in 1947 to

25% in the mid 70's).

       Turning to deficits, we see that they are large by historical

standards; this is true for both 1982 and projected 1983 deficits and

still holds after inflation correction of nominal interest payments on

government debt, as shown in Column 4. Column 5 shows, however, that

with some exceptions, the current deficits are largely cyclical: if

there was no change in fiscal policy, they would disappear as the world

economy returned to full employment. As return to full employment is still

far in the future, these full employment surpluses would still correspond

to actual deficits until at least the mid 80's.

       Most countries, therefore, do not currently have structural deficits.

There is, however, evidence in the U.S. of looming structural deficits

starting in 1983 and, in the absence of further changes in fiscal policy,

averaging 6% of GNP for the rest of the decade.' Two of the proximate

causes, the income tax cuts voted in 1981 and the increase in defense

spending are clearly specific to the U.S. The third, the increase in

real interest rates, is common to all countries, affecting them in proportion

to their debt to GOP ratios. The stance of discretionary fiscal policy is

quite different outside of the U.S.: cyclically adjusted budget deficits
                                                 —4—




                           Table 1. Debt, deficits and spending



                  1        2            3             4         5        6             7
                 1981     1982         1983       1982        1982       1982         1982
                 (end)
                 Debt    Surplus      Surplus    Surplus     Surplus   Receipts   Disbursements
                 GDP       GDP          GDP        GDP         GDP       GDP           GDP
                                                  •
                                                          Full emp.
                                     (forecast) Inflation Inflation
                                                Adjusted Adjusted



Belgium           88      —12.8        —12.1          —5.8    —2.0       47.2         59.9

Denmark           16       —9.5         —9.6          —9.0    —6.3       51.5         60.9

Germany           35       —3.9         —4.1          —3.1     —.1       4.6          49.5
France            17       —3.0         —3.0          —1.9    +1.6       48.1         51.2

Ireland           98      —14.7        —14.4          —3.2     —.1       44.1         58.8

Italy             64      —11.6        —11.0          —1.1    +1.5       40.7         52.3

Netherlands       47       —5.7         —5.5          —2.5    +3.5       54.8         60.5

United Kingdom    58           —.9       —.5          +2.4    +6.5       44.7         45.6


EEC total         42       —5.0         —4.9          —1.5     1.8       45.8         50.8

U.S.              29       —3.9         —6.5           —.3     3.7       32.1         36.0




Columns 1 to 3    EEC : Source EEC, Annual Economic Report, Tables 6.1, 6.4.
                  U.S.: Source Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal year 1984.

Columns 4, 5      EEC : Calculations by author.
                  U.S.: Source OECD, WP3, 1983.

Columns 6, 7      EEC : Source EEC Annual Economic Report, Table 6.1.
                  U.S.: Source Economic Report of the President, 1983
                                    —5—




have been and are expected to be reduced by .5% in 1981, .8% in 1982 and

1.2% in 1983 in Japan, by .9% in 1981, 1.4% in 1982 and 1.2% in 1982 for

the EEC as a whole.2

       Finally, although the focus of the paper is on deficits, that is

on decreases in taxes given spending, it is important to remember what

has happened to government spending. Except in the U.S., the level of

spending has steadily gone up over time. The ratio of government outlays

to GDP for the EEC as a who1 has increased by 10% since 1970, by 15%

since 1960. Columns 6 and 7 show how high the levels are. It is not

unlikely that some of the problems attributed to deficits come in fact

from the levels of government spending and that some arguments against

deficits are really arguments against the level of spending.
                                        —6—




Section II. Sustainability of Deficits


        What does it mean to say that a given combination of debt and deficits

is unsustainable? To answer that, we can start with the government budget

constraint:

                       D = rD + G - T

        D is government debt and the deficit is assumed to be entirely debt

financed. r is the real interest rate, G and T spending and taxes respectively.

Let's further define T as the maximum amount of taxes which can be collected

by the government and G the minimum socially acceptable amount of government

outlays. Both, and expecially the second one, are admittedly fuzzy and would

be difficult to determine empirically. Consider the level of debt D =    r1(T —   C):
if debt ever exceeds D, the level of debt will be forever increasing. The govern-

ment will be in effect running a Ponzl scheme and will ultimately have to re-

pudiate its debt. The Implication is that the government cannot sell debt

beyond D, which is therefore the maximum sustainable level of debt.3 If for

example T — C is equal to 10% of the GNP and r to 5%, D is 2 times GNP. This

shows why the issue of sustainability has arisen in parallel with increases in

real interest rates. Sustainable levels of debt are very large at the histori-

cal level of real rates of 1 — 2%, much smaller at the current 3 — 6%.

        This computation is too simple for many reasons. It is too pessimistic

in that it does not take into account GNP growth which increases the sustainable

ratio of debt to GNI and does not allow for possible monetization and the use

of the inflation tax.4 It is also too optimistic for at least two reasons:
                                         —7—




The first is that, unless Ricardo—Barro equivalence holds, r itself is likely

to be an increasing function of the level of debt. The second is that increases

in the tax burden or decreases in spending can only happen gradually. It is

this element which is currently used to argue against a temporary fiscal ex-

pansion; many doubt that the new spending programs can indeed be only tempo-

rary. It is this last argument that we now formalize. Let:


        (1)            £=rD—X ; X T—G

        (2)            X..cz(X-X)    ,    XET-G>O

       X is the budget surplus (deficit if negative) before interest pay-

ments. Equation (2) says that the gap between X, the maximum surplus, and X

can only be reduced at rate ct.5 We now want to know whether a given pair (X0, D0)

(or equivalently (D0, D0)) is sustainable or not. We can draw the phase dia-

gram of the system, with the inequality in (2) replaced by an equality. This

is done in Figure 1. The equilibrium is a saddle point, with stable arm AA.

Consider point C. Point C Is not sustainable as, even if the deficit is re-

duced as fast as feasible, i.e. if (2) holds with equality, the maximum level

of debt D is reached before deficits are eliminated. Point B on the other hand

is sustainable as deficits can be eliminated before D reaches D. BF represents

the fastest feasible path of reduction of deficits. When. p is reached, X needs

not be increased further and (2) holds as an inequality.

        The critical locus is therefore the locus AE. Pairs (X, D) below it

are not sustainable and pairs above it are. It is given by:6


                  (r+ct) (D—D) — (X—X)         0 ,D'r'X
                         —8—




    Figure 1. Sustainable deficit debt pairs




x

                                                     n=0


                                                    x= x
                                               V
                                               F'

0                                                   D




      C

A
The sustainability condition for a given (X0, D0) is therefore:


           (3)      (r +   a)   (D0 — D)   —         — X) 1 0
                                               (X0

           If a =   , so    that there are no restrictions on changes in X, the condi-

tion is again that D0 be less than D. If a                   0, the condition reduces to

  .   0:   there cannot be a positive deficit.

           Equation (3) shows the role of the speed of adjustment a, the interest

rate, the level of debt, the actual deficit and the maximum potential surplus.

Returning to Table 1, Belgium with its large debt, deficits and level of spend-

ing seems to be the country most likely to violate (3). We can attempt some

crude computations. Using the implied values from Table 1 for D, X together

with r =    5%   and a     20% implies that X be at least equal to 7.5% for the ine-

quality (3) to be satisfied. At the current level of spending, this would imply

a ratio of receipts to GDP of close to 60%, which appears very high.8 Thus sus—

tainability might indeed be an issue in Belgium; it appears to be less so in

other countries.

           The model does not tell us what happens when a current fiscal

 program appears unsustainable. It is likely that a program does not

 suddenly become unsustainable but rather that agents start taking the

 possibility of repudiation into account. What happens depends on the

 type of repudiation that agents anticipate. If they anticipate attempts

 to depreciate the debt through inflation at some point In the future, they

 will require higher nominal interest rates on new issues of public and

 private bonds. Only if public debt is of sufficiently long maturity can

 the government successfully use inflation to repudiate part of the debt.

 If agents anticipate repudiation of government debt only — a less likely
                                   —10—




case — they will require a higher real rate on government debt than on

private debt so as to be compensated for the risk of repudiation. In both

cases, a shift in demand towards short maturity debt is likely.
                                    —11—




Section III. Interest Rates, Debt and Deficits at Full Employment

       This section focuses on the effects of debt and deficits on the

equilibrium sequence of interest rates in a full employment economy.

This is needed to understand their effects in an economy which may not

be at full employment; it is also of more than academic interest as some of

the larger anticipated U.S. deficits are expected to take place in an

economy which should be by then at full employment.

        The first step is to construct a consumption function consistent with

non neutrality of debt; the second is to close the model to derive equilibrium

interest rates.


Aggregate consumption

        Aggregate consumption functions derived from individual life cycle

behavior are usually intractable, for individuals differ in two respects,

making exact aggregation difficult: they have different horizons and thus

different propensities to consume out of wealth, as well as different levels

of wealth. There is however one set of assumptions (and I believe only one)

which preserves the assumption of finite horizons, essential to the analysis

of debt and deficits but leads to a tractable aggregate consumption function;

we now explore it.

        Time is continuous. At any instant, a new cohort, composed of many

agents, is born, its size normalized to be unity. Agents face, during their

lifetime, a constant instantaneous probability of death p, so that their ex-

pected life is p. Because of the large number of agents in each cohort, the

probability p is also the percentage of agents in each cohort which die at any

instant. The size of a cohort born at time zero as of time t is therefore

e Pt and the size of the population at any time t is     et_5)ds p.
                                               —12—




The main implication of this set of assumptions is that,                although     agents are

of different ages, they all have at any time the same expected remaining life,

     and thus the same marginal propensity to consume out of wealth.

            Two additional assumptions, about income distribution and                 financial
markets, considerably simplify the analysis. The first is that all agents

alive work and thus share labor income equally.9 The second is that agents

can save or dissave by buying or selling actuarial bonds rather than regular

bonds, i.e. bonds which are cancelled by death. Because of the large number

of agents, intermediation between lenders and borrowers can be done risklessly.

Lenders lend to intermediaries; these claims are cancelled by death of the

lenders. Borrowers borrow from intermediaries; these claims are cancelled by

death of the borrower. If the rate of interest on regular bonds is r then ar-

bitrage and the zero profit condition in intermediation imply a rate of inter-

est on actuarial bonds of (r + p). As by assumption agents have no bequest

motive, they prefer to borrow and save only through these actuarial bonds. As

a result, they leave no bequest (this clever device was introduced by Yaari

[l965])."
                  -

          The aggregate consumption can now           be   derived intuitively as follows:

(A derivation is given in the appendix.) Assume each agent is an expected

utility maximizer, with instantaneous logarithmic utility and subjective dis-

count rate 0. Then, denoting individual variables by lower case letters, his

consumption is characterized by:
                                                                     ((r +   p)dv
                      c =   (p   + 0)(w + h)       b =          e•              da
        (4).                                   ;
                                                           y5
        (5)           w (r+p)w+y—c
        c is consumption, y is non interest income, w and h are non human and

human wealth respectively. The presence of uncertainty about death modifies

the standard formulation in two ways: The relevant interest rate is (r + p)
                                                —13—




rather than r; at the same time          the   marginal propensity to consume out of wealth

is (p + 8) rather than 8.

            Aggregate consumption is obtained by aggregating (4) and (5) over all

agents alive at time t. Denoting aggregate variables by upper case letters,

this gives:


            (6)          C = (p +0) (W + H) ; H =       Y   e
                                                                S           ds


            (7)          =rW+Y—C
            Those two equations are similar to the individual equations with one —

major   —   difference.     Whereas the rate of interest used to discount non interest

income is (r + p), aggregate non human wealth accumulates at rate r, not (r + p).

This is because, although the interest on actuarial bonds is (r + p)W, a por-

tion, pW, is extinguished with the death of wealth holders. Thus, the

discount rate for aggregate human wealth (r+p) is higher than the discount

rate for aggregate non—human wealth (r). The simple form of the result is

due to the existence of actuarial bonds. The qualitative nature of the

result, namely the use of a higher discount rate for human           than   for non-

human wealth does not depend on the existence of actuarial bonds but on the

positive probability of death faced by agents. It is this difference in

discount rates which implies non—neutrality of debt and deficits.


Debt and Interest rates in steady state


            Let   us introduce now a government which collects lump sum taxes T on
non interest income,        spends   G on goods and has debt outstanding In      amount D.

Debt is     in    the form of actuarial bonds, so that the budget constraint is:

            (8)          D=(r+p)D+G—T—pD-rD+G—T
                                             —14—




           The term —pD again represents the portion of the debt which is ex—

tinguished with the death of debt holders. To see why deficits matter, we

can integrate equation (8) forward, subject to the condition that debt reaches

some steady state level:
                                    —
                                            rdv            —
                                                               5 rdv
           (9)      Dt +         G e          ds =     T   e          ds


           From equation (6), now that non interest income net of taxes        is   given

by Y —   T, human wealth is given by

           (10)         =        Y e
                                     _c(r+P)dvds       —
                                                                    _5(rv+Pdv
                                                                    e        ds
                                                               T5

           In the absence of changes in government spending, changes in taxes must

leave the right hand side of (9) unehanged. This will however change the value

of the second term in (10). In effect the government "discounts" taxes at r,

agents at r + p. Current deficits, that is lower taxes today and higher taxes

later, will, unless p =     0,   increase     and C at given interest rates.

           To close the model, we simply assume that the economy is an exchange

economy, with exogenous output Y. Thus in equilibrium, private non human

wealth W is equal to government debt D. Equilibrium is therefore character-

ized by:


           (11)      YC+C(p+Q)(D+IO+G
           (12)      DrD+G-T
           (13)      H(r+p)H-Y+T
                                         —15—




        Equation (11) is the condition for equilibrium in the goods market.

Equations (12) and (13) give the dynamic behavior of debt and of human wealth;

(13) follows from time differentiation of (10)

        In steady state, 15 = H   = 0 and this, with some manipulation, implies:


        (14)          rD G—T

        (15)          r = 0 + (p + 0)p (D/(Y —   G)).

        Equation (14) is the steady state government budget constraint.

Equation (15) characterizes the steady state interest rate (on regular bonds).

        If p =   0,   then the interest rate equals the subjective discount rate

and is independent of debt and spending. If p is positive however, the interest

rate is an increasing function of both debt and spending; the larger p —           the
shorter the expected life —     the stronger the effect. In order to induce agents
to hold the debt, the government must make agents save more; it does so by in-

creasing the interest rate over the subjective discount rate. The formula sug-

gests relatively small effects of debt on interest rates. For example if

we take reasonable upper bounds, say D/Y =       1,   G =   .5Y, 0 10% and p =   5%,

r — 0 is equal to 1.5%. The strength of this model is, however, not in its

quantitative answers and these numbers should be looked at with caution.12


Dynamic effects of deficits


        Starting from steady state and keeping government spending constant, we

now consider changes in the sequence of taxes which satisfy the intertemporal

government budget constraint. From goods market equilibrium, given output and
                                                  —16—




government spending, interest rates must be such as to leave consumption and

thus the sum of debt and human            wealth constant. If D + H constant, D —H
and    from    (12), (13):


                          rD+(r+p)HY—C.
Combining this with (11) gives:


              (16)        r = 0   + p(p   + 0) (D/(Y —     G)).

          Thus the relation between interest rates, debt and government spending

holds at any point of time           and not   only in steady state. The short—term

interest rate        depends on the current level of debt and does not depend on

the   current level of deficits: a decrease in taxes, given spending has. no
effect on r. Deficits will, however, affect anticipated future real rates.
To illustrate the effects of deficits on the whole term structure, consider
now   the sequence of deficits implied by:

          (17)           D=rD+G—T(D,x) ;TD>O T>O
          Taxes are now a function of a shift parameter x and an increasing func-

tion   of debt. We want to consider only sustainable deficits and thus impose:

                         dD/dD =Ddr/dD + r —      TD
                                                       =    2r —8— TD <0

          This       requires that   taxes increase sufficiently fast as debt increases

thus closing the deficit. Let's further define the long term interest rate as

the yield on consols paying a constant coupon flow of unity.               Let   R be their

yield and      thus hR be their price. The instantaneous rate of return             on console

is

                          (1 + d/dt(h/R))/(h/R)= R         — R/R
                                       —17—




        It is the sum of the yield and of the expected capital gain, which is

negative if yields increase, or equivalently, if prices decrease. By arbitrage

between short and long bonds:


        (18)       R—R/Rr
        We may now consider the system composed of (16), (17), (18) which

determines the dynamic behavior of debt, short and long rates.13 Eliminating

r using (16) gives a system in debt and the long rate:


                   15= (O+p(p+O)y'G) D+G—T(D, x)

                   R/R (R_O_p(p+e)_).
        This   system has a saddle point equilibrium. Its local dynamics around

equilibrium are characterized in Figure 2. The stable arm Alt   is   upward sloping.

        A decrease in x, i.e. a decrease in taxes at any level of debt, shifts

the D = 0 locus to the right. The dynamics of adjustment to an unanticipated

permanent decrease in x are characterized in Figure 3. Starting from point E,

R jumps to point C,and R and D move over time along CE. The economic inter-

pretation is straightforward: A decrease in x decreases taxes, creating a

deficit. This deficit increases debt over time and thus short term rates. As

debt increases, taxes increase reducing the size of the deficit. In the new

steady state, debt and interest rates are higher. The initial deficits twist

the term structure as short term rates do not move but long rates move In anti-

cipation of higher short rates later. The term structure flattens over time,

until R and r are again equal in the new steady state.
                                        —18-.




    Figure 2. Debt, deficits and interest rates in full employment




    R                                    D=O
                                                               =0

                                                               A

R




    0

0
                                              D




            Figure 3.   Anticipated deficits. short and lonz rates



                        0                 ]       = 0




                                                  ft
R




R


        0

                    D                                                D
                                      —19--




        The effects of anticipated deficits can also be characterized using

Figure 3. A decrease in x, anticipated at t to take place at time t leads

to a jump from E to B at t, a movement from B to C from t to t and a movement

along CE' after t. Although the short term rate does not move until t, the

long rate increases at time t to cancel the effects of anticipated lower taxes

on human wealth.

        To summarize, short rates depend In this full employment exchange economy

on the current level of debt. Thus long rates depend on the sequence of anti-

cipated debt, or equivalently, on the initial level of debt and the anticipated

sequence of deficits. A sequence of higher deficits will initially increase

long rates over short rates, leading over time to higher short and long rates.

This analysis suggests that the current focus on deficits rather than on

debt is possibly misdirected. It is true that the anticipated sequence

of U.S. deficits is exceptional in peacetime and implies a large increase

in the level of debt. The current level of debt as well as the anticipated

levels of debt for the medium run are still much lower than at many times

in the past.
                                      —20—




Section IV. Deficits, Interest Rates and Output


        The focus is now on the potentially perverse effect of deficits on

aggregate demand and on output. The strategy has been to remain close to the

traditional Phillips curve augmented ISLM, extending it only to introduce the
                                               15
distinction between short and long rates.14'        The model is the following:


                   IS   : Y=Y(R,g)                  ; Yg>O
                   LM : i=L(Y,m/p) L>0 ; Lm/P<O
                   (19): r*=i_*/p
                   (20): R*/R=R_r*

                   PC : j,*/p/p=e(Y)            ey>o ;VIe()0
       Aggregate   demand is assumed to depend on the long term rate, current

income and an index of fiscal expansion g. Behind this specification is one

important assumption and a technical short cut. The important assumption is

that, although financial markets look forward, agents themselves do not; there

is no direct effect of future income or future taxes on current aggregate de-

mand (there will be an indirect effect through long real rates). We shall re-

turn to this assumption later. The short cut is that fiscal policy is summa-

rized by a single index g. We know from the previous section that aggregate

demand depends on each of the components of fiscal policy, taxes, spending

and debt. Thus a permanent increase in g may correspondto a balanced budget

increase in spending or, more interestingly, to initially higher deficits which

resorb themselves as debt accumulates to reach a new higher steady state.16
                                              —21—




            The LM relation determines the short term nominal rate as a function of

 income and real money balances rn/p. The next two equations provide the links

between this short term nominal rate and the long real rate which appears in

 the IS.     (19) defines the short real rate; stars denote expectations. (20),

which was derived previously, relates short and long real rates. The last

equation is a PhillIps curves relating inflation to the level of output.

           The long run equilibrium of this model is similar to that of the pre-

vious section:

           If


                     V 0(Y)     = 0 ; r,    V = Y (,   ),    =

                     pfr   =   L(Y, m/)

           Fiscal expansion has no long run effect on output but increases the

steady state rate of interest. Prices adjust so that real money balances

are consistent with the new rate of interest.

           To characterize the dynamics of output and interest rates to a fiscal

stimulus, we can reduce the system to a system in R arid p. Replacing the IS,

the LN and the Phillips curve in the interest rate equatIons(19) and (20):


           (21)     R*/R = (R —     r)   where ris given by:


                    r =    L(Y(R, g), m/p) — e(y(R,    g))


           The effect of output on the short term rate is a priori ambiguous: an

increase in output increases both the short term nominal rate and expected inflation.

We shall assume that the nominal rate effect dominates, i.e. that L —        >0
                                         —22—




so that an increase in output increases the short real rate.17 In this case,

fiscal expansion increases short real rates; an increase in the long real rate

decreases output and decreases short real rates. Finally an increase in

prices decreases real money balances, increasing the short real rate.

           The other relation follows from the IS and the Phillips curve:


           (22)      /p = O(Y(R,   g))


           Fiscal expansion increases output and inflation, while an increase in

long real rates decreases output and inflation.

           The analysis can again be carried out most easily with a phase diagram.

The system has a saddle point equilibrium so that given p, there is a unique

value of R consistent with convergence to steady state. The local dynamics

around equilibrium are characterized In Figure 4. The stable arm AA is upward

sloping.

        The dynamic effects of a fiscal expansion, that is, of an increase

in g are characterized in Figure 5. We first characterize the dynamics

technically: The system jumps from E to C and converges to E' over time.

From the Phillips Curve, as      Is positive, output initially increases. From

the IS, as R increases along CE', output decreases along CE'. Finally, from

the arbitrage equation, as      is positive, R is larger than r along CE'. Thus a

fiscal expansion leads initially to an increase in short real rates and out-

put; over time, output goes back to normal and short real rates increase fur-

ther. It is this increasing sequence of short rates which explains the initial

jump in long rates. Fiscal expansion therefore twists the term structure, in-

creasing long rates over short rates. This leads to more crowding out than
                                       —23--




would be predicted by models which do not distinguish between short and long

rates. It does not, however, lead to perverse effects of a fiscal expansion

on output.

        Consider however a more realistic experiment, in which deficits in-

stead of being suddenly larger, increase slowly through time. Instead of a

jump of g from g to g as before, consider instead the following fiscal expan-

sion: until time t, g is equal to, and expected to remain equal to g. At t,

anticipations change and the new actual and anticipated path of g is:


                  g='Y(g—g)

Such a path for g corresponds for example to deficits which initially grow

over time before resorbing themselves as debt accumulates to a new, higher,

steady state level. The path of adjustment is characterized in Figure 6.

R jumps from E to C; R and p then adjust along CDE' over time. The behavior

of R, r and Y is given below the phase diagram; whether r further decreases

after its initial decrease is ambiguous)8

        Thus this type of fiscal expansion has temporarily perverse effects

on output. The reason is simple. The initial current fiscal stimulus is

small. It is, however, anticipated to be large and thus to lead to high short

real rates later. As a result, long real rates increase, leading to a

decrease In aggregate demand which more than offsets the fiscal expansion,

at least initially. Thus, the model tells us, the U.S. fiscal program and its

growing projected deficits could well be initially contractionary. The model

also suggests a way in which fiscal policy could be improved. As current

deficits are expansionary and anticipated deficits contractionary, shifting

of government spending towards the present would,by increasing current deficits

and decreasing future deficits, increase aggregate demand and help the recovery.
                                   -24—




         Figure 4. Dynamics   of   interest rates and   prices

    a



        (1'                                                               44,




                                                                     p



              Figure 5.   Effects of a fiscal expansion




R                                                                0




                                                                     •—
                                                                     p    —o

                                       'I

a                 -4'--. — S — — — — — — — — — = 0




                                                                          p
                                     —25—




            Figure 6. Effects of an anticipated fiscal expansion



 a



  R                                                                     =0




  R                                                                p=   0




                p                                                              p



R,
                                            ______-- -. —
                                              — —




                             /r/
        R

        r       I-.-


                                                                        time
Y, g

                                       —————S


       —————




                                                                        time
                                     —26—




        It is, however, time to return to the specification of aggregate demand.

What if agents are forward looking and take into account the anticipated se-

quence of taxes and income, as in the previous section? First, if they take

into account the anticipated sequence of taxes, a slow increase in deficits

is not equivalent to a slow effect of fiscal expansion on aggregate demand, to

a slow increase in g: agents will realize that the present value of their tax

burden has decreased and this will increase aggregate demand even if current

deficits are still small. Second, if they take into account future income,

the anticipation of temporarily higher output and income may also increase

aggregate demand initially)9 This effect will be stronger, the smaller the

effect of liquidity constraints, the larger the effect of fiscal expansion on

output——if for example the economy is expected to have substantial unemployed

resources for many years to come. Whether these effects more than offset the

interest rate effects is theoretically ambiguous. If these income effects

dominate, the large U.S. anticipated deficits are expansionary in spite of

their effect on current long term real rates.
                                      —27—




Conclusion


        What do we make then of the new view that fiscal deficits hurt rather

than help the recovery? We have found that the Issue of sustainability has

indeed, because of the increase in real rates, become a relevant issue although

probably not yet a pressing one. We have found that in turn, at full employ-

ment, short real rates increase with the level of debt; as a result, prolonged

deficits lead to increasing real rates, thus to long rates being higher than

short rates. We have finally found that, if output responds to aggregate de-

mand, anticipations of growing deficits may be initially contractionary.

        The three models presented in this paper are simple enough that they

can withstand added complexity and realism without loosing analytical tacta—

bility. In particular integrating the first and the second, and the second

and third, would probably be quite useful.

        Finally, this paper has focused on the effects of deficits in closed

economies. One major issue is, however, that deficits are anticipated to be

much larger in the U.S. than in the other countries. This would lead in

closed economies to large differences in real rates. It is likely to lead, in

open economies with capital mobility, to large movements in exchange rates.

believe that a two—country extension of the second model will prove useful to

analyze this issue.
                                               —28—




Appendix. Derivation of the Aggregate Consumption Function



Individual consumption

          Denote by c(t, s), y(t, s), w(t, s), h(t, s) consumption, non interest

income, non human wealth and human wealth of an agent born at time t,                           as    of

time s.

          At time s, the agent maximizes:

                                                  —
                           log c(t, v)                v)OdV.
                    E(

Under the assumption of a constant instantaneous probability of death p, and

of subjective certainty about c(t, v), v                  t, this is equivalent to


          (Al)      max       log c(t, v) e
                                                      —   v)(e +

The "budget constraint" faced by the agent at time s is, if the rate on actuarial

notes is r(ji) ÷   p at time p: (the discussion and justification of the implicit
transversality condition is given in Yaari [1965, p. 1461)

                                                                                                     'V
                               —
                                   !   (r(.i)   + p)dp                                          —    I (r(ii)   + P)dii

          (A2)        c(t, v) e1                           dv =   w(t, a) +5(t v)               e                         dv
                                                                           S

          The solution to this maximization problem is:
                                                                             V
                                                                         —
                                                                                 (r(u)    + p)di.i

          (A3)      c(t, a)     (p + O)(w(t, s) + (             y(t,   v)e                           dv)



          (A4)       dw(t, s)/ds =     (r(s)    + p)w(t, a) + y(t, a) —            c(t,    a)
                                                    -29—




Aggregate consumption


          Denote aggregate consumption, aggregate non interest income, aggregate

non human wealth and aggregate human wealth at time                  s   by C(s), Y(s), W(s) and

H(s). Then

                                                          —
                      C(s) =             c(t,   s) e(t


                                                                            'V
                                                                                   +   p)dii
                                                         -
   (A5)     C(s) =   (0 + p)[W(s) +               e(t        S)P( Y(t, v) e                    dv)dt]

where.
                                            —
          W(s) =       w(t,       s) e(t


          Under the assumption that non interest income is the same for all

agents alive, y(t, v)         pY(v) V t and all agents alive have the same human

wealth. Thus (A5) can be rewritten as:


          (A6)       C(s) = (0 + p)(W(s) + H(s)]

                                   'V
                                        (r(p)   + p)di
                               —)
          H(S) =              e                         dv
                   5 Y(v)
Differentiating W(s) with respect to time gives:



                                                              8d (t s) e(t5)1)dt
                 dW(s)/ds =   w(s, s) — pW(s) +

Using (A4) and w(s, s)         0 gives:


          (A7)       dW(s)/ds =         r(s)W(s) + Y(s) — C(s)
                                      —30—




       Equations (A3) and (A4) are equatior(4) and (5) in the text,   equations
(A6) and (A7) are equations (6) and (7) in the text.
                                           —31—




                                         Footnotes



1. Budget of the U.S. Government, fiscal year 1984, section 3—31.

2. Sources: OECD Economic Outlook, December 1982, Table 9 and Annual

    Economic Report, EEC, November 1982.

3. For the argument to be complete, it should show why the government cannot

    issue more and more debt forever and therefore has to repudiate the debt.

    Dealing with these Issues would lead us too far astray.

4. The maximum inflation tax is relatively small. Unanticipated inflation

    may, however, If debt is in the form of long term bonds with nominal

    coupons, substantially reduce the real value of the debt.

5. An interesting attempt to estimate OECD fiscal reaction functions in

    this light and to study implications for structural deficits is described

    in Hubbard [1983].

6. The roots of the system (1), (2) (with equality) are r and —a. The charac-

    teristic vector associated with a, (x1, x2) is such that x1/x2 =   (r   +
                                 1
    Thus D — D =          + a)       e   and X — X =
                   c1(r                                c1eat
    Taking the ratio gives the equation in the text.

7. Interest payments were equal. to 7.8% of GDP in 1982, and have to be de-

    ducted from disbursements to get C.

8. The medium term budgetary objectives, as of fiscal year 1982, for

   Belgium, are of a reduction of the general government deficit from 12.8%

    in 1982 to 7% in 1985. This is to be achieved partly through a reduction

   in spending. (Source: OECD. Public Sector Deficits: Problems and

   Policy Implications. Occasional Papers, June 1983). The June 1983

   EEC projections of deficits in Belgium are, however, of 11.7% for 1983

   and 12.1% for 1984 (Source: European Economy. Supplement A. No. 6.

   June 1983, Table 9).
                                      —32—




 9. Although the model captures the'idea that agents do not have Infinite

    horizons, agents in the model do not go through a life cycle. Thus

     the model cannot be used to examine issues for which the life cycle is

    essential, such as, for example, saving for retirement or social

    security.

10. In the absence of actuarial bonds, agents would not only leave

     unanticipated bequests but might also go bankrupt. Actuarial bonds

     allow agents to insure themselves against such contingencies. Their

     presence simplifies the analysis considerably but is in no way the

     source of the non—neutrality of deficits or debt.

11. In this section, no notational distinction is made between actual and ex-

    pected values. ñ   for   example is the expected change in H.

12. Tobin [1967] developed a realistic model of life cycle to look at steady

    state savings. He did not look however at the effects of debt.

13. The system is in fact recursive.     R depends on D, but D does not depend

    on R. Consols may actually not be traded at all in the economy. R is

    introduced to get a convenient characteristic of the term structure, and

    because it will play an important role in the next section.

14. An alternative strategy would have been to imbed the aggregate consumption

    function of the previous section in an otherwise Keynesian model. It

    would however be slightly more cumbersome analytically.

15. This Is a simplified and modified version of Blanchard [19811. It is very

    similar to a ndel developed by Cardoso [19831. It is related to a re-

    cent model by Turnovsky and Miller [1982] which treats the government

    budget constraint explicitly but maintains the fixed price assumption.
                                       —33—




16. In the case where consumption is given by the consumption function

     derived in the previous section, and where consumers have static

     expectations, we can derive g explicitly. In that case,


          C + C —   (0    + p) (D +     + G .          Thus,

          g =   (0 + p)    (D —       +G.     Rearranging and using the

     government budget constraint gives:

                                  •   0—r
          g     (0+p-r)D+D+—-T
     If r is close to 0, this simplifies to:
          g = pD+D

17. (Saddle point) stability of the system does not depend on this assumption.

18. The algebraic derivation of these paths is straightforward but extremely

     tedious. The method is identical to that used in appendix B in Blanchard

     [1981].

19. This possibility is partially explored in Blanchard [1981] by the introduc-

     tion of a stock market which affects aggregate demand.
                                      —34—




References


Barro, Robert J. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?", JPE (November 1974),

     82—6, 1095 — 1117.

Blanchard, Olivier J. "Output, the Stock Market and Interest Rates", AER

     (March 1981), 71—1, 132 — 143.

Cardoso, Eliana "Fiscal Policy and Asset Prices,"mimeo, 1983.

Hubbard, G. "Structural' Government Budget Deficits:Reappraisal and Implications",

     Mijneo, 1983.

Tobin, James "Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth", Ten Studies in the

     Tradition of Irving Fisher, Wiley, NY, 1967.

Turnovsky, Steven and M. Miller "Bond Market Efficiency and Macroeconomic

     Policy in a Simple Dynamic Model", mimeo, 1982.

Yaari, Menahem E. "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance and the Theory of the

    Consumer", RE Studies (April 1965), 32, 137 — 150.
