NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAS THE WEALTH OF NATIONS DETERMINED IN 1000 B.C.?
Diego Comin
William Easterly
Erick Gong
Working Paper 12657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12657

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2006

We are thankful to Tobias Pfutze for comments and research assistance, to Michael Clemens, Pete
Klenow, Bob Lucas, Nathan Nun, Peter Peregrine, Romain Wacziarg and David Weil, for useful discussions
and to the NSF (Grant # SES-0517910) and the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics for their
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Diego Comin, William Easterly, and Erick Gong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Was the Wealth of Nations Determined in 1000 B.C.?
Diego Comin, William Easterly, and Erick Gong
NBER Working Paper No. 12657
October 2006
JEL No. N7,O3
ABSTRACT
We assemble a dataset on technology adoption in 1000 B.C., 0 A.D., and 1500 A.D. for the predecessors
to today's nation states. We find that this very old history of technology adoption is surprisingly significant
for today's national development outcomes. Although our strongest results are for 1500 A.D., we find
that even technology as old as 1000 BC matters in some plausible specifications.
Diego Comin
New York University
Department of Economics
269 Mercer Street, 725
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
diego.comin@nyu.edu
William Easterly
New York University
Dept. of Economics
269 Mercer St.
New York, NY 10003
william.easterly@nyu.edu

Erick Gong
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
207 Giannini Hall #3310
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
erick.gong@gmail.com

1. Motivation
The study of economic development usually emphasizes modern determinants of per capita
income like quality of institutions to support free markets, economic policies chosen by
governments, human capital components such as education and health, or political factors
like violence and instability. Could this discussion be missing an important, much more long
run dimension to economic development? To the extent that history is discussed at all in
economic development, it is usually either the divergence associated with the industrial
revolution or the effects of the colonial regimes.1 Is it possible that precolonial, preindustrial
history also matters significantly for today’s national economic outcomes?
This paper assembles a new dataset on the history of technology over 2500 years of history
prior to the era of colonization and extensive European contacts. It finds that there were
important technological differences between the predecessors to today’s modern nations as
long ago as 1000 BC, and that these differences persisted to 0 AD and to 1500 AD (which
will be the three data points in our dataset). These precolonial, preindustrial differences have
striking predictive power for the pattern of per capita incomes across nations that we
observe today. Although our strongest results are for the detailed technology dataset we
assemble for 1500 AD, we also find surprisingly significant effects under plausible
conditions for cruder measures of technological sophistication going back to 1000 BC.
Moreover, technological history affects not only per capita income but also population size
and thus total GDP (not surprisingly, since greater technological productivity could either
support a larger population, or a higher income for the same size population, or – as we find
– both).
We do not claim to definitively resolve WHY technology in 1000 BC or 1500 AD still
matters so much today, a question on which we hope to gain insight from further research.
We think that the simplest explanation is that technological experience has an important
effect on the ability to adopt the new technologies that have come along since the industrial
revolution.2
These results also may be consistent with several well known models of very long run
development. To give some selected examples, Kremer 1993 has a dynamic story for
population (since 1 million BC!) in which better technology makes possible a larger
population (a la Malthus), and a larger population yields more inventors to make further
technological advances. Galor and Weil 2000 (see also Galor 2005) have a related story of
1

A notable, honorable, and famous exception is Jared Diamond (1997) Guns, Germs, and Steel, however, this
work did not systematically test the effect of ancient technologies on modern incomes as we will do here.
Perhaps for that reason, the Diamond work did not change much the tendency of development economics to
focus on the modern period or at most the colonial period.
2
This is much debated in the economic history literature. Mokyr (1990, p. 169) stresses the importance of
technology for growth but argues that technological experience has limited importance for new technology
adoption: "It is misleading to think that nothing leads to technological progress like technological
progress.” Rosenberg and Birdzell (1987) also minimize the role of previous technological experience for
explaining “how the West grew rich.” Greene (2000) argues that, in the West, Greco-Roman dynamism
was part of a long continuum from the European Iron Age to medieval technological progress and the
industrial revolution.

2

very long run development with the critical added feature that advances in technology raise
the rate of return to human capital, which causes the dynamic process to eventually switch
over from extensive growth (output and population growth at the same rate) to intensive
growth (per capita income growth). Jones (2005) emphasizes even more the non-rival nature
of technological ideas, which inevitably generates increasing returns to scale (also featuring
the feedback loop between population and ideas). If societies evolve in isolation through
many eons, those who started out ahead would be even further ahead in both population
and income today.
We do not test the technology-population dynamics explicitly (lack of data on ancient
population corresponding to today’s nations makes this impossible) Moreover, we don’t
have enough data on non-technology variables to test these stories against rival hypotheses,
To consider a very popular current hypothesis for the determinants of economic
development, for example, it could also be that technological history may be proxying for
institutional history. Unfortunately, we lack the detail on ancient institutions that we have on
ancient technologies, so we cannot resolve this definitively. The aims of this paper are more
modest than sorting out these rival models, leading to a simple conclusion: for long run
development: history matters --even ancient history.3

2. Description of technology data set
The datasets presented in this paper measure the cross-country level of technology adoption
for over 100 countries in three historical periods: 1000 B.C., 0 A.D. and the pre-colonial
period around 1500 A.D. Each dataset acts as a “snap shot” in time, capturing the levels of
technology adoption by country throughout the world. In each time period, we determine a
country’s level of technology adoption in five distinct sectors: communications, agriculture,
military, industry, and transportation. By aggregating these values, we determine a country’s
overall level of technology adoption.
Technology adoption is measured on the extensive margin by documenting whether a
country uses a particular technology at all, not how intensively it is used. For example, in the
dataset for 1000 B.C., we consider two transportation technologies: pack animals and
vehicles. A country’s level of technology adoption in transportation is then determined by
whether vehicles and/or draft animals were used in the country at the time. The technologies

3

Spolaore and Wacziarg (2006) have a fascinating exploration of the effect of genetic distance on logincome distance. They take genetic distance as a difference between all characteristics vertically
transmitted from parents to children (not only genetic, but even more importantly cultural), and suggest that
differences in these characteristics act as a barrier to technology/development diffusion . They find that
countries populated by more genetically distant cultures also have more different per capita incomes. This
finding is complementary to ours because genetic distance is very persistent and was determined in a
distant past. It differs, however, in at least two respects. First, we explore the effects of technology adoption
history on current development. Our left hand side variable has a direct effect on development, while
genetic distance surely does not have a direct effect on development. It is a proxy for costs of transferring
technology. Second, by exploring a relationship in levels we are able to preserve the transitivity of our
measures. This is not the case when looking at distances.

3

that we examine change between the ancient period (1000 B.C. and 0 A.D.) to the early
modern period (1500 A.D.) to reflect the evolution of the technology frontier.
Our focus on the extensive margin of technology adoption is motivated by data availability
constraints. It is much easier to document whether a technology is being used in a country
(the extensive margin) rather then measuring the degree of its adoption (the intensive
margin). It is well documented that the Chinese were using iron for tools by 0 A.D; what is
more difficult to assess is the share of tools constructed from iron at the time.
Since our main objective is to analyze the effects that historic technology adoption has on
the current state of economic development, our datasets are partitioned using present day
countries. We use the maps from the CIA’s The World Factbook (2006) to put into
concordance the borders of present day countries with the cultures and civilizations in 1000
B.C., 0 A.D. and 1500 A.D. For example, the technologies used by the Aztecs and their
predecessors during pre-colonial times are coded as the ones used by Mexico in 1500 A.D.
In cases where a country had multiple cultures within its borders during a certain time
period, we take the culture with the highest level of technology adoption to represent that
country. This technique is justified since we are measuring the extensive margin of
technology adoption in a country. For example, in 1000 B.C. there were multiple cultures
residing within Canada’s modern day borders. The Initial Shield Woodland was the most
technologically sophisticated of these cultures and we therefore use its level of technology
adoption to represent Canada in 1000 B.C.
Our datasets are primarily influenced by the work that ethnologists such as George Murdock
and others have done on cross-cultural analysis (Murdock 1967; Carneiro 1970; Tuden and
Marshall 1972; Barry and Paxson 1971). Murdock and others were interested in compiling
data on multiple cultures and comparing their traits using analytical methods.4 A work that
exemplifies this is “The Measurement of Cultural Complexity” (Murdock and Provost 1973).
In that paper, 186 cultures are ranked by their level of cultural complexity. Cultural
complexity was measured using ten variables; these variables included the type of
transportation a culture uses, the level of political integration and urbanization of a culture,
and the degree of technological specialization. Using these rankings, one can conclude that
the Roman Empire was culturally more complex than the Masai of East Africa (Murdock &
Provost 1973: 304).
Since our interests lie in technology adoption within a specific time period, the ethnographic
data described above hold little value for our analysis. Therefore, we adapt the methodology
used in the cross-cultural analysis work to develop our own technology adoption datasets.
Murdock & Morrow (1970) in their work “Subsistence Economy and Supportive Practices”,
provide a detailed description of the methodology that is commonly used to code a crosscultural dataset (Carneiro 1970; Tuden and Marshall 1972; Barry and Paxson 1971; Murdock
and Wilson 1972). In their work, Murdock and Morrow use over 400 sources to evaluate
180 cultures. A team of researchers survey multiple sources for each culture, take detailed
notes in the form of direct quotations, record page numbers of references, and then code
and rank each culture. Inference is used by all of the authors to assist in their coding. In
4

See the Human Relations Area Files at Yale University for an extensive collection of source material for over
150 cultures.

4

Carneiro’s appendix to his dataset, he notes (1973: 854), “the presence of the trait, while not
directly observable, may nevertheless be inferred from the presence of certain other traits
which are themselves directly observable.” All of our technology adoption datasets are
coded following this described methodology.
The datasets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. are derived from the “Atlas of Cultural Evolution”
(Peregrine 2003), while we coded the dataset for 1500 A.D. in its entirety. We include a
detailed discussion about each dataset in the following sections.
2.1 Technology Datasets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D.
The datasets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. measure the level of technology adoption for
agriculture, transportation, communications, writing, and military on 113 and 135 countries
respectively. In each sector, we examine the same technologies for the two periods. The
datasets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. are based on Peter Peregrine’s (2003) “Atlas of Cultural
Evolution”5 (henceforward abbreviated as “ACE”). In this work, Peregrine evaluates the
traits (i.e. writing and records, agriculture, transportation, urbanization) of 289 prehistoric
cultures that existed before 1000 A.D. following closely the same methodology as Murdock
& Provost (1973).
The source for the coding of the “ACE” dataset is the Encyclopedia of Prehistory (Peregrine &
Ember 2001a), which is a nine volume work that documents over 250 prehistoric cultures.
The Encyclopedia of Prehistory was compiled from contributions of over 200 authors and covers
every geographic region of the world (Peregrine & Ember 2001b:3). The Encyclopedia of
Prehistory contains a profile of each prehistoric culture and summarizes the culture’s
environment, settlements, economy, and social political organization. Using the information
from each profile, Peregrine codes the traits of each culture to construct the “ACE” dataset.
It is important to note that the “ACE” limits its survey to prehistoric cultures; prehistory
refers to the time period that precedes written records (Rouse 1972: 3). Once a culture
introduces written records, it is considered part of the historic period and excluded from the
“ACE.” Since written records were introduced at different times throughout the world,
cultures have varying dates on when they entered the historic period. For example, China,
Greece, and Mesopotamia had written records during the first millennium B.C. (Rouse 1972:
8) and are coded as historic regions in the “ACE” (Peregrine 2003). Since most of the world
in both 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. is prehistoric, the “ACE” provides data that covers most of
the world. We then make inferences on the historic regions of the world at 1000 B.C. and 0
A.D. to complete our datasets.
The “ACE” provides us with data documenting the cultural traits of prehistoric societies;
our task was to convert this data in order to measure each country’s level of technology
adoption. The “ACE” dataset contains four variables of particular interest: “Writing and
5

Peregrine (2003) uses BP (Before Present) as the time variable when coding his datasets. We convert the BP
time periods to either B.C. or A.D. Peregrine’s 3000 BP dataset is used for our 1000 B.C. dataset and
Peregrine’s 2000 BP dataset is used for our 0 A.D. dataset.
7
And in even more detail in a second appendix available from the authors that documents the information
used to code each technology for each country.

5

Records,” “Agriculture”, “Technological Specialization”, and “Land Transportation.” We
use these four variables to code the adoption of the technologies in communications,
agriculture, industry, and transportation. Table 1 documents the concordance between the
“ACE” and our technology adoption datasets.
Each of the variables in the “ACE” dataset takes on one of three values as shown in the first
column of Table 1. For example, the variable “technology specialization,” can take on one
of three values: a “3” indicates that metalwork is done by a culture; a “2” indicates that
pottery is produced by a culture, and a “1” signifies an absence of both metalworking and
pottery. We take these values and convert them to signify the presence or absence of a
technology. In our technology adoption dataset, the presence of a technology was awarded a
“1” while the absence was awarded a “0”.
Table 1: Coding Concordance Between “ACE” Dataset and the Technology Adoption Dataset
“ACE” Dataset

Technology Dataset for 1000 B.C. & 0 A.D.
( 0 = indicates absence of technology,
1 = presence of technology)

Writing & Records
1 = None
2 = Mnemonic or nonwritten records
3 = True Writing

Communication

Technological Specialization
1 = None
2 = Pottery
3 = Metalwork (alloys, forging, casting)

Industry

Land Transport
1 = Human Only
2 = Pack or draft animals
3 = Vehicles

Transportation

Agriculture
1 = None
2 = 10% or more, but secondary
3 = Primary

Agriculture
0
1
2

0,1
0,1

0,1
0,1

0,1
0,1

Technology adoption in the agriculture sector is measured indirectly, as the “ACE” dataset
did not code the actual technologies being used. We infer that the greater the role that
agriculture plays in a culture’s subsistence the more likely that advanced agricultural
technologies were employed. The appendix contains a more detailed discussion on how the
agriculture sector is coded.
An example of how we code a country in 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D will best illustrate our
methodology.

6

Korea was inhabited by the Mumun peoples in 1000 B.C. The Mumuns had no tradition of
either writing or non-written records. The Mumuns however did rely on agriculture as its
primary form of subsistence and used pack animals for transportation. In addition the
Mumuns produced metalwork and used bronze for tools (Rhee 2001). The coding for the
Mumun entry in the “ACE” dataset (Peregrine 2003) therefore is:
Writing and Records = 1
Technology Specialization = 3
Land Transportation = 2
Agriculture = 3
Based on this data, we code Korea in 1000 B.C. as:
Communication: Mnemonic or nonwritten records = 0; True Writing = 0
Industry: Pottery = 1; Metalwork = 1
Transportation: Pack or draft animals = 1; Vehicles = 0
Agriculture: 10% or more, but secondary = 1; Primary = 1
We aggregate the technology adoption measures at the sector level by adding all the
individual technology measures in the sector and dividing the sum by the maximum possible
adoption level in the sector. In this way, the sectoral adoption level belongs to the interval
[0,1]. The overall adoption level in each country and time period is the average of the
adoption level across sectors. Obviously, the overall adoption level also belongs to the
interval [0,1].
The adoption levels in the four sectors just reported in Korea in 1000 B.C. are the following:
Communications = 0
Industry = 1
Transportation = 0.5
Agriculture = 1
Coding for the historic regions of the world in 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. relied on a combination
of inference and additional documentation. Cultures with written records were the most
technologically sophisticated at the time. A survey of the historic regions during these
periods confirms this assumption. In 1000 B.C., the historic regions include China, Egypt,
Greece, and Mesopotamia, while in 0 A.D. the historic regions expand to encompass
Western Europe and Persia. All of these regions had advanced civilizations that were highly
innovative relative to the rest of the world. For example, by 1000 B.C., Egypt, China,
Greece, and Mesopotamia had growing city populations which relied on high productivity
agriculture (Scarre 1988:122,144; O’Brien 1999:30,36). Wheeled chariots were invented in
Mesopotamia around 3000 B.C., and were used in Egypt, Greece, and China by 1000 B.C.(
Encyclopedia Britannica 2006h). Jewelry and decorative ornaments constructed out of gold
and silver are also evident in these cultures (Scarre 1988; O’Brien 1999). We therefore code
the historic regions in our dataset as having the highest level of technology adoption in
agriculture, communications, transportation, and industry.

7

The “ACE” did not contain any variables that correspond to technologies used for military
purposes. To assess a country’s level of technology adoption for the military we use the
“ACE” dataset to determine which metals were available for each culture. Metallurgy is
integral for the development of more advanced weapons (Macksey 1993:216; Scarre 1988;
Collis 1997:29). The progression from stone to bronze and finally iron corresponded to a
progression of more powerful weapons; stone weapons were replaced by bronze swords and
daggers; iron weapons were considerably stronger than their bronze predecessors (Hogg
1968:19-22). The “ACE” dataset defined many cultures by the type of metals they were
using for tools. Neolithic cultures are coded as having stone weapons, while Bronze and
Iron Age cultures were coded as having bronze and iron weapons respectively. Prehistoric
cultures not adequately described in the “ACE” dataset are coded through inference. Since
the people of the New World did not use bronze until near the time of European contact, all
countries in North and South America are coded as not having bronze or iron weapons in
1000 B.C. and 0 A.D (Diamond 1997:259; Kipfer 2000).
The historic regions of 1000 B.C. (Mesopotamia, Northern Africa, Greece, China) did not all
use iron for weapons. We therefore differentiate iron producing regions from those that did
not use the metal. Asia Minor and Mesopotamia are coded as using iron since the Hittites
became major producers of iron in the 3rd millennium B.C. (Collis 1997:32; Kipfer
2000:257). Greece also had iron objects by 1200 B.C and is coded accordingly. The two
most prominent historic regions not possessing iron technology by 1000 B.C. are Egypt and
China. Both regions first used iron in the 6th century B.C. (Wager 1993; Lucas 1934:198).
Egypt and China however both used bronze well before 1000 B.C. (Kerr & Wood 2004:7;
Erman 1971: 461) and our dataset in 1000 B.C. reflects this.
The coding of historic regions in 0 A.D. proved much easier as iron technology had diffused
throughout Europe, the Middle East, North Africa, and China during the 1st millennium
B.C. (Kipfer 2000:258). We therefore code all historic regions as using iron weapons in the
0 A.D. dataset.
2.2 Technology Dataset for 1500 A.D.
The technology dataset for 1500 A.D. encompasses 113 countries and evaluates the level of
technology adoption across the same five sectors (agriculture, transportation, military,
industry, and communications) as the previous datasets. The technology adoption dataset
for 1500 A.D. differs from the prehistoric datasets in that it is not based on an existing work.
While the datasets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. relied on the “ACE” (Peregrine 2003) for a
preponderance of data, the dataset for 1500 A.D. is coded using over 170 source materials.
Our technology measures outside Europe are estimated before European colonization. It is
important to stress, therefore, that our technology measures in 1500 A.D. do not incorporate
the technology transferred by Europeans to the rest of the world after European exploration
began around 1500.
Obviously, there is a larger number of sources covering the technology adoption patterns in
1500 A.D. than in 1000 B.C. or 0 A.D. This allows us to collect adoption data for 20
technologies in the four sectors other than agriculture vs. the eight technologies covered in
the data sets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. As a result, our estimate of the level of technology
8

adoption in 1500 A.D. is likely to be more precise than for the earlier periods. Table 2
presents the various technologies measured in 1500 A.D.
Our technology datasets for 1500 A.D. involve surveying multiple sources (atlases, history
books, journal articles) and determining whether a technology was used in a country.
However, as with our datasets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D, the dataset for 1500 A.D. does
include a proxy for the level of agricultural technology adoption.
We must of course stress that there are many possible weak links in the chain to go from the
source material on old cultures to our dataset corresponding to today’s nation states – such
as the possibly tenuous link between ancient cultures and the territories of modern day
nation states, and the possible errors of commission and omission on whether technologies
are present given incomplete records, just to mention two. There also is likely to be selection
bias in that more technologically advanced cultures are likely to leave better records.
Despite these caveats, there are also important reasons to believe in the quality of our data.
First, as we describe below, it builds on the methodological contributions of the existing
literature. Second, it is based on a very extensive documentation described in detail in a
separate appendix.7 Third, it is much easier to code extensive than intensive measures of
technology adoption for pre-colonial periods. The former is feasible, after a significant effort
such as ours. The latter is just impossible. Third, as we shall see below, our technology
adoption measures for 1500 A.D. are highly correlated to the technology adoption measures
for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. from ACE. We find this supportive of the quality of our data given
that they were constructed in a completely independent way. Finally, as we shall show below,
the overall technology adoption measure is highly correlated to contemporaneous measures
of the development of societies such as the urbanization rate. These arguments lead us to
persist nevertheless in making the best of the always shaky nature of very old data in order to
see whether our measures have any signal along with the noise.

9

Table 2: Variables in the 1500 A.D. dataset
Variable

Description

Values

Military
Standing Army
Cavalry
Firearms
Muskets
Field Artillery
Warfare capable ships
Heavy Naval Guns
Ships (+180 guns), +1500 ton
deadweight

An organization of professional soldiers.
The use of soldiers mounted on horseback.
Gunpowder based weapons
The successor to the harquebus (the common firearm of European armies)
was larger and a muzzle-loading firearm.
Large guns that required a team of soldiers to operate. It had a larger caliber
and greater range than small arms weapons.
Ships that were used in battle are considered "warfare" capable.
Ships required significant advances in hull technology before they were
capable of carrying heavy guns.

0,1
0,1
0,1

Large warships that only state navies had the capability of building.

0,1

0,1
0,1
0,1
0,1

Agriculture
Hunting & Gathering
Pastoralism
Hand Cultivation
Plough Cultivation

The primary form of subsistence.
The primary form of subsistence.
The primary form of subsistence.
The primary form of subsistence.

0
1
2
3

Transportation
Ships Capable of Crossing the
Atlantic Ocean
Ships Capable of Crossing the
Pacific Ocean
Ships Capable of Reaching the
Indian Ocean
Wheel
Magnetic Compass
Horse powered vehicles

Any ship that had successfully crossed the Atlantic Ocean.

0,1

Any ship that had successfully crossed the Pacific Ocean.

0,1

Any ship that had reached the Indian Ocean from either Europe or the Far
East.
The use of the wheel for transportation purposes. The most common use
was for carts.
The use of the compass for navigation.
The use of horses for transportation.

0,1
0,1
0,1
0,1

Communications
Movable Block Printing

The use of movable block printing.

0,1

Woodblock or block printing

The use of woodblock printing.

0,1

Books
Paper

The use of books.
The use of paper.

0,1
0,1

Industry
Steel
Iron

The presence of steel in a civilization.
The presence of iron in a civilization.

0,1
0,1

The methodology for coding 1500 A.D. datasets follow the works mentioned previously by
Murdock and Morrow (1970), Murdock and Provost (1973), Peregrine (2003), and Carneiro
(1970). We rely on two principal inference techniques while coding the dataset: 1)
technological continuity (Basalla 1988) and 2) temporal extrapolation (Murdock & Morrow
1970: 314). Technological continuity is the idea that innovations are a result of previous

10

antecedents; innovations typically do not spontaneously arise without preexisting
technologies.8 Technological continuity allows us to infer that countries with advanced
technologies also have more primitive ones. The use of military technology in 1500 A.D.
illustrates this technique. Large warships with over 180 guns on deck were considered the
pinnacle of military technology in 1500 A.D. (Black 1996). We find that many countries
with large warships also had advanced land weapons such as muskets and field artillery. It is
not unreasonable to assume a country must first acquire land-based arms technology before
producing ships with large naval guns. Therefore, in cases such as Portugal and Germany,
where large warships were present we infer that these countries also had advance land
weaponry.
Temporal extrapolation is an inference technique we frequently use in the 1500 A.D. dataset.
This technique assumes that once a technology is introduced into a country it is not
forgotten. When a technology’s presence cannot be documented in a country in 1500 A.D.,
we look at preceding and following time periods. If a technology is used by a country before
1500 A.D. we infer that it was used during 1500 A.D. as well. An example of this is our
coding of transportation technology in China. We were unable to document the presence
of the magnetic compass in China during 1500 A.D., but could do so in the 2nd century
A.D. (Adshead 1988:156). By temporal extrapolation, we infer that the magnetic compass
was still used in China in 1500 A.D. We also use temporal extrapolation to infer the absence
of a technology in a country if something at a point in time is documented as a “first.” Since
the first printing press in the Arabic world was established in Lebanon in 1706 (Stearns
2001: 357), we infer that all Arabic countries did not have printing press technology in 1500
A.D.
Country concordance for the 1500 A.D. dataset follows the methodology we described in
the introduction. We assume that a technology used by a civilization diffuses throughout the
regions it controlled. An example is the Ottoman Empire. The Ottomans controlled a wide
swath of territory during 1500 A.D., including but not limited to modern day Egypt, Libya,
Greece, and Iraq. Technologies used by the Ottoman Empire were assumed to have
diffused from Turkey to all the countries we cited as being under Ottoman control.
The following passages briefly describe the process of determining levels of technology
adoption for the military, agriculture, communications, transportation, and industrial sectors.
Further discussion on our coding methodology is in the appendix.
Military technology in 1500 A.D.
We measure a country’s level of military technology adoption by documenting the presence
of land and sea based weapons in a country. In total, we document the presence of eight
variables for each country.
The variables that represent technology for land weaponry include: the presence of a
standing army, the use of firearms, muskets, cavalry, and field artillery. Sea based weapons
are measured by the presence of naval warships and their armaments. The types of sea
8

See Basalla (1988:30-57) for a number of case studies documenting technological continuity or technological
evolution.

11

based weapons we document are: warfare capable ships, ships with heavy naval guns, and
heavy warships that have over 180 guns and weigh over 1500 tons.
Agricultural Technology in 1500 A.D.
As with the datasets for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D., we use a country’s primary form of
subsistence (hunting and gathering, pastoralism, agriculture) as a proxy for technology
adoption in 1500 A.D. This measure is rationalized by the fact that the adoption of some
important agricultural technologies is necessary for a country to move from a hunter and
gathering society to an agrarian one. In addition to this indirect measure, for those countries
whose primary form of subsistence was agriculture, we also measure the adoption of plough
cultivation.
Transportation Technology in 1500 A.D.
A country’s level of transportation technology adoption is measured by the forms of naval
and land based transportation. We examine six variables, four of which measure a country’s
naval technology, while the remaining two measure land-based technology. Land-based
technologies include the wheel and animals used for transportation. Naval-based
transportation technology adoption is measured by whether a country’s seamen used
magnetic compasses for navigation and the distances that a country’s exploration fleet sailed.
Communications Technology in 1500 A.D.
We measure a country’s adoption of communications technologies by examining the
technologies used to disseminate written information. We directly measure these
technologies by documenting in a country the presence of the following items: paper, books,
woodblock printing tools, and movable type printing presses.
The technologies we document represent the stages that many countries went through as
they developed their communications technology. By 1500 A.D., paper and books had
diffused throughout most of Asia and Europe. These technologies were also adopted in
parts of North Africa. More advanced technological countries adopted means of more rapid
reproduction of written communication, such as the moveable type press.
Industrial Technology in 1500 A.D.
Industrial technology measures a country’s adoption of metallurgical technology. We
measure a country’s extensive margin of technology adoption by documenting the presence
of iron and steel production in the country.
By 1500 A.D., iron and steel were being produced in Europe, the Middle East, and East
Asia. While iron was being used for tools throughout Africa in 1500 A.D., steel was not
present in Sub-Saharan Africa before contact with the Europeans. Also, the technology used
to produce iron and steel was not present in the New World until after European contact.

12

3. Descriptive statistics
We start the data analysis by presenting in Table 3 some descriptive statistics for the overall
technology adoption level in 1000BC, 0 A.D. and 1500 A.D. The descriptive statistics for the
technology adoption measures at the sector level are relegated to Table A2 in the appendix.
__________________INSERT TABLE 3 HERE_____________________________
The increase in the cross-country average of the overall technology adoption level between
1000 B.C. and 0 indicates the diffusion of the technologies described in the ACE. Recall that
the technology adoption data set for 1500 A.D. contains different technologies than the first
two periods. The decline in the average level of adoption in 1500 A.D. indicates that these
technologies had diffused less than the technologies from ACE in 0 A.D.
An important question that the descriptive statistics can answer is how large is the crosscountry dispersion in technology adoption. The binary nature of our measures of technology
adoption for individual technologies provides two benchmarks to interpret the cross-country
dispersion in technology adoption.9 First, the maximum range for the average adoption level
across countries is the interval [0,1]; 0 for a country that has not adopted any of the
technologies and 1 for a country that has adopted all the technologies. Second, the
maximum cross-country dispersion in adoption would occur when half of the countries have
adopted all the technologies and the other half has adopted none. In this case the standard
deviation of the average adoption level across countries would be 0.5.
In Table 3 we can observe how the range of the average adoption level across countries was
[0, 1] in all three periods. The fact that these ranges are the maximum possible signals a large
cross-country dispersion in overall technology adoption.
This conclusion is strengthened by exploring the cross-country standard deviation of the
aggregate adoption level. In 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. this standard deviation is 0.28 and in 1500
A.D. it increases to 0.32. These represent 56 and 64 percent, respectively, of the maximum
feasible dispersion of the aggregate adoption measures. Finally, it is quite remarkable that the
cross-country dispersion in overall technology adoption has remained roughly constant over
the three periods despite the 2500 years that separate the first from the third.
Figures 1 through 3 and Table 4 explore the cross-country variation in the overall technology
adoption level. Table 4 explores the variation across continents in overall technology
adoption. Figures 1 through 3 present a world map with the overall technology adoption
level in each country and historical period. We use four colors to indicate technology
adoption levels between 0 and 0.25, between 0.25 and 0.5, between 0.5 and 0.75 and
between 0.75 and 1. Darker colors represent a higher overall technology adoption level.
Missing values are represented in white.

9

The exceptions to this rule are the measures of technology adoption in agriculture.

13

__________________INSERT TABLE 4 HERE_____________________________

In all three periods, Europe and Asia present the highest average levels of overall technology
adoption, while America and Oceania present the lowest.
____________ INSERT FIGURES 1-3 HERE ______________________
A glimpse to the figures suffices to note that there is substantial variance in overall
technology adoption both across and within continents. To make observation more precise,
we decompose the cross-country variation in overall technology adoption between the
variation within continents and the variation across between continents. In 1000BC, about
65 percent of the variance in overall technology adoption is due to variation within
continents and 35 percent due to variation between continents. These proportions are
reversed in 0 A.D. and in 1500 A.D. the share of total variance due to the between continent
component rises to 78 percent.
Table 5 provides a more detailed comparison of the evolution of overall technology
adoption in the most advanced countries. These countries correspond to four civilizations:
Western Europe, China, the Indian civilization and the Arab people. Western Europe
includes Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium and
Netherlands. The Indian civilization includes India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Finally, the
Arab civilization includes Saudi Arabia, UAE, Yemen, Oman, Iraq, Iran, Syria, Lebanon,
Jordan, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco.
________________ INSERT TABLE 5 HERE _______________________
In 1000 B.C. the Arab empire and China have an overall technology adoption level of 0.95
and 0.9 respectively, while in India and Western Europe the average adoption level are 0.67
and 0.65 respectively. In 0 A.D. India and Western Europe catch up with China and the
Arab empire. In 1500 A.D. Western Europe has completed the transition and is the most
advanced of the four great empires with an average overall adoption level of 0.94. China
remains ahead most countries with 0.88. But the Indian and the Arab empires have fallen
behind. The average overall adoption levels in these empires are 0.7.

4. Technology history and current development
Without more delay, we turn next to the question that motivates our exploration. Namely,
whether centuries-old, pre-colonial technology history determines development today. To
answer this question, we estimate the following regression
yc = α + βTc + uc

(1)

where yc is the log of PPP adjusted per capita income in 2002 A.D., Tc is the measure of
technology adoption and uc is the error term.
14

___________ INSERT TABLE 6 HERE______________
The first three columns of Table 6 report the estimates of regression (1) when Tc is measured
successively by the overall adoption level in 1000 B.C., in 0 and in 1500.A.D. (T-statistics are
in parentheses.) The technology adoption level in 1000 B.C. is positively associated to the log
of per capita GDP in 2002, though this association is only significant at the ten percent level.
Technology adoption in 0 A.D. is not significantly correlated to current development. The
overall technology adoption level in 1500 A.D. is positively and significantly associated to
current income per capita. This measure of technology in 1500 A.D. explains 18 percent of
the variation in log per capita GDP in 2002.
In addition to being statistically significant, the effect of technology on development is
quantitatively large. Changing from the maximum (i.e. 1) to the minimum (i.e. 0) the overall
technology adoption level in 1500 A.D. reduces the level of income per capita in 2002 by a
factor of 5.
Figure 4 presents the scatter plot between overall technology adoption level in 1500 A.D.
and current development. The positive relationship between these two variables is quite
transparent. It is clearly not driven by outliers. In the bottom left quadrant of the plot we can
see many African countries that had adopted very few of the technologies in our 1500
sample and that are quite poor today. European countries are in the top right corner.
Countries that roughly correspond to ancient empires such as Egypt, Iran, China, India, and
Pakistan were middle-income countries in 2002 and had adopted between 70 and 90 percent
of the technologies in our 1500 A.D. sample. These countries are slightly below the
regression line in the bottom right quadrant of Figure 4.
___________ INSERT FIGURE 4 HERE______________
Latin American countries were behind the median country in the overall technology
adoption level in 1500 but today they are middle income countries. This very likely has
something to do with the long period of European settlement in Latin America, even though
the European settlers were generally a minority of the population. Finally, in the top left
corner of Figure 4 we find the Neo-Europes. That is the US, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand. These were among the countries with most primitive technology in 1500 A.D. but
are among the World’s richest countries today. This is very likely due to the large-scale
replacement of the original inhabitants with European settlers.
We would expect that the European settlers in the Spanish and Portuguese colonies and in
the Neo-Europes affected quite dramatically the process of technology transfer, human
capital accumulation and institutional development in these countries during the colonial
period. Another place where there was large scale (albeit still minority) European settlement
was southern Africa. Of course, there could be technology transfer in any colonized nation,
but the duration and intensity of the influence of the settlement processes in southern
Africa, Latin America and the Neo-Europes suggest adding special controls. Further, the

15

difference in the degree to which Europeans colonizers substituted for the local population
justifies the distinction between the Neo-Europes and Latin America/southern Africa.
To formalize this intuition, we use the fraction of European settlers in total population in
1900 from Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001).10 This fraction was over 90 percent for
the Neo-Europes, between 15 percent and 65 percent for South Africa, Lesotho and
Swaziland, and most countries in Latin America, and below 15 percent for the rest of nonEuropean countries.
Based on this, we create two dummies. The first captures maximum European influence, and
takes a value of one for the US, Canada, New Zealand and Australia and is zero for the rest
of the countries. The second dummy reflects lesser European influence than in the neoEuropes, and takes a value of one for the Latin American colonies of Spain and Portugal
(see the appendix for a complete list), South Africa, Lesotho and Swaziland, and is zero
otherwise. This yields the following regression equation:
yc = α + β Tc + Majorc + Minorc + uc

(2)

_______________ INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE_________________
Columns 4 through 6 in Table 6 report the estimates of equation (2) with Tc measured
successively by the overall technology adoption level in 1000B.C., 0 and 1500 A.D.
_______________INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE_____________________
We find that the European influence dummies have a significant positive effect on current
per capita income. Further, when including the European influence dummies, the correlation
between the overall technology adoption and current development increases. In particular,
the effects of the technology adoption levels in 1000 B.C. and 0 on current per capita
income become statistically significant, and the effect of technology in 1500 A.D. almost
doubles. In other words, once we control for the most obvious historical example of
replacement of the indigenous technology by technologies brought by new settlers,
technology in ancient times becomes a significant predictor of per capita income today.
_______________INSERT FIGURE 7 HERE_____________________
In addition to being significant, the effect of technology history on current development is
large. An increase in the overall adoption level from 0 to 1 in 1000 B.C. or in 0 A.D. is
associated with an increase in income per capita in 2002 by a factor of 4. A similar increase
in the overall adoption level in 1500 A.D. is associated with an increase in per capita income
in 2002 by a factor of 18. This is half of the current difference in income per capita between
the top and bottom 5 percent of the countries in the world.

10 Similar results are obtained using the share of population from European descent in 1975 from Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2001) or the fraction of European settlers 100 years after first settlement from Easterly
and Levine (2006).

16

Similarly, 20 percent of the income difference between Europe and Africa is explained by
Africa’s lag in overall technology adoption in 1000 B.C., 7 percent is explained by the
technology distance in 0 A.D., and 75 percent is explained by Africa’s lag in overall
technology adoption in 1500 A.D. This gives a very different perspective on Africa’s poverty
compared to the usual emphasis on modern governments. It also shifts backward in time the
historical explanations for Africa’s poverty, compared to the usual emphasis of historians on
the slave trade and colonialism.11
Figures 5 through 7 display the scatter plots of the current income per capita and overall
technology adoption after regressing these variables on the European influence dummies.
These figures confirm the significant association between current development and historical
technology after conditioning on the European influence dummies. Clearly, the strongest
relationship holds between overall technology adoption in 1500 A.D. and current
development.
Finally, we explore which sectors’ technology are driving the observed association between
overall technology adoption and current development. To investigate this question we
estimate the following regression for each of the three pre-colonial periods.
yc = α + ∑ β iTic + Majorc + Minorc + uc

(3)

i

In this specification, i indexes each of the 5 sectors.
_________INSERT TABLE 7 HERE___________________________
Table 7 reports the estimates of regression (3) for each time period. The main finding is that
different sectors are driving the positive relationship between overall technology adoption
and current development for different periods. The sophistication of agricultural technology
in 1000 B.C. seems important for current development but the importance of agricultural
technology declines for later periods. Technology adoption history in communications and
industry in 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. does not have a positive effect on current development
(communication in 1000 B.C. is negative and significant.) In 1500 A.D., however, the degree
of technology adoption in communication has a strong positive effect on current
development. Military technology adoption history in 1000 B.C. and 1500 A.D. have
important positive effects on current development. Finally, technology adoption history in
transportation in 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. has a positive effect on current development but the
transportation technology adoption variable in 1500 A.D. does not affect current
development. This variation in the conditional correlation of sectoral technology history
provides some justification for looking at the overall technology adoption measure as the
main variable of interest

There was some slave trade before 1500 A.D. across the Sahara and along the Indian Ocean. However, most
accounts of the negative effects of the slave trade stress the Atlantic slave trade, which only became nontrivial
after 1500 A.D.

11

17

5. Robustness and Discussion
Next we discuss the robustness and interpretation of the main fact uncovered in the
previous section, that technology history is positively and strongly associated with current
development.
A. Robustness
We start by exploring whether we are identifying the effect of historical technology on
current development through the cross-continent variation of also through the within
continent variation. To answer this question, the first three columns of Table 8 report the
estimates of regression (2) when adding three continent dummies to the control set.
_______________INSERT TABLE 8 HERE______________________
We extract two main conclusions from columns 1 through 3. First, much of the effect of
technology history is detected from the cross-continent variation. Adding the continent
dummies eliminates the effect of overall technology adoption in 1000 B.C. on current
development (column 1), and by 60 percent the effect of technology adoption in 0 A.D.
(column 2) and in 1500 A.D. (column 3) on current development. The flip side of this is that
a significant fraction of the effects of technology adoption history in 0 A.D. and 1500 A.D.
on current development is driven by the within continent variation. In particular, the within
continent variation in overall technology adoption in 1500 A.D. can account for cross
country variation in current income per capita by a factor of 3.25. This effect is statistically
significant.
Galllup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999) have argued that the latitude is an important
determinant of income per capita, with the tropics at a disadvantage. Hall and Jones (1999),
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2002, Easterly and Levine 2003 and Rodrik et al. (2003)
argue that the effect of tropical location is through institutions. Columns 4 through 9 in
Table 8 report the estimates of regression (2) after controlling for the distance to the
Equator (columns 4 through 6) or whether the country is tropical (columns 7 through 9). As
emphasized by the previous literature, being far from the Equator tends to be associated
with higher levels of current income per capita. Controlling for the latitude of countries,
however, does not eliminate the strong positive effect of overall technology adoption in
1500 A.D. on current development. This effect remains statistically significant, though the
effect of technology adoption history on 1000 B.C. and in 0 A.D. on current development
become insignificant after controlling for the distance to the Equator or after including the
tropical dummy.
One natural question to study is whether more advanced technology also made higher
population feasible as well as higher per capita income. To answer this question we estimate
the effect of primitive technology on the log of real GDP (Yc) and in the log of population
(Lc), both in 2002, as indicated in regressions (4) and (5).
log(Yc ) = α + β Tc + u c

(4)

18

log( Lc ) = α + β Tc + u c

(5)

_______________INSERT TABLES 9a-9c HERE______________________
Table 9a reports the estimates of these specifications for the measures of overall technology
adoption in each of the three periods. In columns 1 through 3 we observe that the measures
of primitive technology in 1000 B.C. and in 1500 A.D. have a very significant positive effect
on current GDP. The effect of technology adoption in 0 A.D. is positive but insignificant.
Columns 4 through 6 show that countries with higher overall levels of historical technology
adoption have higher population today. This is the case for each of the three measures of
primitive technology. Unlike the regressions for per capita income, the coefficient on
technology in 1000 BC for today’s GDP and population is significant even without including
the European influence dummies.
In columns 7 through 9 of Table 9a we estimate the effect of technology adoption history on
land area by estimating the following regression:
log( Ac ) = α + β Tc + u c
(6)
where Ac is the arable land area. Our estimates show that the log of arable land area of
today’s nation states is also related to historical technology in that area. We interpret this as
evidence that countries with more advanced technologies could conquer more land and/or
could control more land more easily.
This could also be another mechanism by which advanced technology led to larger
populations; conversely countries with larger populations, thanks to more advanced
technology, could also conquer or settle more territory. Over the very long period that we
are considering, the size of nations in both area and population is endogenous. Our results
show that technology is one of the determinants of the size of nations. However, since both
land area and population are endogenous and we lack good instruments, we cannot separate
out the relationship between these two different dimensions of size.
Table 9b estimates specifications (4) through (6) adding the two European influence
dummies. This increases the effects of technology adoption history on current GDP, on
current population and on current arable land area. Hence, we conclude that historical
technology adoption facilitated both a larger population and a higher average income.
We next check the robustness of this conclusion to controlling for the distance from the
Equator which affected the significance of the ancient technology variables in the per capita
income regressions Columns 1 through 9 in Table 9c show that controlling for distance to
Equator does not affect the strong positive effect of technology adoption history on current
GDP, on current population, and on current land area. It is interesting to note that, while
distance to Equator is positively and significantly associated with current GDP in the
regressions where technology adoption history is measured at 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D., it is
insignificantly associated with current GDP when technology adoption is measured in 1500
A.D. Similarly, while distance to Equator is insignificantly associated with current population
in the regressions for technology adoption in 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D., it is negatively and
significantly associated to current population when technology adoption is measured in 1500
19

A.D. We interpret these significant changes in the mechanism by which latitude affects
current income per capita as a signal that the association of latitude and current development
is not causal and direct. In contrast, the effect of technology adoption history on current
GDP and population are robust to measuring technology in any of the three periods.
B. Why does old technology matter?
The big question that remains to be addressed is: why does centuries-old, pre-colonial
technology matter so much for current development? We cannot resolve this here for lack of
data on other crucial variables for these earlier eras, but we offer some suggestive
hypotheses.
We think it likely that two related hypotheses will be fruitful for further investigation. First, it
seems to us the simplest hypothesis with which to begin is that adopting one technology
today makes it much easier to adopt subsequent technologies in the future.12 As a result,
technology adoption is extremely persistent. Countries that adopted new technologies in
1000 A.C. were more likely to be the technology leaders in 0 A.D. Technology leaders in 0
A.D. were more likely to adopt the newest technologies in 1500 A.D. The technological
leaders in 1500 A.D. in turn were the ones best suited to implement the industrial revolution
and its many technological sequels. Hence, the leader countries in 1500 A.D. are still today
the current technology leaders. Second, we suggest (not so controversially) that technology is
a principal determinant of a country’s level of development. Hence, countries that currently
are the technology leaders are the richest countries and countries that fail to use advanced
technologies are the poorest. In short, as Mokyr (1990) memorably argued, technology is the
“lever of riches.”
We start our evaluation of this hypothesis by estimating how autocorrelated technology
adoption is over time. Table 10 presents the cross-country correlation of technology
adoption across time periods. The cross country correlation of the overall technology
adoption level between 1000 B.C. and 0 is 0.62, between 0 A.D. and 1500 A.D. it is 0.71
and between 1000 B.C. and 1500 A.D. it is 0.68. Table 11 shows that technology adoption is
also highly persistent after controlling for the distance to the Equator and after adding the
continent dummies. This remarkably high persistence of technological differences over 2500
years of human history is another important finding of our paper.13 (It is also reassuring that
the error rate on our technological measures is not disastrously high.)
12

We are hypothesizing this as a direct feature of the innovation technology. An alternative and more complex
view that is not easy to distinguish with available data is that the dependence of the technology outcome on
initial conditions is a consequence of increasing returns arising from the positive feedback loop between nonrival technological ideas and population size (see references mentioned in the introduction – Kremer 1993 and
Jones 2005; Galor and Weil 2000 and Galor 2005 also add a dynamic interaction with human capital to
generate the transition from extensive to intensive growth).
13 An important question is how our findings of technology and income persistence relate to the “reversal of
fortune”finding of Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002). Our results are not inconsistent because the
reversal of fortune is most dramatic in those places occupied by European settlers, where we have introduced
dummies. Indeed, if we focus on the sub-sample of former colonies we find a negative association between
technology history in 1500 A.D. and current development. However, this association disappears when we
introduce the major European influence dummy. We interpret the dummies as representing technology transfer
in light of our other evidence in this paper, but we cannot necessarily contradict AJR’s interpretation of

20

_________INSERT TABLES 10 AND 11 HERE_____________________
We also observe this very high persistence of technology adoption for the sector-level
measures. The average correlation coefficient between the technology adoption in a sector
in one period and in the subsequent period is around 0.5. Technology adoption is most
persistent in military, industry and transportation. In these sectors, the cross-country
correlation between technology adoption in 1000 B.C. and in 1500 A.D. it is between 0.6
and 0.69. In Agriculture the correlation is 0.42, while in communications it is only 0.22. This
latter correlation is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. All the other correlations
reported in Table 10 are significant at the 1/10000 level.14 As shown in Table 11, the high
autocorrelation of overall technology adoption is robust to controlling for the distance to the
Equator and for the continent dummies.
In the light of these estimates, technology adoption history seems more persistent than any
other determinant of development. Institutions, for example, which have been regarded as
highly persistent, have been more volatile than technology over the past two centuries.
To obtain an estimate of the persistence of modern institutions we use the Polity IV measure
of democracy. This variable takes values from -10 to 10, 10 being most democratic, and it is
available from 1800 until the present. We estimate the coefficient of democracy on
democracy 50 years ago using non-overlapping observations to be 0.59. It seems remarkable
that this widely used measure of institutions is less persistent over a 50 year period than
overall technology adoption over a 2500 year period. Of course, this could be a flawed
measure of institutions, and other deeper definitions of institutions could show stronger
persistence. For example, there is an influential intellectual tradition that locates the origins
of Western democracy and freedom in ancient Greece and Rome. However, this is
speculative in the absence of more rigorous measures and tests.
The second premise in our hypothesis is that technology has a strong, positive and
contemporaneous effect on development. Few would dispute that technology has a large
effect on development, but there is some debate about its importance relative to factor
accumulation. A very important role for technology has been shown indirectly for the postwar period by Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and Hall and Jones (1999). In particular
they show the importance of TFP to explain the cross-country variation in income per capita
nowadays. More recently, Comin, Hobijn and Rovito (2006) have compiled 100 direct
measures of technology covering most sectors of economic activity in 150 countries over the
last two centuries. They have shown that there is a strong cross-country association between
technology and income per capita and that cross-country variation in physical technology
may explain up to 50 percent of the observed cross-country differences in income per capita.
institutional differences being the explanation for this shift. We plan to investigate this further in future work.
In a broader sense, there is no reason to restrict the sample to the group of former colonies. As shown in Table
6, we find that in the whole sample there is a strong positive association between overall technology adoption
in 1500 A.D. and current development. In this sense, there is a “persistence of fortune”.
14 An alternative way to convey the same message is to estimate convergence regressions for the technology
adoption measures both for each sector and for the aggregate. The conclusion from this exercise is that there is
convergence but at an extremely slow pace.

21

__________________INSERT TABLE 12 HERE______________________
One difficulty in demonstrating the contemporaneous connection between technology and
development is that we do not have historical series for income per capita that go back very
far. An alternative route suggested by several authors15 consists in using the urbanization rate
as proxies for development level (they are strongly correlated in the modern data across
countries.) This is a particularly good proxy for pre-modern periods such as the ones
covered by our technology adoption data set.
The urbanization rate for 1000 B.C. and 0 A.D. come from Peregrine’s “ACE”,16 while the
urbanization rate for 1500 A.D. come from Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002). Table
12 reports the estimated contemporaneous effects of overall technology adoption on the
urbanization rate. We find that there is a strong and positive contemporaneous association
between technology adoption history and the contemporaneous urbanization rates. We
extract two conclusions from this finding. First, it provides further support for the quality of
our measures of technology adoption in pre-colonial times. Second, if we grant that
urbanization is a good proxy for development, it shows that the contemporaneous
relationship between technology adoption and development also holds in earlier periods.
In columns 4 through 6 of Table 12 we show that the positive contemporaneous association
between overall technology adoption and the urbanization rate is robust to controlling for
distance to the Equator. Indeed, distance from the Equator typically does not have a
significant effect on urbanization. Since the mechanisms used to justify the effect of latitude
on development are atemporal, this finding also weakens the case for a causal role of latitude
on development.
This evidence is suggestive that ancient technological prowess facilitated modern
technological prowess, which in turn determines modern development. However, there are
loopholes due to lack of data that leaves this only suggestive. We do not have data on
ancient institutions, so we cannot assess whether technology is proxying for quality of
ancient institutions. We obviously don’t have data on ancient factor accumulation, so we
cannot assess the relative role of factor accumulation and technology in ancient development
outcomes.
One thing that we can say more confidently based on our findings is that development is a
very long run process. However much institutions, factor accumulation, and technology may
have been bound up together in the past, our findings still show that the ancient past – as
captured by our technology variable -- matters to a remarkable extent.

Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002), for example.
Peregrine (2003) constructs a measure of the urbanization rate that can take three values. 1 if the largest
settlement is smaller than 100 persons. 2 if it is between 100 and 399 persons. 3 if it is larger than 400
persons.

15

16

22

6. Conclusions
The finding of this paper is a simple one: centuries-old technological history still matters
today. The most surprising part of the finding is just how old the history can be and still
matter. Our most robust finding is that technology in 1500 AD matters for development
outcomes today, itself remarkably old when we consider that most history discussions of
developing countries start with European contact and colonization. Even more surprising is
that technology in 1000 BC and 0 AD has a significant effect in many specifications. While
of course this finding is subject to standard caveats about the quality of data from ancient
periods, the finding has important implications to the extent that it survives those caveats.
This finding is at least suggestive that technology is a strong candidate for being a principal
determinant of development; this paper increased our prior weights on technology vis-à-vis
competing explanations such as institutions and factor accumulation (not to go to the
extreme that those latter things don’t matter). We consider our findings suggestive of the
important role of technology even though missing data on ancient institutions and factor
accumulation make this suggestion less than air-tight.
What does seem inescapable from this finding (if it is taken at face value despite the caveats)
is that development is a very long run process. The tendency of policymakers and
international institutions to overemphasize the instruments under their control may have
contributed to an excessive weight being placed on the behavior of modern-day
governments and development strategies as a determinant of development outcomes.
This is not to say that history is destiny. Our technology history only explained a partial
share of the modern day variance of development outcomes, and so history is obviously not
all that matters.
Even giving any substantial weight to centuries-old history may not be so appealing from a
policy-making point of view, but the world is as it is. The world seems to be a place where
the long eons of history still matter very much today.

23

References
Acemoglu, Daron; Johnson, Simon; Robinson, James A.; Reversal of Fortune: Geography
and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution ; Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November 2002, v. 117, iss. 4, pp. 1231-94
Adshead, S.A.M. (1988) China in World History. New York: St. Margin's Press, Inc.
Barry, H. , III, & L.M. Paxson (1971) "Infancy and Early Childhood: Cross Cultural Codes
2," Ethnology. 10, pp. 466-508.
Basalla, G. (1988) The Evolution of Technology. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press.
Black, J. (1996) The Cambridge Illustrated Atlas of Warfare: Renaissance to Revolution 1492-1792.
Cambridge, United Kingdom: University of Cambridge.
Carneiro, R.L. (1970) "Scale Analysis, Evolutionary Sequences, and the Rating of Cultures"
In: R. Naroll & R. Cohen eds. A Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology. Garden City,
New York: The Natural History Press. pp: 834-871.
Collis, J. (1984) The European Iron Age. New York: Routledge.
Diamond, J. (1997) Guns, Germs, & Steel. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2003) “Tropics, germs, and crops: the role of endowments in
economic development” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50:1, January 2003.

Encyclopedia Britannica (2006h) "chariot," Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
http://search.eb.com/eb/article-9022532
Erman, A. (1971) Life in Ancient Egypt. New York: Dover Publications Inc.
Gallup,John Luke, Jeffrey Sachs, and Andrew Mellinger (1999) "Geography and Economic
Development,", International Regional Science Review, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 179-232, August
1999.
Galor Oded, "From Stagnation to Growth: Unified Growth Theory", in P. Aghion and S.
Durlauf, editors, Handbook of Economic Growth, 2005, 171-293.
Galor, O., and D.N. Weil (2000), “Population, Technology and Growth: From the
Malthusian regime to the Demographic Transition”, American Economic Review 110: 806828.

24

Greene, Kevin (2000). Technological Innovation and Economic Progress in the Ancient
World: M.I. Finley Re-Considered. The Economic History Review, New Series, Vol. 53, No.
1 (Feb. 2000), pp. 29-59.
Hall, R. and C. Jones (1999) "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per
Worker than Others?", Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, Vol. 114, pp. 83-116.
Hogg, O.F.G. (1968) Clubs to Cannon, Warefare and Weapons before the introduction of Gunpowder.
London: Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd.
Jones, Charles. “Growth and Ideas.”in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, editors, Handbook of
Economic Growth, 2005
Kerr, R. & N. Wood (2004) Joseph Needham Science and Technology in China, Vol 5 Chemistry and
Chemical Technology, Part XII: Ceramic Technology. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press.
Kipfer, B.A. ed. (2000) Encyclopedic Dictionary of Archaeology. New York: Lluwker
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Klenow, P. and A. Rodriguez-Clare (1997) "The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
Has It Gone Too Far?" with Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, NBER Macroeconomics Annual
1997, B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg ed., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 73-102
Kremer, Michael. “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to
1990,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, No. 3 (Aug., 1993), pp. 681-716.
Lucas, A. (1934) Ancient Egyptian Materials & Industries. London: Edward Arnold & Co.
Macksey, K. (1993) The Penguin Encyclopeida of Weapons and Military Technology, Prehistory to the
Present Day. New York: Penguin Books USA.
Mokyr, Joel (1990) The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. Oxford;
New York; Toronto and Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Murdock, G.P. (1967) Ethnographic Atlas. University of Pittsburgh Press.
Murdock, G.P. & D.O. Morrow (1970) "Subsistence Economy and Supportive Practices" In:
A. Spoher ed. Ethnology, 9. No. 3. pp: 302-330.
Murdock, G.P. & C. Provost (1973) "Measurement of Cultural Complexity" In: A. Tuden ed.
Ethnology, 12, No. 4. pp: 379-392.
Murdock, G.P. & S.F. Wilson (1972) "Settlement Patterns and Community Organization,"
Ethnology. 11, pp. 254-295.

25

O'Brien, P.K. ed. (1999) Atlas of World History. New York: Oxford University Press.
Peregrine, P.N. (2003) "Atlas of Cultural Evolution" In:J.P. Gray ed. World Cultures,14, no. 3.
pp: 1-75.
Peregrine, P.N. , & M. Ember eds. (2001a) Encyclopedia of Prehistory. Vols 1-8. New York:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Peregrine, P.N. , & M. Ember eds. (2001b) Encyclopedia of Prehistory. Vol 9.New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Rodrik, D. A. Subramanian, F. Trebbi (2004) “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” Journal of
Economic Growth, June 2004, v. 9, iss. 2, pp. 131-65
Rosenberg, Nathan and L.E. Birdzell Jr. How the West Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation of
the Industrial World, Basic Books: New York, paperback reprint, 1987.
Rouse, I. (1972) Introduction To Prehistory, A Systematic Approach. New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Company.
Scarre, C. ed. (1988) Hammond Past Worlds The Times Atlas of Archaeology. Maplewood, New
Jersey: Hammond Inc.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, The Diffusion of Development, mimeo, Tufts and
Stanford, March 2006
Tuden, A. & C. Marshall (1972) "Political Organization," Ethnology. 11, pp. 436-464.
Wager, D. B. (1993) Iron and Steel in Ancient China. New York: E.J. Brill.

26

Figure 1: Overall technology adoption in 1000 B.C.

27

Figure 2: Overall technology adoption in 0 A.D.

28

Figure 3: Overall technology adoption in 1500 A.D.

29

Figure 4: Technology in 1500 and current development

AUL

IRE NOR
SWZDEN
AUS
NTH
GER
FRAUNK
JAP BLG
FIN
ITA
SWE
SNG
SPA
10
GRE
POR
MTA
KOR
CZE
HUN

USA
CAN
NEW
SAU

ARG

SAF
CHL
BOT
MEX
COS
URG
BRA
TON
COL
GABBLZ
NAM
PAN
FIJ
VNZ
PER ELS
PRG
GUY GUA
ECU
NIC
HON
BOL
LES
PNG
ANG
CAM

POL
LTH
RUS
THA
ROM
TUN
IRN
TUR
ALG
BOS
UKR
CHN
PHI
EGY
SYR
IDS
IND
VTM
PAK
CMB
BAN
LAO
MLY

MOR

GHA
GUI
SUD
UZB
SEN MON
UGA
NEP
CAR
BKF
BENKEN
CHDNGA
CON
MAL
ZAM
MAD NIG ETH
GNB
ZAI
TAN
SRL
MAU
IVO

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
1
Overall technology adoption level in 1500AD

9

8

7

log per capita income in 2002

11

6

30

Figure 5: (Conditional) overall technology adoption in 1000 B.C. and
(conditional) current development

BOT
NAM

MOZ

BKF
BEN
KEN
CON
MAL
NGA TAJ
ZAM
ETH
ZAI
TAN

2
ITA
GRE

1
CRO
IRN
TUR
ALG BOS
CHN
0
EGY MOR

PAK
SUD
-1
MAU
CHD

Residual log per capita income in 2002

JAP

NOR
DEN
SWZ
AUS
NTH
BLG
FRA
GER
FIN
UNK
SWE
SPA
POR
KOR
CZE
HUN
EST
POL
LTH
ARG
MLY LTV
SAF
RUS
CHL
MEX
COS
BUL
THA
ROM
GAB
URG BRA
BLZ
KAZ USA
BEL
COL
PAN
TKM UKR
CAN
AUL
VNZ
GUY
ELS PER
SWA PRG
GUA
IDS
ECU
NIC IND
PNG
VTM
ANG
HON
GHA
GUI
BOL
CAM
LES
CMB
GAM
BAN
LAO
UZB
MON
SEN
IVO
UGA NEP MOL

-2

-.5
0
.5
Residual overall technology adoption level in 1000BC

31

JAP
SNG

HUN
SVK
EST

GUY

PNG

ARG

BOT

URG

GAB
BLZ
NAM

PRG

ANG
GHA
CAM
GAM
MON
IVO
BKF
BEN
MOZ
CON
NGA
ZAM
GNB
ZAI
MLW
SRL

LTH
CRO
LTV
MLY

CHL
COS
BUL
THA
ROM
BRA
BOS
BELDOM
COL
PAN
UKR
CAN
VNZ
AUL
ALB
PHI
NEW
IDS
ECU
INDNIC
VTM
HON
CMB
LAO
NEP

NOR
IRE
2
DEN
SWZ
AUS
NTH
BLG
FRA
GER
ITA
FIN
UNK
SWE
SPA
ISR
GRE
POR
KOR
CZE
OMA
SAU
POL

1

Residual log per capita income in 2002

Figure 6: (Conditional) overall technology adoption in 0 A.D. and (conditional)
current development

SAF
RUS
MEX
MAC
IRN
TUR
KAZ
ALG
USA
TKM
LEB
CHN0
PERJORELS
MOR
EGY
SYRSWA
GUA

BOLPAKLES
SUD
BAN
UZB
SEN-1
MAU
UGA
CAR
KEN
CHD
MAL
TAJ
YEM
NIG
MAD
ETH
TAN -2

-.6
-.4
-.2
0
.2
Residual overall technology adoption level in 0AD

32

SAU

POL
LTH

MLY
SAF
RUS
CHL
MEX THA
COS
TON
TUN
ROM
IRN
URG
BRA
TUR
NAMGABBLZ
ALG
BOS
USA
FIJ
COL
PAN
UKR
CAN
CHN
AUL VNZ
GUY
PER
PHIELS
PRG
MOR
EGY
SYR
NEW
GUA
IDS
ECU
IND
NIC
PNG
VTM
ANG
HON
GHA
GUI
BOL
CAM
LES
PAK
CMB
SUD
BAN
LAO
UZB
SEN MON
MAU
IVO
UGA
NEP
CAR
BKF
BENKEN
CHDNGA
CON
MAL
ZAM
NIG
ETH
GNBMAD
ZAI
TAN
SRL
BOT

ARG

IRE NOR
2
SWZDEN
AUS
NTH
BLG
FRAUNK
JAP GER
FIN
ITA
SWE
SNG
SPA
GRE
POR
MTA
KOR
CZE
HUN

1

0

-1

Residual log per capita income in 2002

Figure 7: (Conditional) overall technology adoption in 1500 A.D. and
(conditional) current development

-2

-.5
0
.5
Residual overall technology adoption level in 1500AD

33

Table 3: Descriptive statistics of Overall Technology Adoption
Period

Number Obs.

Average

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

1000BC

113

0.45

0.28

0

1

0

135

0.73

0.28

0

1

1500AD

123

0.46

0.32

0

1

Table 4: Descriptive statistics of Overall Technology Adoption by Continent
Period

Continent

Number Obs.

Average

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

1000BC
Europe

30

0.66

0.16

0.5

1

Africa

34

0.36

0.31

0

1

Asia

23

0.58

0.25

0.1

1

America

24

0.24

0.12

0

0.4

Oceania

2

0.2

0.14

0.1

0.3

Europe

33

0.88

0.15

0.7

1

Africa

40

0.77

0.2

0.6

1

Asia

34

0.88

0.15

0.6

1

America

25

0.33

0.17

0

0.6

Oceania

3

0.17

0.11

0.1

0.3

Europe

26

0.87

0.074

0.69

1

Africa

39

0.32

0.2

0.1

0.78

Asia

25

0.66

0.19

0.07

0.88

America

24

0.14

0.07

0

0.13

Oceania

9

0.12

0.04

0

0.13

0AD

1500AD

Table 5: Average Overall Technology Adoption in Advanced Civilizations

Civilization

1000BC

0 AD

1500 AD

W. Europe

0.65

0.96

0.94

China

0.9

1

0.88

Indian

0.67

0.9

0.7

Arab

0.95

1

0.7

Note: W. Europe includes Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, United Kingdom, Germany,
Belgium and Netherlands. Indian Empire includes India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
Arab Empire includes Saudi Arabia, UAE, Yemen, Oman, Iraq, Iran, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan,
Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco

Table 6: Technology History and Current Development
Dependent Variable

Log Income per capita in 2002
I

Overall Technology adoption level in 1000BC

II

III

IV

0.67
(1.75)

Overall Technology adoption level in 0

V

VI

VII

1.38
(2.89)
0.04
(0.11)

Overall Technology adoption level in 1500AD

1.43
(2.74)
1.6
(4.98)

2.92
(8.17)

Major European Involvement

1.9
(11.71)

2.46
(10.69)

2.82
(8.1)

3.21
(12.86)

Minor European Involvement

0.24
(1.37)

0.61
(2.67)

0.85
(3.22)

1.42
(5.89)

Constant

8.21
(39.37)

8.47
(30.35)

7.76
(37.49)

8.02
(65.07)

7.7
(27.13)

7.21
(17.27)

6.75
(27.06)

N

103

122

106

124

103

122

106

R2

0.03

0

0.18

0.09

0.17

0.13

0.5

Note: t-statistics in parenthesis computed using robust standard errors.
Major European Involvement is a dummy that is 1 for US, Canada, New Zealand and Australia.
Minor European Involvement is a dummy that is 1 mostly for Latin American, Caribean Countries and southern Africa.

Table 7: Sectoral Primitive Technology and Current Development

Dependent variable
Technology adoption in

log GDP/capita 2002
1000BC

0

1500AD

Agriculture

0.82
(2.06)

0.47
(1.29)

-0.69
(1.79)

Communications

-2.48
(3.59)

-0.21
(0.68)

1.31
(3.53)

Industry

-1.38
(1.52)

-0.83
(1.38)

0.08
(0.15)

Military

2.54
(2.4)

-0.15
(0.34)

1.2
(2.71)

Transportation

1.69
(3.51)

1.28
(3.36)

0.54
(0.94)

103
0.4

122
0.2

106
0.56

N
R2

Note: All regressions include major European and minor European dummies and a constant
t-statistics in parenthesis

Table 8: Primitive Technology and Current Development, Robustness
Dependent Variable

Log Income per capita in 2002
I

Overall Technology adoption level in 1000BC

II

III

0.09
(0.22)

Overall Technology adoption level in 0

IV

V

VI

0.2
(0.24)
0.58
(1.38)

Overall Technology adoption level in 1500AD

VII

1.18
(1.94)
1.74
(7.67)

1.58
(5.17)

0.68
(1.27)

Africa dummy

-0.34
(2.03)

-0.66
(2.39)

-1.09
(3.44)

Asia dummy

0.36
(1.31)

0.34
(1.03)

-0.55
(1.23)

America dummy

0.19
(1.04)

0.15
(0.84)

-0.22
(0.69)

Distance to equator

0.45
(0.96)
1.46
(2.8)

3.9
(8.48)

IX

0.52
(1.17)
0.04
(0.09)

Europe dummy

VIII

4.14
(9.02)

2.3
(4.99)

2.91
(4.1)

Tropical dummy

-1.13
(5.49)

-1.21
(6.42)

-0.52
(2.3)

N

103

122

106

97

114

103

103

122

106

R2

0.6

0.62

0.67

0.54

0.45

0.6

0.37

0.36

0.52

Note: t-statistics in parenthesis computed using robust standard errors.
All regressions include major and minor European involvement dummies and a constant.

Table 9a: Technology History, Current GDP, Population and Arable Land

Dependent Variable

Log GDP 2002
I

Overall Technology adoption level in 1000BC

II

Log Population 2002
III

1.75
(2.43)

Overall Technology adoption level in 0

IV

V

1.23
(2.28)
0.87
(1.36)

Overall Technology adoption level in 1500AD

VII

VIII

0.97
(2.1)

0.43
(0.68)
2.42
(4.13)

NO

IX

1.48
(2.66)

3.77
(6.14)

Major and Minor european involvement dummies

VI

Log Arable Land

1.45
(2.54)

NO

NO

N

103

122

105

112

134

117

109

131

114

R2

0.06

0.02

0.27

0.05

0.03

0.14

0.06

0

0.06

Note: t-statistics in parenthesis computed using robust standard errors.
All regressions include a constant.

Table 9b: Technology History, Current GDP, Population and Arable Land, European Influence Dummies

Dependent Variable

Log GDP 2002
I

Overall Technology adoption level in 1000BC

II

Log Population 2002
III

2.86
(3.76)

Overall Technology adoption level in 0

IV

V

1.85
(2.99)
3.63
(4.78)

Overall Technology adoption level in 1500AD

VII

VIII

2.39
(3.6)

2.03
(2.31)
3.51
(5.09)

YES

IX

2.18
(3.67)

5.91
(11.23)

Major and Minor european involvement dummies

VI

Log Arable Land

2.66
(4.14)

YES

YES

N

103

122

105

112

134

117

109

131

114

R2

0.22

0.21

0.54

0.11

0.12

0.23

0.2

0.11

0.2

Note: t-statistics in parenthesis computed using robust standard errors.
All regressions include a constant.

Table 9c: Technology History, Current GDP, Population and Arable Land, Distance from Equator

Dependent Variable

Log GDP 2002
I

Overall Technology adoption level in 1000BC

II

III

2.31
(2.56)

Overall Technology adoption level in 0

IV

V

VI

2.47
(3.18)
2.33
(2.78)

Overall Technology adoption level in 1500AD

Distance from Equator

Log Population 2002

VII

VIII

IX

1.98
(3.07)
2.57
(3.49)

5.43
(7.23)

1.55
(1.77)
4.66
(5.68)

2.96
(2.56)

3.5
(4.33)

-0.073
(0.08)

-0.52
(0.6)

N

97

114

103

105

125

R2

0.3

0.28

0.54

0.13

0.11

Note: t-statistics in parenthesis computed using robust standard errors.
All regressions include major and minor European Influence dummies and a constant.

Log Arable land

-0.46 -3.2
(0.71) (3.06)

2.53
(2.18)
1.38
(1.56)

2.1
(2.46)

0.44
(0.27)

113

104

124

111

0.3

0.23

0.15

0.2

Table 10: Correlation of technology adoption measures over time

Overall

Agri.

Military

Industry

Comm.

Transport.

Correlation (1000BC, 0AD)
p-value

0.62
0

0.39
0

0.51
0

0.39
0

0.32
0

0.64
0

Correlation (0AD, 1500 AD)
p-value

0.71
0

0.41
0

0.51
0

0.64
0

0.51
0

0.71
0

Correlation (1000BC, 1500AD)
p-value

0.68
0

0.42
0

0.69
0

0.6
0

0.22
0.03

0.6
0

Table 11: Correlation of technology adoption measures over time

Dependent Variable

Overal technology adoption in:

Overall Technology Adoption in 1000 B.C.

0 A.D.
0.63
(8.03)

Overall Technology Adoption in 0 A.D.

Distance from Equator

1500 A.D.

0 A.D.

0.58
(5.44)

0.39
(6.01)

0.63
(12.22)
0.17
(1.45)

Continent dummies
N
R2

1500 A.D.

0.7
(7.03)

106
0.67

1500 A.D.
0.33
(3.1)

0.39
(4.46)
0.72
(5.77)

NO
103
0.44

1500 A.D.

YES
94
0.6

110
0.64

106
0.7

94
0.71

Table 12: Urbanization rate and technology adoption history

Dependent Variable: Urbanization rate in
Overall Technology adoption level in 1000BC

1000 B.C.

0 A.D.

1500 A.D.

2.08
(19.38)

Overall Technology adoption level in 0

0 A.D.

1.69
(13.59)

1.68
(12.77)
8.4
(3.46)

Distance from Equator

113
0.5

Note: t-statistics in parenthesis computed using robust standard errors.
All regressions include a constant

1500 A.D.

1.96
(22.57)

Overall Technology adoption level in 1500AD

N
R2

1000 B.C.

135
0.58

52
0.2

9.5
(4.24)
0.39
(1.25)

0.16
(0.84)

-2.83
(0.57)

106
0.48

126
0.59

50
0.21

