                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ASSET PRICING MODELS WITH CONDITIONAL BETAS AND ALPHAS:
          THE EFFECTS OF DATA SNOOPING AND SPURIOUS REGRESSION

                                          Wayne E. Ferson
                                          Sergei Sarkissian
                                           Timothy Simin

                                        Working Paper 12658
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12658


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2006




We are grateful to participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Conference on Topics in Financial
Econometrics, McGill University, the Editor, Stephen Brown and an Anonymous Referee for helpful
comments. We are also grateful to Jeff Nucciarone at the High-Performance Computing Center at
Penn. State. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Wayne E. Ferson, Sergei Sarkissian, and Timothy Simin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Pricing Models with Conditional Betas and Alphas: The Effects of Data Snooping and
Spurious Regression
Wayne E. Ferson, Sergei Sarkissian, and Timothy Simin
NBER Working Paper No. 12658
October 2006
JEL No. C5,G1

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the estimation of asset pricing model regressions with conditional alphas and betas,
focusing on the joint effects of data snooping and spurious regression. We find that the regressions
are reasonably well specified for conditional betas, even in settings where simple predictive regressions
are severely biased. However, there are biases in estimates of the conditional alphas. When time-varying
alphas are suppressed and only time-varying betas are considered, the betas become baised. Previous
studies overstate the significance of time-varying alphas.

Wayne E. Ferson                                     Timothy Simin
Department of Finance                               Department of Finance
Boston College                                      Pennsylvania State University
140 Commonwealth Avenue                             University Park, PA 16802
Fulton Hall 330B                                    tsimin@psu.edu
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3808
and NBER
wayne.ferson@bc.edu

Sergei Sarkissian
Faculty of Management
1001 Sherbrooke St. West
McGill University
Montreal, Quebec
Canada
H3A 1G5
sergei.sarkissian@mcgill.ca
                                                       2



I. Introduction

Regression models for stock or portfolio returns on market-wide factors have long been a staple of

financial economics. Such factor models are used in event studies (e.g., Fama, Fisher, Jensen and Roll,

1969), in tests of asset pricing theories such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM, Sharpe, 1964)

and in other applications. For example, when the market return rm is the factor, the regression model for

the return rt+1 is:



                                           rt+1 = α + β rm,t+1 + ut+1,                               (1)



where E(ut+1)=E(ut+1rm,t+1)=0. The slope coefficients are the “betas,” which measure the market-factor

risk. When the returns are measured in excess of a reference asset like a risk-free Treasury bill return, the

intercepts are the “alphas,” which measure the expected abnormal return. For example, when rm is the

market portfolio excess return, the CAPM implies that α=0, and the model is evaluated by testing that null

hypothesis.

         Recent work in conditional asset pricing allows for time-varying betas modeled as linear

functions of lagged predictor variables, following Maddala (1977). Prominent examples include Shanken

(1990), Cochrane (1996), Ferson and Schadt (1996), Jagannathan and Wang (1996) and Lettau and

Ludvigson (2001). The time-varying beta coefficient is βt = b0 + b1 Zt, where Zt is a lagged predictor

variable. In some cases the intercept or conditional alpha is also time-varying, as αt = α0 + α1Zt (e.g.

Christopherson, Ferson and Glassman, 1998). This results in the following regression model:



                                       rt+1 = α0 + α1Zt + b0 rm,t+1 + b1 rm,t+1Zt + ut+1,            (2)
                                                       3

where E(ut+1)=E(ut+1Zt)=E(ut+1rm,t+1)=E(ut+1[Zt rm,t+1])=0. The conditional CAPM implies that α0=0 and

α1=0.

        This paper studies the sampling properties of regressions like Equation (2). We focus on the joint

affects of two important issues. The first is naive data mining and the second is spurious regression.

Naive data mining in this context refers to the practice of searching the data for predictor variables,

perhaps collectively by a group of researchers through a series of studies, and then effectively using the

same data to evaluate the model without accounting for the number of searches. Spurious regression

arises when the persistence or high autocorrelation of a predictor variable tricks the standard test statistics

into finding a “significant” relation where none exists. These two issues have been studied separately in

many previous papers. However, in spite of the large number of studies that rely on regressions like (2),

none of the work of which we are aware addresses the effects of data mining and spurious regression on

these regressions. That is the goal of this paper.

        Ferson, Sarkissian and Simin (2003) study the combined effects of data mining and spurious

regression in the context of simpler models where the only variable on the right-hand side is the lagged

predictor:



                                          rt+1 = δ0 + δ1 Zt + vt+1.                                       (3)



They focus on the slope coefficient and find that the effects of data mining and spurious regression

interact and reinforce each other. The more persistent variables which generate spurious regressions are

more likely to be discovered by data mining, so the spurious regression problem is worse in the presence

of data mining. At the same time, standard corrections for data mining are inadequate in the presence of

persistent lagged variables, so persistence magnifies the impact of data mining.

These results have profound potential implications for asset pricing regressions like (2) because the
                                                           4

conditional asset pricing literature using the regression (2) has, for the most part, used variables that were

discovered based on predictive regressions like (3). This motivates our study of how data mining and

spurious regression biases influence the asset pricing regressions. We make the assumption -- which

characterizes the existing literature well -- that the lagged variables are mined on the basis of their

performance in the predictive regression (3). The lagged instruments may be mined to predict the market

factor or to predict the test asset returns; we study both cases. We assume that the market factor comes

from theory and is not mined from data.1

         Our results indicate that the conditional betas estimated from the conditional asset pricing

regressions are relatively robust to the effects of spurious regression and data mining for lagged

predictors. The estimates of the average of the conditional alphas over time also are reasonably well

specified. However, the estimates of time variation in alpha are subject to biases. If the model is

estimated without the time-varying alpha term, the conditional betas are mildly biased. Our results help

justify the use of regressions like (2) in asset pricing studies, and suggest some refinements and caveats in

their interpretation.

         The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews the effects of data mining

and spurious regression in the simple predictive regressions. Section III further motivates our analysis of

the conditional asset pricing regressions. Section IV describes our simulation design and Sections V and

VI present the results. Section VII offers concluding remarks.




II. Spurious Regression and Data Mining

The lagged predictor variables identified in the asset pricing literature frequently are highly persistent.

Short term Treasury bill yields, monthly book-to-market ratios, the market dividend yield and some yield


1
 There may be some debate about this if the factors are taken to be those of Fama and French (1993, 1996); see Lo and
MacKinlay (1990), Ferson, Sarkissian and Simin (1999) or Conrad, Cooper, and Kaul (2003).
                                                       5

spreads have first-order autocorrelations of 0.97 or higher in the monthly data commonly used. This

suggests that spurious regression problems may arise when these variables are the predictors.

        The problem of spurious regression in simple predictive models like Equation (3) was perhaps

first studied by Yule (1926), who observed that two trending series that are actually independent of each

other are likely to appear to be related in given sample. Granger and Newbold (1974) study the problem

in the context of the levels of macroeconomic variables. Following Granger and Newbold, we interpret a

spurious regression as one in which the “t-ratios” in the regression are likely to indicate a significant

relation when the variables are really independent. The problem may come from the numerator or the

denominator of the t-ratio: the coefficient or its standard error may be biased. Ferson, Sarkissian and

Simin (2003) show that the problem in the predictive regression (3) lies with the standard errors. When

the null hypothesis that the regression slope δ1=0 is true, the error term vt+1 of the regression (3) inherits

its autocorrelation from the dependent variable. If the asset return on the left hand side consists of a

persistent expected return plus noise, the return has some degree of persistence. Assuming stationarity,

the slope coefficient is consistent, but standard errors that do not account for the serial dependence

correctly are biased and inconsistent.

        Many studies of spurious regression examine nonstationary models, where the autocorrelation of

the regressor is equal to 1.0 (e.g. Phllips (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988) or Marmol, 1998), or where

the process is local to unity, such that the autocorrelation approaches 1.0 as the sample size, T, gets large

(e.g. Phillips (1998), Valkanov (2003) or Campbell and Yogo, 2006). In such cases the sampling

distributions for simple predictive regressions like (3) can often be described by functions of integrals of

Brownian motions. It may be possible to extend this kind of analysis to regressions like (2) with data

mining in future work. We focus on stationary data, allowing for realistically high autocorrelations, in

our analysis. This is largely for tractability, but it also reflects a view that local-to-unity approximations

are most appropriate when overlapping, longer horizon returns are measured. Most of the asset pricing
                                                        6

literature that motivates this study uses monthly, non-overlapping returns data.

        The theoretical foundations for spurious regression bias with stationary but close-to-unit-root

regressors is provided by Phillips (1986, 1998), Marmol (1998), Tsay and Chung (2000), Granger, Hyung,

and Jeon (2001), and Jansson and Moreira (2006). Lanne (2002) and Boudoukh, Richardson, and Whitelaw

(2005) study regressions to predict long-horizon returns. Spurious regression bias is also observed in

models for stock returns using dummy variables as the predictors (see Powell, Shi, Smith, and Whaley

2006), in error-correction regressions (see Berkowitz and Giorgianni, 1996), and in predictive models for

the variance of stock returns (see Paye, 2006). Phillips (2001) studies problems using bootstrap methods

in the presence of spurious regressions.

        Besides spurious regression bias, the financial economics literature has examined other statistical

issues with predictive regressions for stock returns. Boudoukh and Richardson (1994) provide an overview.

Goetzmann and Jorion (1993), Nelson and Kim (1993), Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997) and

Stambaugh (1999) study biases due to dependent stochastic regressors. Stambaugh (1999) studies a predictive

regression where the analyst observes and uses the correct regressor, but a finite sample bias arises because the

future value of the regressor is correlated with the left-hand side stock return. Amihud and Hurvich (2004)

examine solutions for this bias in a multiple regression context. In our problem, the lagged variable used by

the analyst is independent of the correct regressor, so the Stambaugh bias does not arise. The bias in our case

is due to the joint effects of data mining and spurious regression bias. Other useful studies of issues that

debate the predictability of stock returns with lagged information variables include Kim, Nelson and Startz

(1991), Torous, Valkanov and Yan (2003), Lewellen (2004), Ferson, Heuson and Su (2005), Ang and Bekaert

(2006), and Chapman, Simin and Yan (2003).

        Data mining refers to the practice of searching through the data to find predictor variables. With

naïve data mining the same data are effectively used in model estimation, prediction or testing. Searching

through 100 independent variables, one expects to find about five that are “significant” at the 5% level.
                                                      7

To conduct correct inference in such a setting, it is necessary to control for the number of searches

undertaken. Leamer (1978), Hastie, Tibshirani and Friedman (2001) and White (2000), among others,

describe statistical approaches that control for the number of searches. In financial economics the

problem is usually complicated by the fact that many researchers use the same data sets. Thus, the data

are effectively mined by an unknown number of previous researchers (see, e.g. Lo and MacKinlay, 1990).

         Figure 1, taken from simulations described in Ferson, Sarkissian and Simin (2003), illustrates the

interaction between data mining and spurious regression. The critical values for significant t-statistics for

the δ1 coefficient increase with the number of variables mined and with the extent of spurious regression.

In the presence of spurious regression, persistent variables are likely to be mined, and the two effects

reinforce each other. For example, if the expected return accounts for 10% of the stock return variance,

we only have to consider mining in a set of 5 to 10 instruments to obtain critical values as high as those

obtained with 50 to 100 instruments and no spurious regression. The figure illustrates that, even with a

modest amount of data mining, the combined effects have a powerful impact.




III. Regressions with Time-varying Alphas and Betas

The conditional asset pricing literature using regressions like (2) has evolved from the literature on pure

predictive regressions. First, studies identified lagged variables that appear to predict stock returns. Later

studies, beginning with Gibbons and Ferson (1985), used the same variables to study asset pricing

models. Thus, it is reasonable to presume that data mining is directed at the simpler predictive

regressions. The question now is: How does this affect the validity of the subsequent asset pricing

research that uses these variables in regressions like (2)? That is the central question addressed by this

study.

         Table 1 summarizes representative studies that use the regression model (2). It lists the sample
                                                          8

period, number of observations and the lagged instruments employed. It also indicates whether the study

uses the full model (2), with both time-varying betas and alphas, or restricted versions of the model in

which either the time-varying betas or time-varying alphas are suppressed. Finally, the table summarizes

the largest t-statistics for the coefficients α1 and b1 reported in each study. If we find that the largest t-

statistics are insignificant in view of the joint effects of spurious regression and data mining, then none of

the coefficients are significant. We return to this table later and revisit the evidence.

        Using regression models like Equation (2), the literature has produced a number of “stylized

facts.” First, studies typically find that the intercept is smaller in the “conditional” model (2) than in the

“unconditional” model (1): ⏐α⏐ > ⏐α0⏐. The interpretation of these studies is that the conditional CAPM

does a better job of “explaining” average abnormal returns than the unconditional CAPM. Examples with

this finding include Cochrane (1996), Ferson and Schadt (1996), Ferson and Harvey (1997, 1999), Lettau

and Ludvigson (2001) and Petkova and Zhang (2005). Second, studies typically find evidence of time

varying betas: The coefficient estimate for b1 is statistically significant. Third, studies typically find that

the conditional models fail to completely explain the dynamic properties of returns: The coefficient

estimate for α1 is significant, indicating a time-varying alpha. Our objective is to study the reliability of

such inferences in the presence of persistent lagged instruments and data mining.




IV. The Simulation Design

The data in our simulations are generated according to:



                                   rt+1 = βt rm,t+1 + ut+1,                                                  (4)

                                   βt = 1 + Z t * ,

                                   rm,t+1 = μsp + k Z*t + wt+1.
                                                         9

We use the simulated data to run the regression model (2), focusing on the t-statistics for the coefficients

{α0, α1, b0, b1}. The variable Z*t in Equation (4) is an unobserved latent variable that drives both expected

market returns and time-varying betas. The term βt in Equation (4) is a time-varying beta coefficient. As

Z t* has mean equal to zero, the expected value of beta is 1.0. When k≠0 there is an interaction between

the time variation in beta and the expected market risk premium. A common persistent factor drives the

movements in both expected returns and conditional betas. Common factors in time-varying betas and

expected market premiums are important in asset pricing studies such as Chan and Chen (1988), Ferson

and Korajczyk (1995) and Jagannathan and Wang (1996), and in conditional performance evaluation, as

in Ferson and Schadt (1996). There is a zero intercept, or “alpha,” in the data generating process (4),

consistent with asset pricing theory.

        Because the spurious regression problem is driven by biased estimates of the standard error, at

least in the context of the regression (3), the choice of the standard error estimator is crucial. In a

simulation exercise, it is possible to find an efficient unbiased estimator, since we know the “true” model

that describes the simulated regression error. Of course, this will not be known in practice. To mimic the

practical reality, the analyst in our simulations uses the popular heteroskedasticity-and-autocorrelation

consistent (HAC) standard errors from Newey and West (1987), with an automatic lag selection

procedure. The number of lags is chosen by computing the autocorrelations of the estimated residuals,

and truncating the lag length when the sample autocorrelations become “insignificant” at longer lags.2



Modeling the Market Return

        The market return data, rm,t+1, are generated as follows. We set the parameter μsp = 0.0071 to


2
  Specifically, we compute twelve monthly sample autocorrelations and compare the values with a cutoff at two
approximate standard errors: 2/√T, where T is the sample size. The number of lags chosen is the minimum lag length at
which no higher order autocorrelation is larger than two standard errors.
                                                                  10

equal the monthly average return of the S&P500 stock index in excess of the one-month Treasury bill.

The variance of the error is σw2 = σsp2 - k2 Var(Z*), where σsp = 0.057 matches the S&P500 return and

Var(Z*) = 0.055, is the estimated average monthly variance of the market betas on 58 randomly selected

stocks from CRSP over the period 1926-1997.3 The predictor variables follow an autoregressive process:



                                                    ⎧⎪ p * 0 ⎫⎪ *                   ⎛ * ⎞
                                  ( Z t* , Z t )' = ⎨         ⎬( Z t −1 , Z t −1 )'+⎜ ε t , ε t ⎟'.          (5)
                                                     ⎪⎩ 0 ⎪⎭
                                                           p                        ⎝           ⎠



The assumption that the true expected return is autoregressive follows studies such as Lo and MacKinlay

(1988), Conrad and Kaul (1988), Fama and French (1988b) and Huberman and Kandel (1990).

         The errors (εt*,εt) are drawn randomly as a normal vector with mean zero and covariance matrix,

∑. The covariance matrix is diagonal, Zt and Zt* are independent, and the true value of δ1 in the regression

(3) is zero. We build up the time-series of the Z and Z* through the vector autoregression (5), where the

initial values are drawn from a normal with mean zero and variances, Var(Z) and Var(Z*). The other

parameters that calibrate the simulations, {μ, σu2, ρ, ρ*, and ∑}, are described below.



Modeling Data Mining

         Our simulations capture the interaction between spurious regression and data mining, where the

instruments to be mined are independent as in Foster, Smith and Whaley (1997). There are L measured


3
  We calibrate the variance of the betas to actual monthly data by randomly selecting 58 stocks with complete CRSP data
for January, 1926 through December, 1997. Following Fama and French (1997) we estimate simple regression betas for
each stock's excess return against the S&P500 excess return, using a series of rolling 5-year windows. For each window
we also compute the standard error of the beta estimate. This produces a series of 805 beta estimates and standard error
estimates for beta for each firm. We calibrate the variance of the true beta for each firm to equal the sample variance of
the rolling beta estimates minus the average estimated variance of the estimator. Averaging the result across firms, the
value of Var(Z*) is 0.0550. Repeating this exercise with firms that have data from January of 1926 through the end of
2004 increases the number of months used from 864 to 948 but decreases the number of firms from 58 to 46. The value
of Var(Z*) in this case is 0.0549.
                                                      11

instruments over which the analyst searches for the “best” predictor of the test asset return, based on their

Newey-West t-ratios in the univariate regression (3). In Equation (5) Zt becomes a vector of length L,

where L is the number of instruments through which the analyst sifts. The error terms (εt*, εt) become an

L+1 vector with a diagonal covariance matrix; thus, εt* is independent of εt. Following Ferson, Sarkissian

and Simin (2003), we compile a randomly-selected sample of 500 potential instruments, through which

our simulated analyst sifts to mine the data. We select the 500 series randomly from a much larger sample

of 10,866 potential variables, as described in the appendix. The 500 series are randomly ordered, and then

permanently assigned numbers between 1 and 500. When a data miner in our simulations searches

through, say 50 series, we use the sampling properties of the first 50 series to calibrate the simulations.



Modeling Persistence

        We use our sample of potential instruments to calibrate the amount of persistence in the "true"

expected market returns, ρ*. Fesson, Sarkissian and Simin (2003) argue that if the instruments we see in

the literature arise spuriously from data mining, they are likely to be more highly autocorrelated than the

underlying “true” expected returns. However, if the instruments in the literature are a realistic

representation of expected stock returns, their autocorrelations may be a good proxy for the persistence of

the true expected returns. The mean autocorrelation of our 500 variables is 15% and the median is 2%.

Of the 13 popular instruments from the literature surveyed by Ferson Sarkissian and Simin (2003, Table

1), the median autocorrelation is 95%. We use ρ*= 95% for the results reported in the tables. We also

experiment with smaller values of ρ* as described below. With larger values of ρ* the biases we document

become even more severe.

        The autocorrelations of the observed instruments, denoted by the L-vector, ρ, are set equal to the

sample autocorrelations of the first L instruments in our 500 potential instruments, rescaled around the
                                                            12

value of 0.95.4 The rescaling allows us to center the distribution of autocorrelations at 0.95 while

preserving the range in the original data.5 The simulations match the unconditional variances of the

instruments, Var(Z), to the data. The first element of the covariance matrix Σ is equal to σ*2. For a

typical i-th diagonal element of Σ, denoted by σi, the elements of ρ(Zi) and Var(Zi) are given by the data,

and we set σi2 = [1-ρ(Zi)2]Var(Zi).



Coefficients of Determination

         In the asset pricing regressions there are two ways to think about R-squared. The predictive R-

squared, Rp2, measures the proportion of the variance of the market return that could be predicted if Z*

was observed: Rp2 = Var{E(rt+1|Zt*)}/Var(rt+1). We choose the scale parameter, k, to match the values of

Rp2 and Var(Z*), which imply k2 = σsp2 Rp2 / Var(Z*).

         The R-squares observed when the regressors include a contemporaneous market return, as in (2),

will be higher than those of pure predictive regressions. Hence, we define the contemporaneous R-

squared, Rc2 = Var{βtrm,t+1)}/Var(rt+1). This is the R2 that could in principle be observed by using the

contemporaneous market return as the regressor, if the true value of the time-varying beta was known.

The two versions of R-squared are monotonically related in our experiments and we report only the

predictive Rp2 in the tables.

         The final parameters of the simulations are chosen to match the values of ρ and Rp2 as follows.

We set σε2 = Var(Z*) (1-ρ2) and we set σu2 so that the predictive R-squared of the return rt+1 is equal to the


4
  We calibrate the true autocorrelations in the simulations to the sample autocorrelations, adjusted for first order finite
sample bias as: r + (1+3r)/T, where r is the OLS estimate of the autocorrelation and T is the sample size.
5
  The transformation is as follows. In the 500 instruments, the minimum bias-adjusted autocorrelation is -0.571, the
maximum is 0.999 and the median is 0.02. We center the transformed distribution about 0.95. If the original
autocorrelation ρ is less than 0.95 we transform it to:
         .95 + (ρ-.02){(.95+.571 )/(.02+.571)}.
If the value is above 0.95 we transform it to:
         .95 + (ρ-.02){(.999-.95)/(.999-.02)}.
                                                                13

predictive R-squared of the market return, rm,t+1.

            In summary, the analyst in the simulations estimates the regression model (2). He uses the lagged

instrument, Zt, which is independent of Zt*. He identifies the lagged instrument as the one that maximizes

the absolute t-ratio in the predictive regression (3). The true values of the coefficients in the regression

(2) are α0=0, α1=0, b0=1 and b1=0. Thus, the true alpha is zero as predicted by the asset pricing model and

there is no time variation in the beta that is related to the measured instrument. Because of the interaction

terms in the data generating process, the returns data will be conditionally heteroskedastic, with an

unobservable form. The analyst forms t-ratios for the coefficients using the Newey-West procedure, as

described above.6




V. Results

Cases with Small Amounts of Persistence

            We first consider a special case of the model where we set ρ* = 0 in the data generating process

for the market return and true beta, so that Z* is white noise and σ2(ε*) = Var(Z*). In this case the

predictable (but unobserved by the analyst) component of the stock market return and the betas follow a

white noise process. We allow a range of values for the autocorrelation, ρ, of the measured instrument, Z,

including values as large as 0.99. For a given value of ρ, we choose σ2(ε) = Var(Z*)(1-ρ2), so the

measured instrument and the unobserved beta have the same variance. We find in this case that the

critical values for all of the coefficients are well behaved. Thus, when the true expected returns and betas


6
    Substituting the three equations of (4) together we can express the data generating process for the return rt+1 as:
            rt+1 = (1+Zt*)(μsp + k Z*t + wt+1) + ut+1 .
Because of the interaction between the two Z*t terms, we transform the data generated from this expression to obtain the
desired true parameter values in the model, which are α0=α1=b1=0, b0=1. The transformed return is given by a + brt+1,
where the constants are b = [1 + 3kμsp Var(Z*)/Var(rm)]-1, a = μsp - b{ μsp + k Var(Z*)}. This transformation makes the
means of rt+1 and rmt+1 equal to each other.
                                                       14

are not persistent, the use of even a highly persistent regressor does not create a spurious regression bias

in the asset pricing regressions.

        It seems intuitive that there should be no spurious regression problem when there is no

persistence in Z*. Since the true coefficient on the measured instrument, Z, is zero, the error term in the

regression is unaffected by the persistence in Z under the null hypothesis. When there is no spurious

regression problem there can be no interaction between spurious regression and data mining. Thus,

standard corrections for data mining (e.g. White, 2000) can be used without concern in these cases.

        In our second experiment the measured instrument and the true beta have the same degree of

persistence, but their persistence is not extreme. We fix Var(Z) = Var(Z*) and choose, for a given value of

ρ*=ρ, σ2(ε) = σ2(ε*) = Var(Z*)(1-ρ2). For values of ρ<0.95 and all values of Rp2 the regressions seem

generally well-specified, even at sample sizes as small as T=66. These findings are similar to the findings

of Ferson, Sarkissian and Simin (2003) for the case of the pure predictive regression (3). Thus, the

regressions appear to be well specified when the autocorrelation of the true predictor is below 0.95.



Cases with Persistence

        Table 2 summarizes simulation results for a case that allows data mining and spurious regression.

In this experiment the true persistence parameter ρ* is set equal to 0.95. The table summarizes the results

for time-series samples of T=66, T=350 and T=960. The number of variables over which the artificial

agent searches in mining the data, ranges from one to 250. We focus on the two abnormal return

coefficients, { α 0 , α 1} and on the time-varying beta coefficient, b1.

        Table 2 shows that the means of the coefficient α0, the fixed part of the alpha, are close to zero,

and they get closer to zero as the number of observations increases, as expected of a consistent estimator.

The 5% critical t-ratios for α0 are reasonably well specified at the larger sample sizes, although there is

some bias at T=66, where the critical values rise with the extent of data mining. Data mining has little
                                                      15

effect on the intercepts at the larger sample sizes. Since the lagged instrument has a mean of zero, the

intercept is the average conditional alpha. Thus, the issue of data mining for predictive variables appears

to have no serious implications for measures of average abnormal performance in the conditional asset

pricing regressions, provided T > 66. This justifies the use of such models for studying the cross-section

of average equity returns.

        The coefficients α1, which represent the time-varying part of the conditional alphas, present a

different pattern. We would expect a data mining effect, given that the data are mined based on the

coefficients on the lagged predictor in the simple predictive regression. The presence of the interaction

term, however, would be expected to attenuate the bias in the standard errors, compared with the simple

predictive regression. The table shows only a small effect of data mining on the α1 coefficient, but a large

effect on its t-ratio. The overall effect is the greatest at the smaller sample size (T=66), where the critical

t-ratios for the intermediate Rp2 values (10% predictive R2) vary from about 2.4 to 5.2 as the number of

variables mined increases from one to 250. The bias diminishes with T, especially when the number of

mined variables is small, and for L=1 there is no substantial bias at T=360 or T=960 months.

        The results on the α1 coefficient are interesting in three respects. First, the critical t-ratios vary by

only small amounts across the rows of the table. This indicates very little interaction between the

spurious regression and data mining effects. Second, the table shows a smaller data mining effect than

observed on the pure predictive regression (see Ferson, Sarkissian and Simin, 2003, Table III). Thus, data

mining corrections for predictive regressions will overcompensate in this setting. Third, the critical t-

ratios for α1 become smaller in Table 2 as the sample size is increased. This is just the opposite of what is

found for the simple predictive regressions, where the inconsistency in the standard errors makes the

critical t-ratios larger at larger sample sizes. Thus, the sampling distributions for time-varying alpha
                                                        16

coefficients are not likely to be well approximated by simple corrections.7

        Table 2 does not report the t-statistics for b0, the constant part of the beta estimate. These are

generally unbiased across all of the samples, except that the critical t-ratios are slightly inflated at the

smaller sample size (T=66) when data mining is not at issue (L=1).

        Finally, Table 2 shows results for the b1 coefficients and their t-ratios, which capture the time-

varying component of the conditional betas. Here, the average values and the critical t-ratios are barely

affected by the number of variables mined. When T=66 the critical t-ratios stay in a narrow range, from

about 2.5 to 2.6, and they cluster more closely around a value of 2.0 at the larger sample sizes. There are

no discernible effects of data mining on the distribution of the time-varying beta coefficients except when

the R2 values are very high. This is an important result in the context of the conditional asset pricing

literature, which we characterize as having mined predictive variables based on the regression (3). Our

results suggest that the empirical evidence in this literature for time-varying betas, based on the regression

model (2), is relatively robust to the data mining.



Suppressing Time-varying Alphas

        Some studies in the conditional asset pricing literature use regression models with interaction

terms, but without the time-varying alpha component (e.g. Cochrane (1996), Ferson and Schadt (1996),

Ferson and Harvey, 1999). Since the time-varying alpha component is the most troublesome term in the

presence of spurious regression and data mining effects, it is interesting to ask if regressions that suppress

this term may be better specified. Table 3 presents results for models in which the analyst runs

regressions without the α1 coefficient. The results suggest that the average alpha coefficient, α0, and its t-

statistic are well specified regardless of data mining and potential spurious regression. Thus, once again


7
  We conducted some experiments in which we applied a simple local-to-unity correction to the t-ratios, dividing by
the square root of the sample size. We found that this correction does not result in a t-ratio that is approximately
invariant to the sample size.
                                                      17

we find little cause for concern about the inferences on average abnormal returns using the conditional

asset pricing regressions, even though they use persistent, data mined lagged regressors.

        The distribution of the average beta estimate, b0, is not shown in Table 3. The results are similar

to those obtained in a factor model regression where no lagged instrument is used. The coefficients and

standard errors generally appear well specified. However, we find that the coefficient measuring the

time-varying beta is somewhat more susceptible to bias than in the regression that includes α1. The b1

coefficient is biased, especially when T=66, and its mean varies with the number of instruments mined.

The critical t-ratios are inflated at the higher values of Rp2 and when more instruments are mined.

        Including the time-varying alpha in the regression helps “soak up” the bias so that it will not

adversely effect the time varying beta estimate. These experiments suggest that if one is interested in

obtaining good estimates of conditional betas, then in the presence of data mining and persistent lagged

instruments, the time-varying alpha term should be included in the regression.



Suppressing Time-Varying Betas

        There are examples in the literature where the regression is run with a linear term for a time-

varying conditional alpha but no interaction term for a time varying conditional beta (e.g. Jagannathan

and Wang, 1996). Table 4 considers this case. First, the coefficient for the average beta in the regression

with no b1 term (not shown in the table) is reasonably well specified and largely unaffected by data

mining on the lagged instrument. We find that the coefficients for alpha, α0 and α1, behave similarly to the

corresponding coefficients in the full model. The estimates of the average alpha are reasonably well

behaved, and only mildly affected by the extent of data mining at smaller sample sizes. The bias in α 1 is

severe. The bias leads the analyst to overstate the evidence for a time-varying alpha, and the bias is worse

as the amount of data mining increases. Thus, the evidence in the literature for time-varying alphas, based

on these asset-pricing regressions, is likely to be overstated.
                                                         18



A Cross-section of Asset Returns

         We extend the simulations to study a cross-section of asset returns. We use five book-to-market

(BM) quintile portfolios, equally weighted across the size dimension, as an illustration. The data are

courtesy of Kenneth French. In these experiments the cross-section of assets features cross-sectional

variation in the true conditional betas. Instead of βt = 1 + Z*t , the betas are βt = β0 + β1 Z*t , where the

coefficients β0 and β1 are the estimates obtained from regressions of each quintile portfolio’s excess return

on the market portfolio excess return and the product of the market portfolio with the lagged value of the

dividend yield. The set of β0’s is {1.259, 1.180, 1.124, 1.118, 1.274}, the set of β1’s is {-1.715, 1.000,

3.766, 7.646, 8.970}.8 The true predictive R-squared in the artificial data generating process is set to

0.5%. This value matches the smallest R-squared from the regression of the market portfolio on the

lagged dividend yield with a window of 60 months.

         Table 5 shows simulation results for the conditional model with time-varying alphas and betas.

The means of the b0 and b1 coefficients are shown in excess of their true values in the simulations. The

critical t-statistics for both α1 and b1 are generally similar to the case where Rp2=0.5% in Table 2. As

before, there is a large bias in the t-statistic for α1 that increases with data mining but decreases somewhat

with the sample size. The t-statistics for the time-varying betas are generally well specified.

         We conduct additional experiments using the cross section of asset returns, where the conditional

asset pricing regression suppresses either the time-varying alphas or the time-varying betas. The results

are similar to those in Table 5. When the time-varying betas are suppressed there is severe bias in α1 that

diminishes somewhat with the sample size. When time-varying alphas are suppressed there is a mild bias


8
  The β1 coefficient for the BM2 portfolio is 1.0, replacing the estimated value of 0.047. When the β1 coefficient is
0.047 the simulated return becomes nearly perfectly correlated with rm and the simulation is uninformative. The
dividend yield is demeaned and multiplied by 10. The dividend yield has the largest average sample correlation with
the five BM portfolios among the standard instruments we examine.
                                                        19

in b1.



Revisiting Previous Evidence

         In this section we explore the impact of the joint effects of data mining and spurious regression

bias on the asset pricing evidence. First, we revisit the studies listed in Table 1. Consider the models

with both time-varying alphas and betas. If the data mining searches over 250 variables predicting the

test asset return and T=350, the 5% cut-off value to apply to the t-statistic for α1 is larger than 3.8 in

absolute value. For smaller sample sizes, the cut-off value is higher. Note from Table 1 that the largest t-

statistic for α1 in Shanken (1990) with a sample size of 360 is -3.57 on the T-bill volatility, while the

largest t-statistic for α1 in Christopherson, Ferson and Glassman (1998) with a sample size of 144 is 3.72

on the dividend yield. This means that the significance of the time-varying alphas in both the studies is

questionable. However, the largest t-statistic for b1 in Shanken (1990) exceeds the empirical 5% cut-off,

irrespective of spurious regression and data mining adjustments. This illustrates that the evidence for

time-varying beta is robust to the joint effects of data mining and spurious regression bias, while the

evidence for time-varying alphas is fragile.

         Now consider the model with no time-varying alpha. If the data mining searches over 250

variables to predict the test asset return, the 5% cut-off value to apply to the t-statistic on b1 is less than

3.5 in absolute value. Cochrane (1996) reports a t-statistic of -4.74 on the dividend yield in a time-

varying beta, with a sample of T=186. Thus, we find no evidence to doubt the inference that there is a

time-varying beta. (However, the significance at a 10% level of the term premium in the time-varying

beta,, with a t-statistic of -1.76, is in doubt.)

         Finally, consider the model with no time-varying beta. If the data mining searches over 25

variables to predict the test asset return, then the 5% cut-off value to apply to the t-statistic on α1 is larger

than 3.1 in absolute value. The largest t-statistic in Jagannathan and Wang (1996) with a sample size of
                                                      20

330 is 3.1. Therefore, their evidence for a time-varying alpha does not survive even with a modest

amount of data mining.

        An empirical example further illustrates the effects of using the correct cutoffs to evaluate the

evidence for time-varying alphas. We use the value-growth spread portfolio excess return as the test asset

and a conditional CAPM as the asset pricing model. The lagged conditioning variable is the term spread,

measured as the lagged difference between ten-year and one-year, constant-maturity yields from the

Federal Reserve Data Base.9 The regressions include both time-varying betas and alphas, and the monthly

returns cover the period from April of 1953 through the end of 2005. We summarize results for samples

of length T=66 and T=350. We roll the regressions through the overall sample and use the average of the

rolling regression coefficients and the average absolute t-ratios as proxies for the expected results, given a

randomly chosen sample of each size. The average absolute t-ratios for the two sample sizes are shown

below the regression equation:



                       rt+1 =       α0 + α1Zt + b0 rm,t+1 + b1 rm,t+1Zt + ut+1                            (6)

                       T=66          1.559 2.199      21.32     2.897

                       T=350         0.815 1.978      21.34     0.952



Figure 2 presents time-series plots of the absolute t-ratios for the coefficients, α1, from the rolling

regressions. We evaluate the significance of the t-ratios using the simulations previously described,

assuming ρ* = 0.95 and the true predictive R-squared is 10%. The cutoff levels for the absolute t-statistics

with different amounts of data mining are depicted as horizontal lines in the figure.

        Figure 2 shows that the expected t-ratio for a time-varying alpha is just above the 5% critical



9
  We also examined the dividend yield and a short-term Treasury yield and the overall impressions are
similar.
                                                      21

cutoff level for T=66, and very close to the cutoff for T=350 when there is no adjustment for data mining.

However, the results vary with the sample period. When we sort the sample t-statistics from high to low,

we find that about 1/3 are above the cutoff with no data mining when T=66 and 53% are above the cutoff

when T=350. Thus, we are likely to find evidence of time-varying alphas when there is no adjustment for

data mining.

        Figure 2 also shows as horizontal bars the 5% critical cutoff levels when the lagged instrument is

mined to predict the test asset, searching over L=25 and L=250 instruments. When L=25 and T=66, only

15% of the t-statistics lie above the cutoff, and less than 10% exceed the cutoff when L=250. None of the

t-statistics appear significant when T=350 and L=25 or L=250. Thus, even modest amounts of data

mining are likely to change the inferences about time-varying alphas. In particular, given a typical sample

with T=350, there is no evidence for a time-varying alpha related to the term premium.




VI.     Robustness

This section summarizes the results of a number of additional experiments. We extend the simulations to

consider examples with more than a single lagged instrument. We also consider asset pricing models with

multiple factors, motivated by Merton’s (1973) multiple-beta model. We also examine models where the

data mining to select the lagged instruments focuses on predicting the market portfolio return instead of

the test asset returns. Tables with the results of these additional experiments are available by request.



Multiple Instruments

        The experiments summarized above focus on a single lagged instrument, while many studies in

the literature use multiple instruments. We modify the simulations, assuming that the researcher mines

two independent instruments with the largest absolute t-statistics and then uses both of them in the

conditional asset pricing model with time-varying betas and alphas. (Thus there are two a1 coefficients
                                                       22

and two b1 coefficients.) These simulations reveal that the statistical behavior of both coefficients are

similar to each other and similar to our results as reported in Table 2.



Multiple-beta Models

        We extend the simulations to study models with three state variables or factors. In building the

three-factor model, we make the following assumptions. All three risk premiums are linear functions of

one instrument, Z*. The factors differ in their unconditional means and their disturbance terms, which are

correlated with each other. The variance-covariance matrix of the disturbance terms matches that of the

residuals from regressions of the three Fama-French (1993, 1996) factors on the lagged dividend yield.

The true coefficients for the asset return on all three factors and their interaction terms with the correct

lagged instrument, Z*, are set to unity. Thus, the true conditional betas on each factor are equal to 1 + Z*.

We find that the bias in the t-statistic for α1 remains and is similar to the simulation in Table 2. There are

no biases in the t-statistics associated with the b1's for the larger sample sizes.



Predicting the Market Return

        Much of the previous literature looked at more than one asset to select predictor variables. For the

examples reported in the previous tables, the data mining is conducted by attempting to predict the excess

returns of the tests assets. But a researcher might also choose instruments to predict the market portfolio

return. We examine the sensitivity of the results to this change in the simulation design. The results for

the conditional asset pricing model with both time-varying alphas and betas are re-examined. Recall that

when the instrument is mined to predict the test asset return, there is an upward bias in the t-statistic for

α1. The bias increases with data mining and decreases somewhat with T. When the instruments are

mined to predict the market, the bias in α1 is small and is confined to the smaller sample size, T=66.

Mining to predict the market return has little impact on the sampling distribution of b1.
                                                      23



VII. Conclusions

We study regression models for conditional asset pricing models in which lagged variables are used to

model conditional betas and alphas. We focus on the finite sample properties of the models in view of two

important issues. The first issue is data mining and the second is spurious regression, caused by predictor

variables that are persistent time series. These two issues have been studied separately in many previous

papers, and their combined effects for simple predictive regressions are studied by Ferson, Sarkissian and

Simin (2003). This study addresses the joint effects of data mining and spurious regression on models

with time-varying alphas and betas.

        The conditional asset pricing literature has, for the most part used the same variables that were

discovered based on simple predictive regressions, and our analysis characterizes the problem by

assuming the data mining occurs in this way. Our results relate to several stylized facts that the literature

on conditional asset pricing has produced.

        Previous studies find evidence that the intercept, or average alpha, is smaller in a conditional

model than in an unconditional model, suggesting for example that the conditional CAPM does a better

job of explaining average abnormal returns. Our simulation evidence finds that the estimates of the

average alphas in the conditional models are reasonably well specified in the presence of spurious

regression and data mining, at least for samples larger than T=66. Some caution should be applied in

interpreting the common 60-month rolling regression estimator, but otherwise we take no issue with the

stylized fact that conditional models deliver smaller average alphas.

        Studies typically find evidence of time varying betas based on significant interaction terms. Here

again we find little cause for concern. The coefficient estimator for the interaction term is well specified

in larger samples, and largely unaffected by data mining in the presence of persistent lagged regressors.

There is an exception when the model is estimated without a linear term in the lagged instrument. In this
                                                      24

case the coefficient measuring the time-varying beta is slightly biased. Thus, when the focus of the study

is to estimate accurate conditional betas, we recommend that a linear term be included in the regression

model.

         Studies typically find that even conditional models fail to completely explain the dynamic

properties of stock returns. That is, the estimates indicate time-varying conditional alphas. We find that

this result is the most problematic. The estimates of time variation in alpha inherit biases similar to, if

somewhat smaller than, the biases in predictive regressions. We use our simulations to revisit the

evidence of several prominent studies. Our analysis suggest that the evidence for time-varying alphas in

the current literature should be viewed with some suspicion. Perhaps, the current generation of

conditional asset pricing models do a better job of capturing the dynamic behavior of asset returns than

existing studies suggest.
                                                      25

Appendix: The Sample of 500 Instruments

          All the data come from the web site Economagic.com: Economic Time Series Page, maintained

by Ted Bos. The sample consists of all monthly series listed on the main homepage of the site, except

under the headings of LIBOR, Australia, Bank of Japan, and Central Bank of Europe. From the Census

Bureau we exclude Building Permits by Region, State, and Metro Areas (more than 4,000 series). From

the Bureau of Labor Statistics we exclude all non-civilian Labor force data and State, City, and

International Employment (more than 51,000 series). We use the CPI measures from the city average

listings, but include no finer subcategories. The PPI measures include the aggregates and the 2-digit

subcategories. From the Department of Energy we exclude data in Section 10, the International Energy

series.

          We first randomly select (using a uniform distribution) 600 out of the 10,866 series that were left

after the above exclusions. From these 600 we eliminated series that mixed quarterly and monthly data

and extremely sparse series, and took the first 500 from what remained.

          Because many of the data are reported in levels, we tested for unit roots using an augmented

Dickey-Fuller test (with a zero order time polynomial). We could not reject the hypothesis of a unit root

for 361 of the 500 series and we replaced these series with their first differences.

          We estimate a sample correlation matrix of the 500 instruments as follows. We take each pair of

instruments and compute the sample correlation between the two series, using all of the observations for

which our data for the two series overlap. For some pairs, there is no overlapping data. For these cases

we substitute the average of all the sample correlations that we can compute.




References:
Agren, A., and B. Jonsson. “A Note on the Use of Lagged Variables in Interaction Terms: Why Units
Matter,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 54 (1992), 609-613.
                                                   26


Ang, A., and J. Chen, 2005, “CAPM Over the Long Run: 1926-2001,” Journal of Empirical Finance
(forthcoming 2006).

Ang, A., and G. Bekaert, “Stock Return Predictability: Is It There?” Review of Financial Studies, 2006.

Amihud, Y., and C.M. Hurvich, “Predictive Regressions: A Reduced-Bias Estimation Method,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39 (2004), 813-841.

Bekaert, G., R. Hodrick and D. Marshall, “On Biases in Tests of the Expectations Hypothesis of the
Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 44 (1997), 309-348.

Berkowitz, J., and L. Giorgianni. “Long-Horizon Exchange Rate Predictability,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 83 (1996), 81-91.

Boudoukh, J. and M. Richardson, “The Statistics of Long-Horizon Regressions,” Mathematical Finance,
4 (1994), 103-120.

Boudoukh, J., M.P. Richardson, and R.F. Whitelaw. “The Myth of Long-Horizon Predictability,”
Working paper (2005), NYU.

Breen, W.,, L.R. Glosten., and R. Jagannathan. “Economic Significance of Predictable Variations in
Stock Index returns,” Journal of Finance 44 (1999), 1177-1190.

Campbell, J.Y. “Stock Returns and the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 18 (1987), 373-
400.

Campbell, J.Y., and R. Shiller. “The Dividend Ratio and Small Sample Bias,” Economics Letters, 29
(1988), 325-331.

Campbell, J.Y., and M.Yogo. “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 81 (2006), 27-60.

Chan, C.K., and N.F. Chen. “An Unconditional Asset Pricing Test and the Role of Size as an Instrumental
Variable for Risk,” Journal of Finance, 43 (1988), 309-325.

Chapman, D.A., T. Simin, T., and H. Yan. “Stock Returns and Dividend Yields: Some New Evidence,”
Working Paper (2003), the Pennsylvania State University.

Christopherson, J.A., W. Ferson and D. Glassman. “Conditioning Manager Alpha on Economic
Information: Another Look at the Persistence of Performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 11 (1998),
111-142.

Cochrane, J.H. “A Cross-Sectional Test of an Investment-Based Asset Pricing Model,” Journal of
Political Economy, 104 (1996), 572-621

Cochrane, J.H. “New Facts in Finance,” Working Paper (1999), University of Chicago.
                                                  27


Conrad, J., Cooper, M., and G. Kaul. “Value Versus Glamour,” The Journal of Finance, 58 (2003), 1969-
1995.

Conrad, J. and G. Kaul. “Time-Variation in Expected Returns,” Journal of Business, 61 (1988), 409-425.

Fama, E.F., L. Fisher, M.C. Jensen, and R. Roll. “The Adjustment of Stock Prices to New Information,”
International Economic Review, 10 (1969), 1-21.

Fama, E.F. “Stock Returns, Expected Returns, and Real Activity,” Journal of Finance, 45 (1990),
1089-1108.

Fama, E.F., and K.R. French. “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 22 (1988a), 3-25.

Fama, E.F., and K.R. French. “Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Prices,” Journal of
Political Economy, 96 (1988b), 246-273.

Fama, E.F., and K.R. French. “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds, Journal of
Financial Economics 33 (1993), 3-56.

Fama, E.F., and K.R. French. “Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing Anomalies, Journal of Finance,
51 (1996), 55-87.

Fama, E.F., and K.R. French. “Industry Cost of Equity,” Journal of Financial Economics 43 (1997), 153-
194.

Ferson, W.E. “Changes in Expected Security Returns, Risk and the Level of Interest Rates,” Journal of
Finance 44 (1989), 1191-1218.

Ferson, W.E. and C.R. Harvey. “The Fundamental Determinants of International Equity Returns: A
Perspective on Country Risk and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 21 (1997),   1625-
1665.

Ferson, W.E. and C.R. Harvey. “Conditioning Variables and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns,”
Journal of Finance, 54 (1999), 1325-1360

Ferson, W.E., A. Heuson and T. Su. “Weak and Semi-Strong Form Predictability Revisited,”
Management Science, 51 (2005), 1582-1592.

Ferson, W.E., and R. Korajczyk. “Do Arbitrage Pricing Models Explain the Predictability of Stock
Returns?” Journal of Business 68, (1995) 309-349.

Ferson, W.E., S. Sarkissian and T. Simin. “The Alpha Factor Asset Pricing Model: A Parable,” Journal of
Financial Markets 2 (1999), 49-68.

Ferson, W.E., S. Sarkissian and T. Simin. “Spurious Regressions in Financial Economics?” Journal of
                                                    28

Finance 58 (2003), 1393-1414.

Ferson, W.E., and R. Schadt. “Measuring Fund Strategy and Performance in Changing Economic
Conditions.” Journal of Finance 51 (1996), 425-462.

Foster, F. D., T. Smith and R.E. Whaley. “Assessing Goodness-of-Fit of Asset Pricing Models: The
Distribution of the Maximal R-Squared,” Journal of Finance 52 (1997), 591-607.

Gibbons, M.R. and W.E. Ferson. “Testing Asset Pricing Models With Changing Expectations and an
Unobservable Market Portfolio,” Journal of Financial Economics, 14 (1985), 216-236.

Goetzmann, W. and P. Jorion, “Testing the Predictive Power of Dividend Yields,” Journal of Finance, 48
(1993), 663-679.

Goyal, A., and I. Welch. “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios,” Management Science 49
(2003), 639–654.

Granger, C.W.J., N. Hyung, Y. J. “Spurious Regressions with Stationary Series,” Applied Economics, 33
(2001), 899-904.

Granger, C.W.J. and P. Newbold. “Spurious Regressions in Economics,” Journal of Econometrics, 4
(1974), 111-120.

Granger, C.W.J., N. Hyung and Y. Jeon. “Spurious Regressions with Stationary Series,” Applied
Economics, 33 (2001), 899-904.

Hastie, T., R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning, Springer, (2001).

Huberman, G. and S. Kandel. “Market Efficiency and Value Line’s Record,” Journal. of Business, 63
(1990), 187-216,

Jagannathan, R., and Z. Wang. “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,”
Journal of Finance, 51 (1996), 3-54.

Jansson, M., and M.J. Moreira. “Optimal Inference in Regression Models with Nearly Integrated
Regressors,” Econometrica, 74 (2006), 681-714.

Kendall, M.G. “A Note on the Bias in the Estimation of Autocorrelation,” Biometrica 41 (1954), 403-404.

Keim, D.B. and R.F. Stambaugh. “Predicting Returns in the Bond and Stock Markets,” Journal of
Financial Economics 17 (1986), 357-390.

Kim, MJ, C.R. Nelson and R. Startz, “Mean Reversion in Stock Prices? A Reappraisal of the Empirical
Evidence,” Review of Financial Studies, 58 (1991), 515-528.

Kothari, S.P., and J. Shanken. “Book-to-Market Time Series Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics
44 (1997), 169-203.
                                                   29


Lanne, M., “Testing the Predictability of Stock Returns,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84 (2002),
407-415.

Leamer, E.E., Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental Data, John Wiley & Sons
(1978).

Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson. “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of
Finance 56 (2001), 815-849.

Lewellen, J., “Predicting Returns with Financial Ratios,” Journal of Financial Economics, 74 (2004),
209-235.

Lewellen, J. and S. Nagel. “The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain Asset-Pricing Anomalies,” Journal
of Financial Economics, (forthcoming, 2006).

Lo, A.W. and A.C. MacKinlay, “Stock Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks: Evidence From a New
Specification Test,” Review of Financial Studies, 1 (1988), 41-66.

Lo, A.W. and A.C. MacKinlay, “Data Snooping in Tests of Financial Asset Pricing Models,” Review of
Financial Studies 3 (1990), 431-467.

Maddala, G.S. Econometrics, McGraw-Hill, New York, (1977).

Marmol, F. “Spurious Regression Theory with Non-Stationary Fractionally Integrated Processes,”
Journal of Econometrics 84 (1998), 233-250.

Merton, R.C., “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,” Econometrica, 41 (1973), 867-887.

Nelson, C.R. and M.J. Kim, “Predictable Stock Returns: The Role of Small Sample Bias,” Journal of
Finance, 48 (1993), 641-661.

Newey, W.K., and K.D. West. “A Simple, Positive Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation
Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica 55 (1987), 703-708.

Petkova, R. and L. Zhang. “Is Value Riskier Than Growth?”Journal of Financial Economics, 78 (2005),
187-202.

Paye, B.S. “Do Macroeconomic Variables Predict Aggregate Stock Market Volatility?,” Working paper
(2006), Rice University.

Phillips, P.C.B. “Understanding Spurious Regressions in Econometrics,” Journal of Econometrics 33
(1986), 311-340.

Phillips, P.C.B. “New Tools for Understanding Spurious Regressions,” Econometrica 66 (1998), 1299-
1326.
                                                   30

Phillips P.C.B. “Bootstrapping Spurious Regression,” Working paper (2001), Yale University.

Pontiff, J., and L. Schall. “Book-to-Market as a Predictor of Market Returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics 49 (1998), 141-60.

Powell, J.G., J. Shi, T. Smith, and R.E. Whaley. “Political Regimes, Business Cycles, Seasonalities, and
Returns,” Working paper (2006), Australian National University.

Santos, J. and P. Veronesi, “Labor Income and Predictable Stock Returns,” Review of Financial Studies
19 (2006), 1-44.

Santos, J. and P. Veronesi. “Cash Flow Risk, Discount Risk, and the Value Premium,” Working paper
(2006), University of Chicago

Shanken, J. “Intertemporal Asset Pricing: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Econometrics 45
(1990), 99-120.

Stambaugh, R.S. “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics 54 (1999), 315-421.

Sharpe, W.F. “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under Conditions of Risk,” Journal
of Finance 19 (1964), 425-42.

Tsay W.-J., C.-F. Chung. “The Spurious Regression of Fractionally Integrated Processes,” Journal of
Econometrics, 96 (2000), 155-182.

Torous, W., R. Valkanov, and S. Yan. “On Predicting Stock Returns with Nearly Integrated Explanatory
Variables,” Journal of Business, 7 (2005), 937-966.

Valkanov, R. “Long-Horizon Regressions: Theoretical Results and Applications,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 68 (2003), 201-232.

White, H. “A Reality Check for Data Snooping,” Econometrica, 68 (2000), 1097-1126.

Yule, G.U. “Why Do We Sometimes Get Nonsense Correlations Between Time Series? A Study in
Sampling and the Nature of Time Series,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 89 (1926), 1- 64
                                                                                   31


                                                                             TABLE 1
                                                                      Representative Studies
This table summarizes representative conditional asset pricing and performance evaluation studies. The first column indicates the published study. The second
column specifies the lagged instruments used. The next two columns give the sample (Period) and the number of observations (Obs) on the stock returns.
Columns five and six indicate whether the conditional model includes time-varying alpha (αt) and the time-varying beta (βt), respectively. The last five columns
summarize the regression results. Column seven shows the ratio of an intercept (a pricing error) in the conditional model to that of the unconditional. Columns
8 and 9 report the point estimates of the time-varying alpha, α1, and their corresponding t-statistics, t(α). Columns 10 and 11 report the point estimates of the
time-varying beta coefficient, b1, and their corresponding t-statistics, t(b1). For each predictor, the table reports regression estimates corresponding to the largest
in absolute value t-statistics. The abbreviations in the table are as follows. TB1y and TB1vol are the yield and volatility on the one-month Treasury bill,
respectively. Three-one is the difference between the lagged returns of a three-month and a one-month T-bill. The variable “Cay” is the linear function of
consumption, asset wealth, and labor income. DY is the dividend yield of the CRSP index. Term is a spread between long-term and short-term bonds. Default is
a spread between low-grade and high-grade corporate bonds.

 (1)                                    (2)            (3)           (4)     (5)        (6)     (7)       (8)              (9)              (10)            (11)
 Reference                           Predictor        Period         Obs      αt         βt   |α0/α|      α1              t(α1)              b1            t(b1)
 Shanken (90, T3&4)                    TB1y         5301-8212        360     Yes        Yes    NA        -0.48            -1.17             1.42           5.92
                                      TB1vol                                                             -5.70            -3.56            -8.40           -4.42
 Cochrane (96, T8)                      DY          47Q1-93Q4        188      No        Yes    NA        None             None             -0.53           -4.74
                                       Term                                                                                                -0.31           -1.76
 Ferson & Schadt (96, T2)              TB1y         6801-9012        276      No        Yes   0.72       None             None              NA              NA
                                        DY
                                       Term
                                      Default
 Jagannathan & Wang (96, T2)          Default       6307-9012        330     Yes        No    1.53       -65.7            -3.10            None            None

 Christopherson et al. (98,            TB1y         7901-9012        144     Yes        Yes   0.77       -0.21            -2.01             NA              NA
 T1&2)                                  DY                                                               1.22             3.72
                                       Term                                                              -0.21            -1.85
 Lettau & Ludvigson (01a, T3)          “Cay”        63Q3-98Q3        144     Yes        Yes   0.84        NA               NA               NA              NA

 Petkova & Zhang (05, T3)            TB1y         2701-0112      900      No Yes         0.97            None             None              NA              NA
                                      DY
                                     Term
                                    Default
“None” stands parameter values not used in the study, “NA” stands for results not reported.
                                                           29



                                                      TABLE 2

                             Simulating a Conditional Asset Pricing Model
The table shows the results of 10,000 simulations of the estimates from the conditional asset pricing model, allowing for
possible data mining of the lagged instruments. The regression model is:
                                         rt+1 = α0 + α1Zt + b0 rm,t+1 + b1 rm,t+1Zt + ut+1.
T is the number of time series observations, L is the number of lagged instruments mined, Rp2 is the true predictive R-
squared in the artificial data generating process.

                                    T=66                               T=350                        T=960
  Rp2                     L=1       L=25     L=250          L=1         L=25    L=250      L=1      L=25      L=250
                                                        Means: α0
  0.001                  0.000     0.001      0.000        0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.005                  0.000     0.000      0.000        0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.01                   -0.001    0.000      0.000        0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.05                   -0.001    -0.001    -0.001        0.000       -0.001   0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.1                    -0.002    -0.002    -0.002        0.000       -0.001   -0.001     0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.15                   -0.002    -0.002    -0.002       -0.001 -0.001         -0.001     0.000     0.000     0.000
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for α0
  0.001                  2.280      2.603     2.855        1.999       2.061    2.146      1.996     2.005     2.115
  0.005                  2.266      2.540     2.792        1.994       2.058    2.135      2.013     2.002     2.104
  0.01                   2.253      2.508     2.759        2.000       2.045    2.125      2.016     2.002     2.098
  0.05                   2.153      2.408     2.728        1.974       1.998    2.094      2.021     1.991     2.100
  0.1                    2.088      2.388     2.652        1.977       2.000    2.030      2.058     2.008     2.073
  0.15                   2.065      2.382     2.597        1.968       1.960    1.987      2.069     2.031     2.041
                                                        Means: α1
  0.001                  0.001      0.007    -0.003       -0.001 -0.002         0.003     -0.001    -0.002     -0.001
  0.005                  0.001      0.005    -0.001       -0.001 -0.001         0.002     -0.001    -0.002     -0.001
  0.01                   0.001      0.005     0.000       -0.001 -0.001         0.002     -0.001    -0.002     -0.001
  0.05                   0.001      0.005    -0.002       -0.001 -0.001         0.002     -0.001    -0.001     -0.002
  0.1                    0.001      0.005     0.000       -0.001 -0.001         0.002     -0.001    -0.001      0.000
  0.15                   0.001      0.004     0.000       -0.001       0.000    0.002     -0.001    -0.001     0.001
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for α1
  0.001                  2.392      3.992     5.305        2.023       3.240    3.891      1.910     3.097     3.748
  0.005                  2.390      3.961     5.252        2.024       3.206    3.874      1.905     3.092     3.719
  0.01                   2.387      3.912     5.198        2.025       3.198    3.872      1.902     3.091     3.712
  0.05                   2.412      3.924     5.237        2.039       3.172    3.855      1.902     3.062     3.706
  0.1                    2.426      3.912     5.163        2.036       3.159    3.837      1.912     3.040     3.690
  0.15                   2.423      3.913     5.086        2.024       3.155    3.785      1.909     3.024     3.629
                                                        Means: b1
  0.001                  -0.041    -0.017     0.026       -0.003 -0.002         0.011      0.010     0.008     -0.009
  0.005                  -0.038    -0.019     0.061       -0.003       0.001    0.002      0.009     0.007     -0.005
  0.01                   -0.038    -0.012     0.055       -0.003       0.000    0.004      0.008     0.004     -0.006
  0.05                   -0.039    -0.014     0.077       -0.003       0.006    -0.003     0.006     0.001      0.001
  0.1                    -0.040    -0.018     0.058       -0.003       0.010     0.003     0.005     0.000      0.004
  0.15                   -0.041    -0.015     0.062       -0.003       0.014    0.007      0.004     0.001      0.000
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for b1
  0.001                  2.576      2.534     2.634        2.122       2.098    2.175      1.996     2.013     2.075
  0.005                  2.574      2.579     2.611        2.116       2.138    2.210      2.022     2.036     2.075
  0.01                   2.583      2.574     2.597        2.114       2.133    2.219      2.027     2.071     2.126
  0.05                   2.603      2.588     2.597        2.149       2.212    2.336      2.027     2.121     2.219
  0.1                    2.612      2.614     2.596        2.157       2.297    2.451      2.024     2.188     2.475
  0.15                   2.610      2.601     2.657        2.156       2.361    2.614      2.018     2.322     2.722
                                                             30

                                                      TABLE 3

          Simulating a Conditional Asset Pricing Model with no Time-Varying Alpha
The table shows the results of 10,000 simulations of the estimates from the conditional asset pricing model with no time-
varying alpha, allowing for the possibility of data mining for the lagged instruments. The regression model is:
                                             rt+1 = α0 + b0 rm,t+1 + b1 rm,t+1Zt + ut+1.
T is the number of time series observations, L is the number of lagged instruments mined, Rp2 is the true predictive R-
squared in the artificial data generating process.

                                    T=66                               T=350                        T=960
  Rp2                     L=1       L=25     L=250          L=1         L=25    L=250      L=1      L=25      L=250
                                                        Means: α0
  0.001                  0.000     0.000     -0.001        0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.005                  -0.001    -0.001    -0.001        0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.01                   -0.001    -0.001    -0.001        0.000        0.000   0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.05                   -0.002    -0.002    -0.002        0.000        0.000   -0.001     0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.1                    -0.002    -0.002    -0.003        0.000       -0.001   -0.001     0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.15                   -0.003    -0.003    -0.003       -0.001 -0.001         -0.001     0.000     0.000     -0.001
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for α0
  0.001                  2.165      2.146     2.123        1.951        1.988   1.947      1.990     1.965     1.934
  0.005                  2.138      2.114     2.089        1.949        1.981   1.929      1.983     1.961     1.922
  0.01                   2.132      2.102     2.054        1.944        1.966   1.918      1.992     1.956     1.931
  0.05                   2.042      2.020     1.986        1.907        1.921   1.917      1.983     1.970     1.921
  0.1                    1.984      1.956     1.929        1.896        1.910   1.885      1.988     1.962     1.904
  0.15                   1.949      1.922     1.893        1.900        1.884   1.829      1.993     1.965     1.869
                                                        Means: b1
  0.001                  0.007     -0.006    -0.043       -0.008       0.004    -0.001    -0.003     0.013     -0.012
  0.005                  0.008     -0.017    -0.060       -0.006 -0.003          0.000    -0.003     0.013     -0.008
  0.01                   0.008     -0.015    -0.064       -0.006 -0.003         -0.004    -0.003     0.010     -0.007
  0.05                   0.010     -0.031    -0.047       -0.003 -0.003         -0.003    -0.002     0.007     -0.001
  0.1                    0.010     -0.020    -0.035       -0.002 -0.005         -0.001    -0.002     0.000      0.001
  0.15                   0.010     -0.029    -0.042        0.000       -0.003   -0.003    -0.002     0.002     -0.002
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for b1
  0.001                  2.630      2.605     2.639        2.157        2.128   2.218      1.987     2.136     2.147
  0.005                  2.636      2.646     2.631        2.156        2.145   2.246      1.991     2.162     2.170
  0.01                   2.661      2.665     2.643        2.163        2.150   2.256      1.987     2.154     2.216
  0.05                   2.656      2.748     2.739        2.146        2.257   2.441      1.988     2.267     2.476
  0.1                    2.629      2.811     2.861        2.175        2.378   2.618      1.994     2.395     2.639
  0.15                   2.607      2.857     3.001        2.201        2.466   2.755      2.008     2.479     2.828
                                                           31

                                                      TABLE 4

           Simulating a Conditional Asset Pricing Model with no Time-Varying Beta
The table shows the results of 10,000 simulations of the estimates from the conditional asset pricing model with no time-
varying beta, allowing for the possibility of data mining for the lagged instruments. The regression model is:
                                               rt+1 = α0 + α1Zt + b0 rm,t+1 + ut+1.
T is the number of time series observations, L is the number of lagged instruments mined, Rp2 is the true predictive R-
squared in the artificial data generating process.

                                    T=66                               T=350                        T=960
  Rp2                     L=1       L=25     L=250          L=1        L=25     L=250      L=1      L=25      L=250
                                                        Means: α0
  0.001                  0.000     0.000     0.000         0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.005                  0.000     0.000     0.000         0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.01                   -0.001    0.000     0.000         0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.05                   -0.001    -0.001    -0.001        0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.1                    -0.002    -0.001    -0.001        0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
  0.15                   -0.002    -0.002    -0.002       -0.001 -0.001         0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for α0
  0.001                  2.239      2.592    2.794         1.991       2.080    2.182      2.004     2.047     2.092
  0.005                  2.219      2.533    2.764         1.982       2.070    2.147      2.014     2.036     2.084
  0.01                   2.206      2.511    2.731         1.988       2.069    2.150      2.013     2.018     2.089
  0.05                   2.124      2.429    2.656         1.970       2.056    2.148      2.019     2.012     2.130
  0.1                    2.065      2.389    2.607         1.968       2.034    2.158      2.035     2.010     2.160
  0.15                   2.015      2.356    2.546         1.978       2.033    2.177      2.072     2.010     2.167
                                                        Means: α1
  0.001                  0.001      0.000    0.002        -0.001       0.001    0.000      0.000    -0.001     0.000
  0.005                  0.001      0.000    0.001        -0.001       0.001    0.001      0.000    -0.001     0.001
  0.01                   0.001      0.000    0.001        -0.001       0.001    0.001      0.000    -0.001     0.001
  0.05                   0.000      0.001    0.003        -0.001       0.001    0.001      0.000    -0.001     0.002
  0.1                    0.000      0.001    0.005        -0.001       0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.001
  0.15                   0.000      0.000    0.003        -0.001       0.000    -0.001     0.000    -0.001     0.000
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for α1
  0.001                  2.307      4.015    5.298         2.068       3.172    3.912      2.020     3.073     3.794
  0.005                  2.311      4.005    5.169         2.066       3.149    3.890      2.017     3.061     3.761
  0.01                   2.312      3.998    5.142         2.061       3.148    3.891      2.017     3.058     3.754
  0.05                   2.322      3.968    5.040         2.054       3.156    3.885      2.003     3.029     3.739
  0.1                    2.323      3.908    5.041         2.056       3.138    3.849      2.012     3.001     3.713
  0.15                   2.323      3.901    5.075         2.056       3.124    3.783      2.005     3.003     3.659
                                                          32

                                                      TABLE 5

                Conditional Asset Pricing Models with a Cross-section of Returns
The table shows the results of 10,000 simulations from a conditional asset pricing model, allowing for the possibility of
data mining for the lagged instruments. The dependent variables are book-to-market quintile portfolios. The regression
model is:
                                         rt+1 = α0 + α1Zt + b0 rm,t+1 + b1 rm,t+1Zt + ut+1.
T is the number of time series observations and L is the number of lagged instruments mined. The true predictive R-
squared in the artificial data generating process is 0.005.


                                    T=66                               T=350                        T=960
  BM quintile             L=1       L=25     L=250          L=1         L=25    L=250      L=1      L=25      L=250
                                                        Means: α0
  BM1 (low)              -0.002    -0.001    -0.001       -0.002 -0.002         -0.002    -0.002    -0.002     -0.002
  BM2                    0.000     0.000     0.000         0.000       0.000    0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000
  BM3                    0.000     0.002     0.001         0.002       0.002    0.002     0.002     0.002      0.003
  BM4                    0.001     0.003     -0.001        0.004       0.005    0.006     0.005     0.006      0.007
  BM5 (high)             0.004     0.002     0.006         0.006       0.006    0.005     0.008     0.007      0.006
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for α0
  BM1 (low)              2.157      2.593     2.705        1.691        1.847   1.914      1.526     1.618     1.651
  BM2                    2.297      2.523    2.742         1.916       2.067    2.156      1.960     2.034     2.056
  BM3                    2.296      2.681    2.916         2.093       2.218    2.380      2.143     2.206     2.301
  BM4                    2.343      2.686    3.060         2.059       2.253    2.399      2.132     2.233     2.368
  BM5 (high)             2.369      2.659    3.099         2.135       2.233    2.326      2.269     2.284     2.359
                                                        Means: α1
  BM1 (low)              0.002      0.000     0.001       -0.001 -0.004          0.002     0.000     0.000      0.000
  BM2                    0.000     0.000     0.002         0.001       0.000    0.001     0.000     0.000      0.001
  BM3                    0.009     0.006     -0.008       -0.001 -0.005         -0.008     0.001     0.007      0.001
  BM4                    0.019     -0.027    -0.004        0.007       -0.003   0.012     -0.003    -0.003      0.005
  BM5 (high)             0.021     0.028     -0.068        0.005        0.028   0.027     0.002     -0.006     -0.009
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for α1
  BM1 (low)              2.381      4.088     5.382        2.037        3.243   3.917      1.962     3.115     3.813
  BM2                    2.390      3.884    4.956         2.025       3.145    3.793      1.971     3.044     3.637
  BM3                    2.418      4.146    5.720         1.972       3.264    3.999      1.952     3.148     3.804
  BM4                    2.403      4.263    5.705         2.078       3.240    3.934      1.999     3.179     3.807
  BM5 (high)             2.417      4.227    5.594         2.005       3.271    4.076      2.021     3.134     3.817
                                                        Means: b1
  BM1 (low)               0.018     0.007    -0.054       -0.007        0.002    0.051     0.021    -0.001     0.004
  BM2                    -0.003    0.032     -0.015        0.000       -0.004   -0.009    -0.010     0.000     -0.002
  BM3                    0.108     0.050      0.128        0.066       -0.033   -0.042    -0.041    -0.004     0.034
  BM4                    -0.230    -0.050    -0.062       -0.016 -0.054          0.087     0.028    -0.068      0.032
  BM5 (high)             -0.479    0.075     -0.389        0.041        0.113   -0.006    -0.136     0.032     0.058
                                              Critical 5% t-statistics for b1
  BM1 (low)              2.612      2.522     2.548        2.065        2.168   2.181      2.045     2.115     2.061
  BM2                    2.521      2.591    2.559         2.146       2.126    2.149      2.056     2.056     2.067
  BM3                    2.573      2.501    2.585         2.083       2.159    2.089      2.103     2.023     2.061
  BM4                    2.624      2.556    2.552         2.048       2.114    2.091      2.130     2.004     2.035
  BM5 (high)             2.628      2.640    2.536         2.177       2.149    2.068      2.084     2.050     1.982
  33



Figure 1
                                         34




                                      Figure 2

                Rolling Window Absolute Values of Conditional Alpha t-statistic
                                 Z = Term Spread, T = 66
14


12


10


8


6
                                                                                   L=250
4                                                                                  L=25


2                                                                                   L=1


 0
1958.10 1963.10 1968.10 1973.10 1978.10 1983.10 1988.10 1993.10 1998.10 2003.10




           Rolling Window Absolute Values of Conditional Alpha t-statistic
                            Z = Term Spread, T = 350
4
                                                                                   L=250


                                                                                   L=25
3




2                                                                                   L=1



1




 0
1982.06   1985.06   1988.06    1991.06    1994.06   1997.06    2000.06   2003.06
