                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MINERVA UNBOUND:
KNOWLEDGE STOCKS, KNOWLEDGE FLOWS AND NEW KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTION

                                            Lynne G. Zucker
                                            Michael R. Darby
                                            Jonathan Furner
                                             Robert C. Liu
                                             Hongyan Ma

                                          Working Paper 12669
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12669


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2006


This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0304727) and the
University of California's Industry-University Cooperative Research Program (grants PP9902, P00-04,
P01-02, and P03-01). We are indebted to our research team members Jason Fong, Yaqiang Qi, and
Emre Uyar. Nanotechnology data used in this paper is part of NanoBank.org, a community resource
building project funded by NSF. In this paper, we both introduce and demonstrate some of the potential
uses for this new database, as well as test the underlying data in preparation for public launch of NanoBank.
Certain data included herein are derived from the Science Citation Index Expanded, Social Sciences
Citation Index, Arts & Humanities Citation Index of the Institute for Scientific Information, Inc. (ISI),
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: Copyright Institute for Scientific Information, Inc. 2005. All rights
reserved. Certain data included herein are derived from the Zucker-Darby Knowledge, Innovation,
and Growth Project: Lynne G. Zucker and Michael R. Darby. All rights reserved. This paper is a part
of the NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of their employers or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Lynne G. Zucker, Michael R. Darby, Jonathan Furner, Robert C. Liu, and Hongyan Ma.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Minerva Unbound: Knowledge Stocks, Knowledge Flows and New Knowledge Production
Lynne G. Zucker, Michael R. Darby, Jonathan Furner, Robert C. Liu, and Hongyan Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 12669
November 2006
JEL No. O31,O33,R11,Z13

                                              ABSTRACT

The rate of regional growth of new knowledge in the field of nanotechnology, as measured by counts
of articles and patents in the open-access digital library NanoBank, is shown to be positively affected
both by the size of existing regional stocks of recorded knowledge in all scientific fields, and the extent
to which tacit knowledge in all fields flows between institutions of different organizational types. The
level of federal funding has a large, robust impact on both publication and patenting. The data provide
further support for the cumulative advantage model of knowledge production, and for ongoing efforts
to institutionalize channels through which cross-organizational collaboration may be achieved.

Lynne G. Zucker
Departments of Sociology & Public Policy             Robert C. Liu
University of California, Los Angeles                Two California Plaza
UCLA Box 951551                                      350 S. Grand Ave. â Suite 200
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1551                           Los Angeles, California 90071-3462
and NBER                                             robcliu@ucla.edu
zucker@ucla.edu
                                                     Hongyan Ma
Michael R. Darby                                     Department of Information Studies
John E. Anderson Graduate School                     UCLA Box 951520
of Management                                        Los Angeles, CA 90095-1520
University of California, Los Angeles                hym@ucla.edu
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
michael.r.darby@anderson.ucla.edu

Jonathan Furner
Department of Information Studies
UCLA Box 951520
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1520
jfurner@ucla.edu
    MINERVA UNBOUND: KNOWLEDGE STOCKS, KNOWLEDGE FLOWS AND NEW
                       KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTION

      Lynne G. Zucker, Michael R. Darby, Jonathan Furner, Robert C. Liu, and Hongyan Ma


1. Introduction

       What factors influence the rates at which new knowledge is produced in technological

fields? The particular study reported in this paper is part of a more general research program

driven by this question, whereby we seek to understand the processes that determine the

productivity of authors and inventors in new technology, as measured by counts of articles and

patents (see, e.g., Zucker, Darby, & Brewer, 1998; Zucker, Darby, & Armstrong, 2002). In the

study reported here, our counts of documents are obtained by statistical analysis of the contents

of NanoBank, an open-access digital library of articles and patents in the field of nanotechnology

(Zucker & Darby, 2006). Our approach is guided by a theoretical conception of the production of

scientific knowledge as an activity that is deeply embedded in a complex network of social

structures and practices, and that the forms taken by these structures and practices are crucial

determinants of the forms taken by knowledge production in later periods in the same place.

While it is conventional to refer to science as cumulative, we argue and demonstrate that there is

a significant cumulative effect even when the knowledge produced is discontinuous and

revolutionary in some respects.

       We present the results of tests of two related hypotheses. The first of these is that the

frequency of publication, during a given period and in a given geographical region, of articles

and patents relating to nanotechnology is correlated with the size of the existing “knowledge

stock” of all other (non-nanotechnology) articles and patents in all fields of science previously

published in that region. The second hypothesis is that the frequency of publication, during a



                                                 1
given period and in a given geographical region, of articles and patents relating to

nanotechnology is correlated with the extent to which articles and patents in the existing

knowledge stock of the region are co-authored by affiliates of institutions of different

organizational types.

       The results of our tests allow us to draw two sets of conclusions. In the first place, we are

able to differentiate the respective merits of two competing kinds of claim about the ways in

which existing knowledge stocks affect the evolution of new fields of knowledge such as

nanotechnology. In the second place, we are able both to evaluate, on the basis of their impact on

productivity, ongoing efforts to institutionalize channels through which cross-institutional

collaboration (or “knowledge flow”) may be achieved, and to demonstrate the utility of a method

by which the impact of stocks of tacit knowledge (as opposed to that of stocks of recorded

knowledge) may be estimated.

       In the course of our investigations of the links between knowledge stocks, knowledge

flows, and knowledge production, we are also able to assess the impact (on productivity of

knowledge in nanotechnology) of the cumulative stock of funding dollars awarded by the

National Science Foundation (NSF) to nanotechnology projects initiated by institutions in a

given region.

       The paper is structured as follows. Firstly, we contextualize our hypotheses by

considering the impact, on the production of new knowledge, of general knowledge stocks

(Section 2), and of barriers to the flow of knowledge across institutional boundaries (Section 3).

We then provide a justification of our focus on geographically localized knowledge flow

(Section 4), before describing our methods of measuring knowledge (Section 5), of identifying

“nano-relevant” documents (Section 6), and of categorizing those documents by organizational


                                                 2
type and geographical region (Section 7). In Section 8, we describe our methods of data analysis;

in Section 9, we present the results of the tests of our first hypothesis, about the impact of

knowledge stocks; and in Section 10, we present the results of the tests of our second hypothesis,

about the impact of knowledge flows. Finally, we draw our conclusions (Section 11).




2. General knowledge stocks: Their impact on the production of new knowledge

       Researchers in the economics of scientific knowledge have long been concerned to assess

the impact of knowledge production on economic growth (see, e.g., Stephan, 1996; Foray, 2004).

How closely do measurements of the rates at which new knowledge is produced correlate with

measurements of the rates at which the economy grows as a whole? A number of production

functions have been proposed that model the relationship between output quantities of goods and

services and input quantities of knowledge. Considerable attention has also been paid to the task

of identifying the conditions under which rates of knowledge production (and thus economic

productivity in general) can increase most rapidly. Correspondingly, production functions have

been developed that may be used to predict the rate at which new knowledge will be produced in

the future (see, e.g., Adams, 1990).

       Comprehensive functions of this latter kind typically quantify inputs of three principal

types: time, physical resources, and human (i.e., intellectual) resources. In practice, the

intellectual capital accessible to an institution includes both (i) knowledge that is recorded or

codified in documents, and (ii) the tacit knowledge or know-how that is stored only in the minds

of the institution’s scientists and researchers. Research in economics (see, e.g., Griliches, 1990)

suggests that the impact of cumulated general knowledge stocks (i.e., knowledge capital) on the

production of new knowledge is positive. In other words, the larger the existing cumulated stock



                                                  3
of general knowledge, the faster new knowledge is produced: rates of production of new

knowledge increase in direct proportion to sizes of stocks of existing knowledge. Such a finding

supports the general claim, widely accepted by economists, that scientific knowledge is strongly

cumulative (see, e.g., Stigler, 1983; Machlup, 1984). According to the cumulative advantage

model of the knowledge production process, having one idea increases the likelihood of having

another: knowledge begets knowledge.

       The validity of the cumulative advantage model has been questioned from various

perspectives. On one hand, it is criticized for its reliance on the assumption that the existing

knowledge base consists of propositions about the world that are themselves true. Work in the

history and philosophy of science (HPS) and science and technology studies (STS) tends to

emphasize the sharp continuity breaks in the evolution of fields of knowledge that are observed

to follow breakthrough discoveries (see, e.g., Kuhn, 1962), and thus to suggest that the size of

existing knowledge stocks is either irrelevant for predictions of future knowledge productivity,

or even negatively correlated in the sense that the existence of large stocks of prior general

knowledge actively retards the making and acceptance of discoveries in new fields.

       From another perspective, the cumulative advantage model has been attacked for failing

to take into account the gradual obsolescence (and depreciation in economic value) of

knowledge, and the variation in obsolescence rates among fields. Nevertheless, the correlation

between size of existing knowledge stock and rate of production of new knowledge has been

observed even when the value of previously-produced knowledge is discounted (conventionally

by 20% per year) to reflect the way in which older knowledge becomes obsolete over time (see,

e.g., Griliches, 1990).




                                                  4
        Thirdly, it has been argued that the positive externalities of knowledge in a given field are

most frequently restricted or localized to third parties working in that field -- i.e., that the stock

of knowledge produced in one field has little impact on the rate of production of new knowledge

in other fields (see, e.g., Antonelli, 2001).

        The study described in this paper supplies data that can be interpreted as further evidence

of the validity of the cumulative advantage model, addressing in particular the third criticism

mentioned above. We report measurements of (i) the size of prior stocks of knowledge in all

fields, and (ii) the rate of production of new knowledge in the field of nanotechnology, and find

that the correlation between sets of measurements of the two kinds is typically positive. We

believe that this finding reflects the capability of disruptive, breakthrough discoveries in science

still to draw upon, or at least not contradict, some of the concepts, formulae, and machines

developed in pre-existing science. While some elements in pre-existing science may be radically

changed or eliminated, other old elements are imported largely unchanged, while still others are

transformed by their use for new purposes, yielding hybrid elements that mix old and new.




3. Barriers to the flow of knowledge across institutional boundaries: Their impact on the

production of new knowledge

        A much remarked property of knowledge as an economic good is that it is capable of

"spillover": it may be acquired and used freely by people working in institutions other than those

in which the knowledge originates, while the originating institution retains access to that

knowledge but receives no further compensation for its diffusion (see, e.g., Arrow, 1962).

Knowledge production is thus said to generate "positive externalities" or benefits for third

parties. Codified knowledge flows through text books, scientific equipment, and lecture hall



                                                   5
presentations. Tacit knowledge is embodied in the person and is communicated with great

difficulty, often by doing research together with the person learning. The freedom for tacit

knowledge to flow across institutional boundaries is frequently identified as one of the essential

conditions under which rates of knowledge production can increase most rapidly.

       Ideally, the intellectual capital input to a knowledge production function should account

not only for stocks of recorded knowledge but also for stocks of tacit knowledge. Recorded

knowledge may be quantified using counts of publications (and perhaps qualified, more

controversially, by weighting publication counts by counts of the citations made to those

publications by other authors). It has proven more difficult, on the other hand, to measure stocks

of tacit knowledge. Nevertheless, since there is evidence to suggest that researchers’ engagement

in collaborative activity is the principal way in which tacit knowledge is generated and shared,

collaboration contains evidence of likely significant tacit knowledge stocks, once value and skill

differentiation are controlled.

       The simplest and most commonly occurring process by which knowledge is transferred

across institutional boundaries involves people from different institutions interacting with one

another, and (more specifically) collaborating on projects whose results include the production of

some new knowledge. Micro-institutional approaches look at the social construction process,

including transmission of knowledge and information (Zucker 1977) and “institutionalization

projects” (DiMaggio 1982a and b).

       Co-authoring across institutional boundaries serves to connect the two organizations,

while simultaneously converting each co-author into quasi-members of the other co-authors’

organizations, such that a subsequent promotion of one of the authors may include a letter of

evaluation from an external collaborator (Zucker, 1991; Gartrell, 1987). This process of external



                                                 6
evaluation of job performance also occurs in firms, e.g. investment banks where externally

collected survey data from clients is used to determine bonuses and promotions (Eccles & Crane,

1988). Action becomes embedded in the virtual space created by the social network (Powell,

1990). Thus, the deepening of channels or conduits for the flow of knowledge can serve as a

catalyst for changes in the degree and type of social embeddedness of knowledge-production

activity.

        As the frequency and number of different scientists working with each other across

institutional boundaries increases, the “gap” between institutions may begin to be converted into

a “glissando” (Tyree, Semyonov, & Hodge, 1979). When this kind of boundary change occurs

repeatedly across institutions of two organizational types (e.g., university and firm), the social

distance between the two types is reduced and institutional differentiation may decrease,

changing the context in which action is embedded. For new knowledge to have an impact, and

perhaps become taken-for-granted, the knowledge not only needs to be produced, but also

transmitted to others. Pre-existing practices of co-authorship and collaboration provide existing

channels along which the new information is likely to flow. These collaborations can be viewed

as micro-joint ventures, where success encourages more joint work, further embedding persons

in cross-organizational contexts. As the number of these “micro-JVs” adds up, the cumulative

effects may operate like an organization-level joint venture, and lead to a move to the other

organization by one of the scientists.

        The factors considered by researchers when choosing whether or not to engage in

collaborative knowledge-production activity are various. Whatever the factors that are perceived

by individuals as incentives in particular contexts, the force of such incentives is typically

diminished by the existence of barriers to collaboration, such as the absence (or unreliability) of




                                                  7
formalized structures of the kinds that might support cross-institutional interaction. It is clear, for

instance, that the prior lack of channels for cross-institutional communication is a strong

disincentive to collaborate on cross-institutional research, with the result that institutional

boundaries function as knowledge envelopes, preventing knowledge from leaving the institution

in which it was produced (Zucker et al., 1996).

       In our prior work, we have examined the effects of direct ties, measured as numbers of

articles co-authored by scientists in universities and scientists in firms, on commercialization of

basic science discoveries made in universities (Zucker, Darby, & Armstrong, 1998; 2002; Zucker

& Darby, 2001). It is not yet equally clear, however, what impact the prior existence of channels

for cross-institutional communication has on the rate at which knowledge is produced in new

fields. It might be hypothesized that the depth of such channels is positively correlated with

knowledge productivity – in other words, that the more frequently cross-institutional

collaboration has occurred (and knowledge has flowed) in the past, the greater quantity of

knowledge will be produced in the immediate future. In this paper, we investigate this hypothesis

in relation to the field of nanotechnology, reporting our findings that the absence of barriers to

the flow of general (i.e., “non-nano”) knowledge in the past has a positive impact on the rate at

which new knowledge is produced in nanotechnology.




4. Geographically localized knowledge flow: A theory of localization

       A stream of recent research on innovation in the U.S. has found evidence of “geographically

localized knowledge spillovers” occurring in areas around major universities (Jaffe, 1986; 1989;

Jaffe, Trajtenberg, & Henderson, 1993; Audretsch & Feldman, 1996; Henderson, Jaffe, &

Trajtenberg, 1998). The underlying assumption is that proximity to a major university itself



                                                   8
provides technological opportunity; the localization is assumed to be due to the social ties between

university and firm employees or to firm employees’ access to seminars at the university. The

importance of distance is strengthened by Adams and Jaffe’s (1996) finding that geographic

distance is an important impediment to flow of technology even within the firm.

        Zucker, Darby, and Brewer (1998) and Darby and Zucker (2001) find that firms are more

likely to begin using biotechnology in U.S. and Japanese regions where and when “star”

bioscientists are actively publishing, respectively. Although these findings have been cited as

evidence of geographically localized knowledge spillovers, we read our results – and those of the

other authors cited above – as only demonstrating geographical localization of knowledge. Zucker,

Darby, and Armstrong (1998; 2002) and Zucker and Darby (2001) show for California, the U.S.,

and Japan, respectively, that university effects on nearby firm R&D productivity are highly

concentrated in the particular firms with bench-science working relationships with top academic

scientists and practically absent otherwise. We identify these academic--firm links by the academic

scientist publishing a journal article that also has one or more firm-affiliated authors. Fieldwork –

supported by analysis of the timing of the academic scientists’ first articles with a firm and its

founding -- indicates that these academic--firm co-publishing relationships most often connote that

the academic scientist was a firm founder or at least presently has a significant financial interest in

the firm. In our view, knowledge localization occurs because high levels of tacit knowledge

characteristic of high-science discoveries require inventor involvement for successful transfer to

firms. The implied temporary natural excludability produces high potential returns which help

motivate the involvement of top scientists in the commercial application of their discoveries.

        This paper builds on this literature in two ways: First, we hypothesize that both recently

published and patented knowledge creation will have localized effects on the current production




                                                    9
of knowledge. Second, we hypothesize that it will be more difficult to engage in collaborations

across organizational type in a new area like nanotechnology in those local regions where there

is little prior precedent for such collaborations than in those regions with a more extensive

history of such collaborations. That is, the inherited institutional setting of a local region may

limit or enhance the ability of scientists and engineers to engage in productive collaborations

across organizational type.



5. Overcoming difficulties in the measurement of knowledge

        The characteristics of knowledge that make it impossible for researchers to measure its

quantity (let alone its quality) directly are well documented (see, e.g., Foray, 2004). In this paper,

we adopt a strategy for measurement that will be familiar to sciento- and bibliometricians (see,

e.g., Hullmann & Meyer, 2003; Moed, Glänzel, & Schmoch, 2004): We use counts of articles

(i.e., articles published in the scientific literature) and counts of patents as separate indicators of

the quantities of knowledge produced in given fields, in given sectors, in given regions, in given

periods.

        The limitations of such an approach are also well documented; suffice to say that we are

only too aware (i) that such counts obscure large variations in the quality of the knowledge

recorded in articles and patents, and (ii) that a large but unknown proportion of the knowledge

produced and used by researchers and by developers remains unrecorded in articles and patents.

One common response to the former observation is to weight publication counts in accordance

with counts of the citations received by publications. We have not made use of citation statistics

in this study since the nature of the relationship between citedness and quality is itself unclear.




                                                  10
        We have been developing an open-access digital library of articles and patents in the field

of nanotechnology, covering all aspects of the science and technology of nanometer-scale

structures and systems (Zucker & Darby, 2006). Nanotechnology is an emergent, highly

interdisciplinary field. The criteria that we use when deciding whether or not to add a new article

or patent to NanoBank are described in Section 6.

        Each of the records in NanoBank includes metadata that specify, inter alia, the date of the

article’s publication or the patent’s grant, the institutional affiliation of each of the article’s

authors or the patent’s assignees (and the addresses of named institutions), and any discipline(s)

or subject area(s) to which the article or patent has been assigned in previous acts of

classification. These metadata can then be processed by computer (using procedures described in

Section 7) in order to generate counts of articles and patents tabulated by year, by geographical

area, by organizational type, by subject area, and by type of cross-institutional collaboration.

        These counts – indicating the rate of production of new knowledge in nanotechnology –

are then compared with counts of “non-nano” articles and patents that indicate the size of

existing general knowledge stocks. These latter counts are generated in a similar manner from

existing databases of general coverage produced by Thomson Scientific (formerly the Institute

for Scientific Information, Inc. -- ISI), and the United States Patent and Trademark Office

(USPTO).




6. Identifying nano-relevant documents

        In order to populate NanoBank with articles and patents that treat topics related to

nanotechnology (i.e., that are “nano-relevant” or, simply, “nano”), we need to filter such

documents from initial universal sets of documents covering all subject areas. Nanotechnology is


                                                   11
an interdisciplinary endeavor, and nano-relevant documents may be found inhabiting many

disciplinary spaces, both expected and unexpected. The two universal document sets with which

we began are (for articles) the union of Science Citation Index Expanded™, Social Sciences

Citation Index®, and Arts & Humanities Citation Index® produced by Thomson Scientific, and

(for patents) the database of US patents produced by the Zucker-Darby Knowledge, Innovation,

and Growth Project. Thomson Scientific’s data cover more than 24 million articles from more

than 8,700 peer-reviewed journals; our patent data cover the 3,891,720 patents granted by the

USPTO from 1976 to 2005.

       The fraction of the content of these document sets that is nano-relevant is substantial, so

the task of filtering nano-relevant documents is one that can be carried out only with automated

assistance. We use two separate methods of distinguishing documents that are “nano”: (a) Search

for the occurrence of terms in a predefined list of 379 terms identified by subject specialists as

nano-specific to indicate “nano.” We found this method to be less reliable in identifying the

latest and the earliest nano-relevant documents: the latest are more likely to include terms that

are too new to have made it on to our list, while the earliest were written before the terms on our

list were in common usage. (b) Discriminate between nano-relevant documents and others using

a probabilistic procedure for the automatic identification of those terms (Sebastiani, 2002). This

procedure is adaptive in the sense that it requires the computer to continuously learn from the

training data provided by prior sets of judgments of the relevance or non-relevance of

documents, and integrates techniques developed in the fields of information retrieval (IR),

machine learning (ML), and natural language processing (NLP).

       We begin by assuming the nano-relevance of the articles that make up the Virtual Journal

of Nanoscale Science & Technology (a.k.a. VJNano; http://www.vjnano.org/), a weekly



                                                 12
compilation of the latest research on nanoscale systems whose contents is selected manually,

from a variety of source publications, by the members of an international editorial board. In the

technical vocabulary of IR, VJNano’s selection policy is analogous to the output of a search with

very high precision but potentially low recall: few, if any, non-nano articles are selected, but it is

not known how many nano-relevant articles are not selected.1 Our task is then to identify those

documents that have not been selected by VJNano but that are nevertheless nano-relevant; in

other words, we want to classify the non-VJNano literature into nano (relevant) and non-nano

(non-relevant). The terms that occur most frequently in VJNano (and that do not appear on a

stop-word list of terms that occur frequently in English text in general) are weighted according to

their frequencies and used in a query against a universal document set (Van Rijsbergen, 1979).

The system’s response to such a query is a list of documents ranked in order of their probability

of relevance. In a “blind” feedback process, we then assume the nano-relevance of the top-

ranked documents, use data on the frequencies of occurrence of terms in those newly-identified

documents to modify the previous query, and submit the modified query against the universal

document set (Efthimiadis, 1996). We repeat the process until we converge on a relatively

consistent set of terms that changes little between iterations.

       A refinement of this procedure involves the generation of separate ranked lists of highly

discriminating terms for different subject areas. Every journal indexed by Thomson Scientific,

for instance, is assigned to one or more subject categories, and every article appearing in a given

journal inherits the category or categories to which that journal has been assigned. We were able

to match with their counterparts in the Thomson Scientific databases 17,693 of the 22,732

articles appearing by December 2005 in VJNano, and then to generate a separate sub-classifier

(i.e., a relatively stable query that may be used to retrieve nano-relevant documents) for each of



                                                  13
the 235 subject categories to which Thomson Scientific’s articles are assigned. Sub-classifiers

can similarly be generated for each of the five categories of patent in the broad science and

technology classification scheme based on the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)

International Patent Classification (IPC) that is used in the USPTO database. Even more specific

sub-classifiers can be generated for every publication year.




7. Categorizing documents by organizational type and geographical region

       Each Thomson Scientific record of an article includes fields that supply the name and

address of each of the institutions with which any of that article’s authors is affiliated; each

USPTO record of a patent includes fields that similarly supply the name and usually the address

of the institutional assignee-at-issue, and the home address of each inventor. We analyze the data

contained in these fields in order to categorize the knowledge-producing institutions by

organizational type or sector (i.e., as a firm, university / hospital, government / national

laboratory, research institute / national professional organization, “unclassified” [type not yet

determined]) and by geographical region. Institutions are classified by organizational type using

a sequential application of two methods: (i) the application of look-up tables, developed over

several years of automatic and manual processing, that match variant names to preferred names

and thence to organizational type; and (ii) keyword analysis for remaining unidentified

organizations that infers organizational type from certain of the words, phrases, and

abbreviations contained in an institution’s name (so that, for example, a name that includes

“Inc.” is classed as a firm). Addresses are classified by county and then by geographical region

using the Federal Information Processing Standard database (FIPS55;

http://geonames.usgs.gov/fips55.html) maintained by the U.S. Geological Survey, and definitions



                                                  14
of the 179 functional economic areas in the U.S. supplied by the U.S. Bureau of Economic

Analysis (Johnson & Kort, 2004).

       Statistical analysis of the contents of NanoBank yields data on the numbers of nano-

relevant articles published in each of 235 subject categories and patents granted in each of 5

subject categories, in each of 5 sectors, in each of 179 U.S. regions, in each of the 24 years from

1981 through 2004. If an article or patent is associated with more than one subject category,

organizational type, or region, each count is credited a fraction equivalent to the reciprocal of the

number of associated types or regions. If an article is co-authored by authors affiliated with

institutions of different organizational types within the same region, it is counted as an instance

of cross-institutional collaboration or “knowledge flow.” 2 Corresponding data on numbers of

non-nano articles and patents are derived by analyzing the residual contents (i.e., the contents left

after subtracting nano articles and patents) of the Thomson Scientific and USPTO databases.

       Table 1 provides a summary of these data. Table 2 provides further detail on the relative

frequencies of articles whose co-authors span institutional boundaries.




8. Data analysis methodology

       Our data analysis is performed on panel data – a time series of cross sections – comprised

of observations for each of the years 1981-2004 for each of the 179 U.S. functional economic

areas (i.e., central urban areas plus their suburbs and exurbs or “regions”) as defined by the U.S.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. Most of these regions have a relatively low rate of publication

and patenting while a smaller tail have much higher rates.

       We analyze this data using Poisson regressions with random effects and robust standard

errors estimated using the xtpoisson procedure in the Stata 9.0 statistical package. This procedure


                                                 15
is both flexible and robust. For example, since the negative binomial is a special case of the

random effects model (Kennedy, 1998, pp. 247-248), it permits the data to choose that form

rather than have it imposed which potentially biases the coefficient estimates if the true model is

not negative binomial.3 Since we use the local region as the group variable in these estimations

we are fitting separate constants for each region and crediting the model with explanatory power

only to the extent that it explains variation over time relative to the mean rates of publication or

patenting for each region. This provides something of an acid test for the significance of the

coefficients individually and as a group or groups.

       To be very specific, the general form of the random intercept Poisson model estimated by

xtpoission can be expressed by the following equations:

                                    K
             log( λij ) = β0 j +          βk X kij                    (1)
                                   k =1


             β0 j = η00 + α 0 j                                       (2)

Taking (1) and (2) together, we have

                                    K
             log( λij ) = η00 +           βk X kij + α 0 j            (3)
                                   k =1


where λij is the expected number of events occurred for the j th region at the i th year, β0 j

indicates an intercept that is random for each region, and α 0 j is an error term for the j th region

that follows a log-gamma distribution with mean zero.

       Compared to a simple Poisson model estimated based on the pooled data, our estimator

allows for heterogeneity among regions by estimating the variance of α 0 j . When the estimated

variance is not significantly different from zero (i.e., when there is no heterogeneity among

regions), the estimator will give identical results as a simple Poisson regression. In our case, all



                                                             16
the estimated variances of α 0 j are significantly different from zero, which suggests that we

cannot treat observations from different regions as if observations from the same region, ignoring

the hierarchical nature of the data. Although a random intercept model does not explicitly

explore the source of heterogeneity (which is not the focus of the current paper), it nevertheless

takes it into account and gives adjusted estimates for regressors that we report.

       We elected to use robust standard errors in order to provide t-statistics which are not

biased by deviations from the assumed parametric model. Nonetheless, in response to a comment

by an anonymous referee, we report alternative estimates in the Appendix based on the

bootstrapping procedure. Since these results are very similar to those reported in the body of the

paper, we believe that the basic methodology is well suited to the data being analyzed.



9. The impact of general knowledge stocks on the production of knowledge in

nanotechnology: Empirical results

       Table 3 summarizes the results of a Poisson regression with random effects analysis that

indicates the strength of the relationship between three explanatory variables -- the cumulative

stock4 of non-nano articles written by authors affiliated with institutions in a given region, the

cumulative stock of non-nano patents granted to inventors affiliated with institutions in a given

region, and (for purposes of comparison) the cumulative stock of funding dollars awarded by the

National Science Foundation (NSF) to nanotechnology projects initiated by institutions in a

given region5 -- and two dependent variables -- the number of nano articles written in the

corresponding region in a given year, and the number of nano patents granted in the

corresponding region in a given year. There is no standard measure of goodness of fit like the R2

for this procedure, perhaps because it would be controversial to take credit for the explanatory



                                                 17
power of the differing regional means. We note that all the coefficients but one in Table 3 are

highly significant and do make comparative evaluations of goodness of fit using Wald (1943)

log-likelihood tests.

       From these results in Table 3, we can determine that the rates of production both of nano

articles and of nano patents are higher in regions with a larger cumulative stock of non-nano

articles. However, a larger cumulative stock of non-nano patents has a positive impact only on

the rate of production of nano patents, and not on the rate of production of nano articles. This

finding is consistent with a linear model in which academic discoveries (which dominate the

article counts) add to the research productivity of nearby firms (which dominate the patent

counts), but not vice versa. Adding the NSF nano-funding stock variable very significantly

increases the explanatory power of the regressions relative to the corresponding regressions

without that variable. The same is true for all other regression specifications reported below.

NSF nano-funding significantly increases regional research productivity whether measured by

articles or patents – implying that both universities and firms are more productive in years and

regions with above average support by the NSF. We cannot distinguish from these non-

experimental data the extent to which NSF is independently creating discoveries by its funding

or successfully identifying and facilitating the research efforts of the best and brightest scientists.

This result comes through loud and clear regardless of which model specification we tried. In

Table 3 it also makes the article impact of the cumulative non-nano patent stock significantly

negative. We are tempted to interpret this result as due to more competition for top academic

scientists’ time in areas with very successful firm research efforts, but note that the negative

coefficient is not statistically significant using the alternative bootstrap standard errors reported

in the Appendix.



                                                  18
        In Table 4, we break down the cumulative stocks by sector. For the dominant players in

article production (universities) and in patent production (firms),6 the strengths of the

relationships between cumulative stocks and annual productivity are similar to those we see in

Table 3. However, the results of the regression for other organizational types display

considerable instability that is difficult to interpret: in research institutes, for example,

cumulative non-nano patent stocks have a strong positive impact on patent production but a

strong negative impact on article production, whereas, in the same sector, cumulative non-nano

article stocks have a negative impact all round. Since the models in Table 3 can be considered to

be nested in the models of Table 4 when the coefficients for the articles knowledge stocks are all

constrained to equal the same number and the coefficients for the patents knowledge stocks are

all constrained to equal the same number (possibly different from the one for articles), we can

use another Wald test (reported at the bottom of Table 4) to see if relaxing the constraints
                                                                                     2
significantly improves the explanatory power of the regressions. The reported            statistics are all

extremely large, demonstrating that the more complicated models of Table 4 have much more

explanatory power than the simple models of Table 3.

        We believe that the significant anomalous signs for smaller participants in publishing and

patenting results from multicollinearity among the regressors. While multicollinearity is always

a matter of degree and difficult to assess in nonlinear models like ours, we appear to have a

moderate level of multicollinearity as measured by the variance inflation factor (VIF). When

multicollinearity is a serious problem, the estimated coefficients as well as the standard errors are

unstable and tend to vary widely with a slight change of the observations. With perhaps an

excess of caution, we tried bootstrapping to test the robustness of our results as described in the

Appendix. In general, the bootstrapped standard errors are somewhat larger than those reported



                                                   19
in Tables 3-6; some of the coefficients become insignificant, but the main, quantitative

conclusions still hold.




10. The impact of general knowledge flow on the production of knowledge in

nanotechnology: Empirical results

       Table 5 displays the results of more Poisson with random effects regressions, this time

run with cumulative counts of cross-institutional-type co-authored non-nano articles in given

regions substituted as an explanatory variable instead of the total counts of non-nano articles.7

Until the Zucker-Darby articles-patent person matching project is completed, we cannot measure

cross-institutional-type collaborations among inventors since their affiliation is available only

from articles.

       These results are similar to those displayed in Table 3, with the exception that cumulative

counts of non-nano patents also now have a significant positive impact on the rate of production

of nano articles, even in the presence of the NSF funding variable. When the knowledge flows

are broken down by sector pairings, as in Table 6, the flows between firms and universities,

firms and research institutes, firms and government, and universities and government all show

robustly positive impacts on the rate of production both of articles and of patents. Relaxing the

equality constraint on the coefficients in moving from Table 5 to 6 again very significantly

improves the explanatory power of these regressions.

       However, the explanatory power of these regressions is in every case substantially lower

than the corresponding regressions in Tables 3 and 4. Nonetheless, we are encouraged that even

the crude flow variables we are able to measure at this time do as well as they do and are




                                                 20
encouraged to pursue this concept in future research when data is available to measure

collaborations for patents as well as articles.




11. Conclusions

       In this paper, we have described our investigations of the impact of non-nano knowledge

stocks and knowledge flows on knowledge production in nanotechnology. The research question

that we sought to answer in the course of these investigations was “What factors influence the

rates at which new knowledge is produced in the field of nanotechnology?” We believe that this

question is an important one, not simply because answering it improves our understanding of the

processes by which new knowledge is produced in a rapidly evolving field, but because scientific

knowledge is commonly assumed to be a strong source of economic growth. If we can identify

conditions under which the rate of production of knowledge in a given field is observed to

increase, we may be able to point to firm-, regional-, and national-level strategies and policies

that will encourage the creation of those conditions, and that will ultimately promote economic

growth.

       The data analyses reported in this paper provide the following headline results:

       (i) that the size of the cumulative knowledge stock of articles published in non-

nanotechnological fields in a given geographical region has a significant positive effect on the

rate of production of nanotechnological articles and patents in that region (see Table 3);

       (ii) that the size of the cumulative knowledge stock of patents published in non-

nanotechnological fields in a given geographical region has a significant positive effect on the

rate of production of nanotechnological patents in that region (see Table 3);




                                                  21
       (iii) that the volume of the cumulative knowledge flow of cross-institutionally co-

authored articles published in non-nanotechnological fields in a given geographical region has a

significant positive effect on the rate of production of nanotechnological articles and patents in

that region (see Table 5); and

       (iv) that the size of the cumulative stock of funding dollars awarded by the NSF to

nanotechnology projects initiated by institutions in a given geographical region has a significant

positive effect on the rate of production of nanotechnological articles and patents in that region

(see Tables 3 and 5).

       These results allow us to draw two main conclusions. In the first place, the data provide

further support for the general claim that scientific knowledge is strongly cumulative. We

suggest that the Kuhnian critique of the cumulative advantage model (summarized in Section 2)

is valid only under more limited conditions than are examined here. In the second place, the data

supply evidence that ongoing efforts to institutionalize channels for cross-institutional

collaboration are worthy of renewed support at organizational, regional, and national levels.

       We mentioned in Section 1 our conviction that knowledge production is deeply

embedded in a network of social structures and practices. Such structures and practices both

constrain action and enable it (see, e.g., Granovetter, 1985). We have found empirically that the

production of nanotechnological knowledge is embedded in the wider social context of

institutional organization, cross-institutional collaboration, and national structures of incentives

and rewards. This embeddedness is constraining, in that the range of possible action is narrowed,

but also enabling, as channels for the flow of tacit knowledge deepen, and the flow between

organizations of different types becomes more differentiated.




                                                 22
       We predict that a productive seam of future data will be found at the level of the

individual scientist and/or institution, which is the source both of resistance to, and of support

for, nanotechnological knowledge flow. Resistance comes from the large number of scientists

trained in non-nanotechnological areas, who face a daunting choice: either continuing to practice

as they have in the past and risking devaluation in the labor market, or making the effort to

acquire new knowledge and skills, typically at substantial cost. Change comes from a smaller

number of scientists who take the positive decision to learn new areas of science (e.g., biology in

addition to engineering) and/or to move to a new location to improve their access to new

knowledge. Providing a precise specification of the mechanisms by which individual decision-

making and localized social context together influence the growth of knowledge in particular

fields remains a formidable research challenge.




Appendix

       An anonymous referee raised questions about the effect of multicollinearity on our

results. When multicollinearity is a serious problem, the estimated coefficients as well as the

standard errors are unstable and tend to vary widely with a slight change of the observations. As

one approach to seeing whether or not the moderate degree of multicollinearity among our

independent variables was a serious problem, we tried bootstrapping to test the robustness of our

results. Using bootstrap technique, we randomly select the observations with replacement

(clustered by year) 100 times, re-estimate all our models, and calculate the bootstrapped standard

errors. In general, the bootstrapped standard errors in the regressions reported in Tables 3A-6A

are somewhat larger than those reported in the corresponding Tables 3-6, some of the

coefficients become insignificant, but the main, quantitative conclusions still hold.



                                                  23
References




Adams, J.D., 1990. Fundamental stocks of knowledge and productivity growth. Journal of

Political Economy 98, 673-702.



Adams, J.D., Jaffe, A.B., 1996. Bounding the effects of R&D: An investigation using matched

establishment-firm data. Rand Journal of Economics 27, 700-721.



Antonelli, C., 2001. The Microeconomics of Technological Systems. Oxford University Press,

Oxford.



Arrow, K.J., 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for inventions, in: Nelson,

R.R. (Ed.), The Rate and Direction of Economic Activity: Economic and Social Factors.

Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 609-626.



Audretsch, D., Feldman, M.P., 1996. R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation and

production. American Economic Review 86, 630-640.



Darby, M.R., Zucker, L.G., 2001. Change or die: The adoption of biotechnology in the Japanese

and U.S. pharmaceutical industries. Comparative Studies of Technological Evolution 7, 85-125.



DiMaggio, P., 1982a. Cultural entrepreneurship in nineteenth century Boston, I: The creation of

an organizational base for high culture in America. Media, Culture and Society 4, 33-50.



                                               24
DiMaggio, P., 1982b. Cultural entrepreneurship in nineteenth century Boston, II: The

classification and framing of American Art. Media, Culture and Society 4, 303-322.



Eccles, R.G., Crane, D.B., 1988. Doing Deals: Investment Banks at Work. Harvard Business

School Press, Boston, MA.



Efthimiadis, E.N., 1996. Query expansion, in: Williams, M.E. (Ed.), Annual Review of

Information Science and Technology, Vol. 31. Learned Information, Medford, NJ, pp. 121-187.



Foray, D., 2004. The Economics of Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.



Gartrell, C.D., 1987. Network approaches to social evaluation. Annual Review of Sociology 13,

49-66



Granovetter, M., 1985. Economic action, social structure, and embeddedness. American Journal

of Sociology 91, 481-510.



Griliches, Z., 1990. Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey. Journal of Economic

Literature 28, 1661-1707.



Gulati, R., 1999. Network location and learning: The influence of network resources and firm

capabilities on alliance formation. Strategic Management Journal 20, 397-420.




                                               25
Henderson, R., Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., 1998. Universities as a source of commercial

technology: A detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965-1988. Review of Economics and

Statistics 80, 119-127.



Hullmann, A., Meyer, M., 2003. Publications and patents in nanotechnology: An overview of

previous studies and the state of the art. Scientometrics 58, 507-527.



Jaffe, A.B., 1986. Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D: Evidence from firms’

patents, profits, and market value. American Economic Review 76, 984-1001.



Jaffe, A.B., 1989. Characterizing the “technological position” of firms, with application to

quantifying technological opportunity and research spillovers. Research Policy 18, 87-97.



Jaffe, A.B., 1989. Real effects of academic research. American Economic Review 79, 957-970.



Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M., Henderson, R., 1993. Geographic localization of knowledge

spillovers as evidenced by patent citations. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 577-598.



Johnson, K.P., Kort, J.R., 2004 (November). 2004 redefinition of the BEA economic areas.

Survey of Current Business, 68-75.



Kennedy, P., 1998. A Guide to Econometrics, 4th ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.




                                                26
Kuhn, T.S., 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,

IL.



Machlup, F., 1984. Knowledge: Its Creation, Distribution, and Economic Significance, vol. 3.

Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.



Moed, H.F., Glänzel, W., Schmoch, U. (Eds.), 2004. Handbook of Quantitative Science and

Technology Research: The Use of Publication and Patent Statistics in Studies of S&T Systems.

Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands.



Powell, W.W., 1990. Neither market nor hierarchy: Network forms of organization, in: Staw, B.B.,

Cummings, L.L. (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 12. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.



Sebastiani, F. 2002. Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing

Surveys 34, 1-47.



Stephan, P.E., 1996. The economics of science. Journal of Economic Literature 34, 1199-1235.



Stigler, G.J., 1983. The process and progress of economics. Journal of Political Economy 91,

529-545.




                                               27
Tyree, A., Semyonov, M., Hodge, R.W., 1979. Gaps and glissandos: Inequality, economic

development, and social mobility in 24 countries. American Sociological Review 44, 410-424.



Van Rijsbergen, C.J., 1979. Information Retrieval, 2nd ed. Butterworths, London.



Wald, A., 1943. Tests of statistical hypotheses concerning several parameters when the number of

observations is large. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 54, 426-482.



Zucker, L.G., 1977. The role of institutionalization in cultural persistence. American Sociological

Review 42, 726-743.



Zucker, L.G., 1991. Markets for bureaucratic authority and control: Information quality in

professions and services, in: Barley, S., Tolbert, P. S. (Eds.), Research in the Sociology of

Organizations, Vol. 8. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 157-189.



Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R., 2001. Capturing technological opportunity via Japan’s star scientists:

Evidence from Japanese firms’ biotech patents and products. Journal of Technology Transfer 26,

37-58.



Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R., 2006. Socio-economic impact of nanoscale science: Initial results

and NanoBank, in: Roco, M.C., Bainbridge, W.S. (Eds.), Societal Implications of

Nanotechnology. Springer Science+Business Media, in press.




                                                 28
Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R., Armstrong, J., 1998. Geographically localized knowledge: Spillovers

or markets? Economic Inquiry 36, 65-86.



Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R., Armstrong, J., 2002. Commercializing knowledge: University

science, knowledge capture, and firm performance in biotechnology. Management Science 48,

138-153.



Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R., Brewer, M.B., 1998. Intellectual human capital and the birth of U.S.

biotechnology enterprises. American Economic Review 88, 290-306.




                                              29
                                               Footnotes


1
    VJNano also covers a limited range of journals, those published by the American Institute of

Physics or by the American Physical Society, plus a core group of interdisciplinary journals.
2
    Our data on the extent of cross-institutional collaboration are currently limited to co-authorship

of papers: we have not analyzed patents for instances of knowledge flow.
3
    The negative binomial is nested within the random effects model which itself is a very simple

form of the hierarchical linear model (random coefficients) estimation.
4
    The sizes of all stocks reported in our data are computed by cumulating counts for all previous

years, and discounting by 20% annually to reflect depreciation.
5
    Nano-relevant awards were identified by searching the NSF “Award Search” website

(http://nsf.gov/awardsearch/tab.do?dispatch=3) for the following 17 terms identified by subject

specialists as indicators of nano-relevance: atomic force microscop*; buckminsterfullerene; c60;

fullerene; giant magnetoresistance; langmuir blodgett; mesoscopic; nanocrystal*; nanoparticle;

nanoscale; nanostructur*; quantum confin*; quantum dot; quantum well; quantum wire; scanning

tunneling microscop*; self-assembled monolayer. The asterisk is a wild-card symbol: documents

that contain any term beginning with the string of characters before the asterisk will be marked

as “nano.”
6
    See Table 1.
7
    These counts, unlike those for general knowledge stocks, are not discounted as they represent

institutions precedents, not depreciating knowledge.




                                                   30
                             Table 1. Variable Names and Summary Statistics

Variables                                                                                             U.S. Regions
                                                                                     N      Mean        S.D.       Min        Max
Variables Measured without Differentiating Organization Types
    Nano Articles Published in Year                                                 4296   25.690       82.330          0 1025.873
    Nano Patents Granted in Year                                                    4296   11.946       57.868          0 1329.448
    Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Stock                                               4296    5.598       13.707          0 124.281
    Non-Nano Patents Knowledge Stock                                                4296    0.992        2.565     0.001    35.842
    NSF Nano Funding Stock for Region (in US$ millions)                             4296    0.092        0.301          0    5.842
    Year                                                                            4296 1992.500        6.923      1981      2004
    Region (BEA number)                                                             4296   90.000       51.678          1       179
University and Hospital Variables
    University Nano Articles                                                        4296     18.950     57.632           0   651.666
    University Nano Patents                                                         4296      1.518      7.044           0   104.239
    University Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Stock                                    4296      4.183      9.630           0    86.983
    University Non-Nano Patent Knowledge Stock                                      4296      0.028      0.086           0     0.971
Firm Variables
    Firm Nano Articles                                                              4296      3.159     20.878          0 607.591
    Firm Nano Patents                                                               4296      9.494     48.771          0 1157.022
    Firm Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Stock                                          4296      0.550      1.890          0   21.713
    Firm Non-Nano Patent Knowledge Stock                                            4296      0.901      2.357     0.001    33.294
Government & Federal or National Laboratories Variables
    Government Nano Articles                                                        4296      1.763      9.459           0   158.970
    Government Nano Patents                                                         4296      0.349      2.783           0    70.332
    Government Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Stock                                    4296      0.233      1.344           0    20.469
    Government Non-Nano Patent Knowledge Stock                                      4296      0.025      0.093           0     1.231
Research Institutes & National Professional Organization Variables
    Research Inst. Nano Articles                                                    4296      0.663      3.644           0    78.172
    Research Inst. Nano Patents                                                     4296      0.132      0.857           0    15.367
    Research Inst. Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Stock                                4296      0.127      0.484           0     6.723
    Research Inst. Non-Nano Patent Knowledge Stock                                  4296      0.004      0.014           0     0.143
Unclassified (Not Yet Classifiable as Above) Variables
    Unclassified Nano Articles                                                      4296      1.156      7.716           0   173.494
    Unclassified Nano Patents                                                       4296      0.453      2.166           0    63.295
    Unclassified Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Stock                                  4296      0.504      1.676           0    22.003
    Unclassified Non-Nano Patent Knowledge Stock                                    4296      0.035      0.102           0     1.389
Cross-Organization-Type Knowledge Flow Variables
    Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                                                4296     62.929    232.531           0 3289.931
    Firm-University Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                                4296     13.522     50.725           0 541.824
    Firm-Research Institute Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                        4296      0.421      2.387           0   57.440
    Firm-Goverment Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                                 4296      1.453     10.685           0 218.875
    Firm-Unclassified Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                              4296      2.096     10.357           0 206.753
    University-Research Institute Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                  4296      9.094     42.095           0 628.370
    University-Government Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                          4296      6.542     33.200           0 530.031
    University-Unclassified Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                        4296     26.450     85.920           0 1180.020
    Government-Research Institute Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                  4296      0.428      4.918           0 124.131
    Government-Unclassified Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                        4296      2.147     25.912           0 497.000
    Research Institute-Unclassified Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                4296      0.691      4.394           0   99.631

Notes: 1. Knowledge stocks are computed as a perpetual inventory of the indicated series with 20% per year depreciation
          and measured in thousands of cumulated articles or patents.
       2. Each variable is measured each year 1981-2004 for each of the U.S. regions which are the 179 functional economic
          areas defined by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (Johnson and Kort 2004). N = 24 years x 179 regions = 4296.
       3. We include in our patent counts only those with an assignee at issue to an organization separate from the inventor(s).
          Patents are located by the address of the inventors and classified as to organization type by assignee.
       4. The NSF Nano Funding Stock is computed like the knowledge stocks, but measured in millions of US dollars.
       5. Knowledge flows are computed as the number of articles co-authored across organization types within one BEA.




                                                                31
                  Table 2. Organization Type Boundaries: Spanning the Fences

                                                A. Non-Nano Articles
Organization Type                Total Number of      All Authors within the Org. Type      Authors across 2+ Org. Types
                                ISI Journal Articles Number Articles        Percent         Number Articles    Percent
Universities & Hospitals            4,380,043            4,141,152             95                238,891                5


Firms                                563,504              488,356              87                75,148             13


Government, National &               238,056              192,654              81                45,402             19
  Federal Laboratories
Research Institutes &                137,807               91,755              67                46,052             33
  Natl. Professional Orgs.
Unclassified (Not Yet                539,765              404,577              75                135,188            25
  Classifiable as Above)

                                                   B. Nano Articles
Organization Type                Total Number of      All Authors within the Org. Type      Authors across 2+ Org. Types
                                ISI Journal Articles Number Articles        Percent         Number Articles    Percent
Universities & Hospitals              81,409               75,729              93                 5,680                 7


Firms                                 13,570               10,691              79                 2,879             21


Government, National &                 7,572               5,422               72                 2,150             28
  Federal Laboratories
Research Institutes &                  2,846               2,198               77                  648              23
  Natl. Professional Orgs.
Unclassified (Not Yet                  4,965               3,460               70                 1,505             30
  Classifiable as Above)

                                                     C. All Articles
Organization Type                Total Number of      All Authors within the Org. Type      Authors across 2+ Org. Types
                                ISI Journal Articles Number Articles        Percent         Number Articles    Percent
Universities & Hospitals            4,461,452            4,216,881             95                244,571                5


Firms                                577,074              499,048              86                78,026             14


Government, National &               245,628              198,076              81                47,552             19
  Federal Laboratories
Research Institutes &                140,653               93,953              67                46,700             33
  Natl. Professional Orgs.
Unclassified (Not Yet                544,730              408,037              75                136,693            25
  Classifiable as Above)

Note: These counts are based respectively on all non-nano articles, all nano articles, and all articles listed in the
      Science Citation Index Expanded, 1981-2004, and the organization matching program of the Zucker-Darby
      Knowledge, Innovation, and Growth Project.




                                                            32
        Table 3. Nano Publishing and Patenting: Knowledge Stock Effects
     Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa for U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                            Nano-scale Article and Patent
  for Region and Year            Nano Article   Nano Article   Nano Patent          Nano Patent
Non-Nano Articles                  0.076***        0.074***        0.073***           0.074***
 Knowledge Stock                   (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)            (0.001)
Non-Nano Patents                    0.001         -0.013***        0.069***           0.058***
 Knowledge Stock                   (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)            (0.001)
NSF Nano                                           0.439***                           0.262***
 Funding Stock                                     (0.008)                            (0.014)
Constant                           1.974***        1.922***        0.974***           0.957***
                                   (0.118)         (0.117)         (0.091)            (0.110)
Log likelihood                   -30567.4***     -29168.4***      -15648.6***       -15482.7***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
  NSF Nano Funding Stockb              -          2798.0***            -              331.8***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and
          Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Robust standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge stocks (KS) are computed as a perpetual inventory of the indicated
          series with 20% per year depreciation and are measured in thousands of
          cumulated articles of patents.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.




                                                33
   Table 4. Nano Publishing and Patenting: Knowledge Stocks by Organization Type
       Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa for U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                                           Dependent Variable
   for Region and Year                Nano Articles        Nano Articles   Nano Patents         Nano Patents
University Non-Nano                      0.134***            0.121***          0.087***            0.079***
    Articles Knowledge Stock             (0.002)             (0.002)           (0.003)             (0.003)
University Non-Nano                     -1.974***           -2.046***          -3.029***          -3.211***
    Patents Knowledge Stock              (0.108)             (0.109)            (0.151)            (0.152)
Firm Non-Nano                            0.158***            0.180***          0.214***            0.228***
    Articles Knowledge Stock             (0.006)             (0.006)           (0.007)             (0.007)
Firm Non-Nano                            0.016***           -0.018***          0.101***            0.080***
    Patents Knowledge Stock              (0.004)             (0.004)           (0.005)             (0.005)
Government Non-Nano                      0.187***            0.139***          -0.053***          -0.094***
   Articles Knowledge Stock              (0.009)             (0.009)            (0.015)            (0.015)
Government Non-Nano                     -1.893***           -2.251***          -1.103***          -1.382***
   Patents Knowledge Stock               (0.098)             (0.099)            (0.156)            (0.158)
Research Institute Non-Nano             -0.164***           -0.112***          -0.157***          -0.094***
   Articles Knowledge Stock              (0.018)             (0.019)            (0.028)            (0.028)
Research Institute Non-Nano             -5.711***           -5.451***          8.466***            9.101***
   Patents Knowledge Stock               (0.355)             (0.351)           (0.435)             (0.436)
Unclassified Non-Nano                   -0.034***             -0.010           0.120***            0.139***
   Articles Knowledge Stock              (0.009)             (0.009)           (0.014)             (0.014)
Unclassified Non-Nano                    0.935***            1.292***          0.900***            1.067***
   Patents Knowledge Stock               (0.073)             (0.074)           (0.103)             (0.103)
NSF Nano                                                     0.425***                              0.317***
   Funding Stock                                             (0.008)                               (0.014)
Constant                                 1.754***            1.760***          0.817***            0.826***
                                         (0.116)             (0.116)           (0.108)             (0.108)
Log likelihood                         -28197.4***         -27040.5***        -14810.4***        -14583.4***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
                             b
  NSF Nano Funding Stock                   -                2313.8***             -                454.0***
                               c
Log-likelihood Test vs. Table 3         4740.0***           4255.8***          1676.4***          1798.6***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Robust standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge stocks (KS) are computed as a perpetual inventory of the indicated series with 20%
          per year depreciation and measured in thousands of cumulated articles of patents.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.
       c. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that constraining all the articles-
          knowledge-stock coefficients to be the same and all the patents-knowledge-stock coefficients
          to be the same (as is implicit in Table 3) does not significantly reduce the goodness of fit
          the regression.




                                                      34
            Table 5. Knowledge Flows across Organization Type Boundaries
        Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa for U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                                  Nano-scale Article and Patent
  for Region and Year                   Nano Article   Nano Article   Nano Patent      Nano Patent

Non-Nano Patents                          0.046***      0.021***        0.077***        0.060***
  Knowledge Stock                         (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)

Non-Nano Articles                         0.001***      0.001***        0.001***        0.001***
  Knowledge Flow                          (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)

NSF Nano                                                0.541***                        0.348***
  Funding Stock                                         (0.008)                         (0.013)

Constant                                  2.684***      2.633***        1.590***        1.576***
                                          (0.130)       (0.129)         (0.119)         (0.119)
Log likelihood                          -40540.6***    -38108.5***     -18445.6***     -18113.8***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
 NSF Nano Funding Stockb                     -          4864.2***           -           663.6***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and
          Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Robust standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge flows are computed as the number of articles co-authored across organization
          types within one BEA.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.




                                                 35
     Table 6. Knowledge Flows across Differentiated Organization Type Boundaries
       Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa for U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                                            Dependent Variable
  for Region and Year                         Nano Articles Nano Articles Nano Patents           Nano Patents
Non-Nano Patents                                 0.013***        -0.014***         0.109***         0.093***
  Knowledge Stock                                (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.003)
Firm-University                                  0.006***        0.005***          0.005***         0.004***
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow              (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
Firm-Research Institute                          0.009***        0.015***          0.011***         0.015***
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.002)
Firm-Government                                  0.012***        0.013***          0.015***         0.014***
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow              (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)
Firm-Unclassified                                -0.016***       -0.012***        -0.009***         -0.005***
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.001)           (0.001)
University-Research Institute                    -0.003***       -0.003***        -0.004***         -0.004***
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)
University-Government                            0.002***        0.002***         -0.005***         -0.006***
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
University-Unclassified                          0.002***        0.003***          0.003***         0.003***
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
Government-Research Institute                    -0.015***       -0.019***        -0.009***         -0.011***
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.002)
Government-Unclassified                          0.008***        0.006***          0.006***         0.006***
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.001)          (0.001)
Research Institute-Unclassified                  -0.006***       -0.010***         -0.001           -0.005***
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)
NSF                                                              0.530***                           0.404***
  Nano Funding Stock                                             (0.008)                            (0.014)
Constant                                         2.583***        2.533***          1.417***         1.391***
                                                 (0.128)         (0.127)           (0.115)          (0.115)
Log likelihood                                 -37231.3***      -35133.2***      -16821.1***       -16424.3***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
                             b
  NSF Nano Funding Stock                            -            4196.2***           -              793.6***
                               c
Log-likelihood Test vs. Table 5                  6618.6***       5950.6***        3249.0***         3379.0***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and
          Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Robust standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge flows are computed as the number of articles co-authored across organization
          types within one BEA.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.
       c. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that constraining all the articles-
          knowledge-flow coefficients to be the same (as is implicit in Table 5) does not significantly
          reduce the goodness of fit of the regression.




                                                       36
                                        Appendix Tables

       Table 3A. Nano Publishing and Patenting: Knowledge Stock Effects
   Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa & Bootstrapped Standard Errors
                           U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                              Nano-scale Article and Patent
  for Region and Year             Nano Article    Nano Article   Nano Patent         Nano Patent
Non-Nano Articles                   0.076***          0.074***       0.073***           0.074***
 Knowledge Stock                    (0.010)           (0.010)        (0.007)            (0.008)
Non-Nano Patents                      0.001           -0.013         0.069***           0.058***
 Knowledge Stock                     (0.006)          (0.009)        (0.009)            (0.011)
NSF Nano                                              0.439***                          0.262**
 Funding Stock                                        (0.116)                           (0.093)
Constant                            1.974***          1.922***       0.974***           0.957***
                                    (0.216)           (0.215)        (0.163)            (0.159)
Log likelihood                     -30567.4***    -29168.4***      -15648.6***        -15482.7***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
  NSF Nano Funding Stockb               -          2798.0***             -              331.8***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and
          Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge stocks (KS) are computed as a perpetual inventory of the indicated
          series with 20% per year depreciation and are measured in thousands of
          cumulated articles of patents.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.




                                                 37
  Table 4A. Nano Publishing and Patenting: Knowledge Stocks by Organization Type
     Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa & Bootstrapped Standard Errors
                             U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                                           Dependent Variable
   for Region and Year                Nano Articles        Nano Articles   Nano Patents         Nano Patents
University Non-Nano                      0.134***            0.121***           0.087***           0.079***
    Articles Knowledge Stock             (0.027)             (0.024)            (0.017)            (0.021)
University Non-Nano                      -1.974*             -2.046*           -3.029***           -3.211**
    Patents Knowledge Stock              (0.975)             (0.885)            (0.942)             (1.143)
Firm Non-Nano                            0.158**             0.180**            0.214***           0.228***
    Articles Knowledge Stock             (0.056)             (0.058)            (0.050)            (0.048)
Firm Non-Nano                             0.016               -0.018            0.101***           0.080**
    Patents Knowledge Stock              (0.026)             (0.026)            (0.021)            (0.029)
Government Non-Nano                      0.187**             0.139*              -0.053             -0.094
   Articles Knowledge Stock              (0.061)             (0.063)            (0.081)            (0.087)
Government Non-Nano                      -1.893*             -2.251**            -1.103             -1.382
   Patents Knowledge Stock               (0.781)              (0.724)           (1.063)            (0.936)
Research Institute Non-Nano              -0.164**            -0.112^             -0.157             -0.094
   Articles Knowledge Stock               (0.061)            (0.063)            (0.139)            (0.158)
Research Institute Non-Nano             -5.711***            -5.451**           8.466***           9.101***
   Patents Knowledge Stock               (1.481)              (1.857)           (1.861)            (1.740)
Unclassified Non-Nano                     -0.034              -0.010            0.120^             0.139*
   Articles Knowledge Stock              (0.064)             (0.068)            (0.064)            (0.063)
Unclassified Non-Nano                    0.935^              1.292*              0.900              1.067
   Patents Knowledge Stock               (0.547)             (0.552)            (0.636)            (0.702)
NSF Nano                                                     0.425***                              0.317***
   Funding Stock                                             (0.105)                               (0.093)
Constant                                 1.754***            1.760***           0.817***           0.826***
                                         (0.248)             (0.240)            (0.188)            (0.190)
Log likelihood                         -28197.4***         -27040.5***        -14810.4***        -14583.4***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
                             b
  NSF Nano Funding Stock                   -                2313.8***             -               454.0***
                               c
Log-likelihood Test vs. Table 3         4740.0***           4255.8***          1676.4***          1798.6***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge stocks (KS) are computed as a perpetual inventory of the indicated series with 20%
          per year depreciation and measured in thousands of cumulated articles of patents.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.
       c. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that constraining all the articles-
          knowledge-stock coefficients to be the same and all the patents-knowledge-stock coefficients
          to be the same (as is implicit in Table 3A) does not significantly reduce the goodness of fit
          the regression.




                                                      38
          Table 5A. Knowledge Flows across Organization Type Boundaries
      Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa & Bootstrapped Standard Errors
                              U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                                  Nano-scale Article and Patent
  for Region and Year                   Nano Article   Nano Article   Nano Patent      Nano Patent

Non-Nano Patents                          0.046***        0.021         0.077***        0.060***
  Knowledge Stock                         (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.014)

Non-Nano Articles                         0.001***      0.001***        0.001***        0.001***
  Knowledge Flow                          (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)

NSF Nano                                                0.541***                         0.348*
  Funding Stock                                         (0.161)                          (0.142)

Constant                                  2.684***      2.633***        1.590***        1.576***
                                          (0.228)       (0.233)         (0.198)         (0.200)
Log likelihood                          -40540.6***    -38108.5***     -18445.6***     -18113.8***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
 NSF Nano Funding Stockb                     -          4864.2***           -           663.6***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and
          Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge flows are computed as the number of articles co-authored across organization
          types within one BEA.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.




                                                 39
    Table 6A. Knowledge Flows across Differentiated Organization Type Boundaries
      Poisson Regressions with Random Effectsa & Bootstrapped Standard Errors
                              U.S. Regions, 1981-2004

Explanatory Variables                                             Dependent Variable
  for Region and Year                          Nano Articles Nano Articles Nano Patents           Nano Patents
Non-Nano Patents                                   0.013           -0.014          0.109***          0.093**
  Knowledge Stock                                 (0.027)         (0.030)          (0.034)           (0.036)
Firm-University                                  0.006***        0.005***          0.005**           0.004**
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow              (0.002)         (0.001)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Firm-Research Institute                            0.009           0.015            0.011             0.015
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.016)         (0.017)          (0.014)           (0.013)
Firm-Government                                   0.012^          0.013^           0.015^             0.014
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.007)         (0.008)          (0.009)           (0.010)
Firm-Unclassified                                 -0.016*         -0.012^           -0.009            -0.005
   Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.006)           (0.006)
University-Research Institute                    -0.003**         -0.003**        -0.004***          -0.004**
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)            (0.001)
University-Government                              0.002           0.002           -0.005^           -0.006^
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.003)
University-Unclassified                          0.002***        0.003***          0.003***          0.003***
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow               (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
Government-Research Institute                      -0.015          -0.019           -0.009            -0.011
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.012)         (0.013)          (0.022)           (0.022)
Government-Unclassified                            0.008           0.006            0.006             0.006
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.010)           (0.011)
Research Institute-Unclassified                    -0.006          -0.010           -0.001            -0.005
  Non-Nano Articles Knowledge Flow                (0.012)         (0.013)          (0.011)           (0.012)
NSF                                                              0.530***                            0.404***
  Nano Funding Stock                                             (0.155)                             (0.116)
Constant                                         2.583***        2.533***          1.417***          1.391***
                                                 (0.231)         (0.239)           (0.200)           (0.201)
Log likelihood                                  -37231.3***     -35133.2***      -16821.1***       -16424.3***
Wald log-likelihood Test for
                             b
 NSF Nano Funding Stock                             -            4196.2***           -              793.6***
                               c
Log-likelihood Test vs. Table 5                  6618.6***       5950.6***        3249.0***         3379.0***

Notes: Dependent variables: Nano Articles Published in Year and
          Nano Patents Granted in Year
       Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
       N = 4296. Significance levels: ^ 0.10, * 0.05, ** 0.01, ***0.001
       Knowledge flows are computed as the number of articles co-authored across organization
          types within one BEA.
       a. Group variable for random effects: Region (BEA number). 179 groups.
       b. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that adding the NSF
          Nano Funding Stock does not significantly improve the fit of the regression.
       c. This Wald (1943) log-likelihood test is for the null hypothesis that constraining all the articles-
          knowledge-flow coefficients to be the same (as is implicit in Table 5A) does not significantly
          reduce the goodness of fit of the regression.



                                                       40
