                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DO EXTERNAL INTERVENTIONS WORK? THE CASE OF TRADE REFORM
                 CONDITIONS IN IMF SUPPORTED PROGRAMS

                                            Shang-Jin Wei
                                            Zhiwei Zhang

                                        Working Paper 12667
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12667


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2006




This is a revised version of an early paper entitled, "Evaluating the effectiveness of trade conditions
in IMF-supported programs." We thank Andrew Rose for inspiring the initial idea and for helpful comments,
Mary Amiti, Tamim Bayoumi, A. Bio-Tchane, Judith Dean, Dimitri Demekas, Allan Drazen, Erik
De Vrijer, Steven Dunaway, Michael Hadjimichael, Simon Johnson, Kalpana Kochhar, Hans Peter
Lankes, Phil McCalman, Raghuram Rajan, Tessa van der Willigen, Yi Wu, and participants of seminars
at the IMF for helpful suggestions and comments, Yuanyuan Chen for excellent research assistance,
and Christy Gray for able administrative support. The views expressed are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the IMF or its policy. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Shang-Jin Wei and Zhiwei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do External Interventions Work? The Case of Trade Reform Conditions in IMF Supported
Programs
Shang-Jin Wei and Zhiwei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 12667
November 2006
JEL No. F10,F13,F33

                                              ABSTRACT

Trade reform conditions are common in IMF supported programs. Of the 99 countries that had IMF
programs during 1993-2003, 77 had conditions on trade reforms in their programs. Since the WTO
has not been found especially effective in promoting trade openness for most developing countries,
it is of great interest to see if the IMF has been more effective as it combines carrots and sticks not
available to the WTO. Yet, the effectiveness of trade conditions in IMF programs has not been systematically
studied. Using a unique dataset, this paper provides such an assessment. It finds that trade conditions
are associated with an increase in trade openness on average, but the effect comes mostly from countries
that, by some measure, have a high degree of "willingness to reform."

Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund
Room 10-700
19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
and NBER
swei@imf.org

Zhiwei Zhang
IMF
Research Department
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431 USA
zzhang@imf.org
                                             -2-



    1. INTRODUCTION

       The International Monetary Fund and other international organizations have
frequently attempted to promote structural reforms in developing countries. Both IMF
programs and trade reform conditions embedded in the programs are commonplace. For
example, during 1993-2003, 99 countries went through IMF programs, some with multiple
ones. 77 of these countries had trade reform conditions in at least one program. Are these
conditions successful in generating an increase in trade openness in developing countries?
This paper aims to provide the first rigorous and comprehensive answer.

        Although most economists agree that trade openness is an important element of a
successful development strategy, an influential paper by Rose (2004) has cast doubt on the
common presumption that the World Trade Organization (WTO) or its predecessor, the
General Agreement on Trade and Tariff (GATT), has promoted global trade. Subramanian
and Wei (forthcoming) also show that the GATT/WTO does not appear to have promoted
trade openness for developing countries, especially those that became GATT members prior
to the Uruguay Round (though it appears to have strongly promoted trade openness among
developed countries). This raises an intriguing question of whether the IMF, by mixing sticks
(including trade reforms in its conditionality that go beyond a country’s commitments to the
WTO) and carrots (providing financing through IMF supported programs if the reform
conditions are met), can be more successful in prodding developing countries to engage in
trade reforms.

         The case of trade conditions in IMF programs also provides a window to understand
whether reform conditions embedded in international financial assistance packages work in
general. The efficacy of conditionality in promoting reforms is highly controversial in the
literature and in policy circles. Some argue that it is entirely futile: If a country does not want
to engage in serious reforms on its own for domestic political reasons, then it can always find
ways to undo the substance, if not the letter, of the conditions in these programs. Others
argue that the conditions are very useful precisely because they might alter domestic political
forces, overcome a political impasse, and allow the necessary reform to be enacted.

        The effectiveness of the trade reform conditions has not been studied in an
econometrically rigorous way2. While information on IMF programs and trade reform
conditions has been made available for a few countries in recent years, it is thus far not
generally available for many others. By taking advantage of a unique and comprehensive
database, this paper aims to fill this void. Our approach is conceptually a difference-in-
differences methodology: We compute trade openness for each importer at a bilateral level
before and after trade conditions were first introduced, and compare the change with either
(a) those for other countries that had IMF programs but no trade conditions, or (b) those for

2
 The IMF conducts periodic reviews of its trade conditions (see, for example, IMF 2001 and
2005b). Unlike the current paper, the reviews tend to adopt a case-study approach and focus
on a small number of countries.
                                             -3-


other developing countries that had no IMF programs. To control for other factors that could
affect trade openness, we embed our estimation and testing in an augmented gravity model.
The augmentation includes noneconomic factors such as linguistic and colonial ties, and
regional trade agreements (proposed by Frankel and Wei, 1994), year and separate importer
and exporter fixed effects (needed to proxy for “multilateral resistance” proposed by
Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003), and selection for non-zero trade and intra-sector firm
heterogeneity (argued to be important by Helpman, Melitz, and Rubinstein, 2005).

         The key findings can be summarized as follows: (a) There is evidence that trade
conditions are effective on average. After accounting for a number of factors that could
affect trade openness, trade conditions are associated with an increase in import volume in
most statistical specifications. (b) However, the positive effect comes mostly from countries
that have a high degree of “willingness to reform” by some measure. This pattern continues
to hold after adjusting for a selection bias - the possibility that countries that wish to increase
trade openness are more likely to agree to have trade conditions in the programs. (c)
Implementation of trade conditions on paper does not imply real trade reforms. While a
majority of trade conditions are recorded as having been implemented on time in the IMF’s
database, they do not always translate into an actual increase in trade openness.

       Section 2 of this paper summarizes some salient facts about trade conditions in
IMF programs. Section 3 describes a simple model to illustrate the point that external
conditions on reforms can work but not in all instances. Section 4 lays out the statistical
methodology, describes the data, and reports estimates for the impact of trade conditions.
Section 5 presents a number of robustness checks and extensions. Section 6 offers
conclusions.

2.   SOME BASIC FACTS ABOUT TRADE CONDITIONS IN IMF PROGRAMS

        It may be useful to set out some basic facts about the trade reform conditions in IMF
programs. First, as noted at the beginning of the paper, these conditions are common. Figure
1 displays the counts of all IMF programs with and without trade conditions during 1993-
2004. The height of a bar represents the total number of IMF programs in that year (e.g., 15
in 2003). The lower portion in black marks the number of programs that also carry conditions
on trade reforms (e.g., 8 in 2003), whereas the upper portion in gray represents the number of
programs without trade conditions (e.g., 7 in 2003). On average, about half of the programs
throughout the sample have trade conditions. There is no obvious trend in the fraction of
programs that carry trade conditions. In fact, it is at least as likely for a program country to
have trade conditions at the end of the sample as at the beginning.
                                                                            -4-



                                                  Figure 1. Number of IMF-Supported Programs by Year
                                      35
                                                                                                         without trade condition
                                                                                                         with trade conditions
                                      30


             Number of IMF Programs   25


                                      20


                                      15


                                      10


                                       5


                                       0
                                            1993     1994   1995   1996   1997   1998    1999    2000    2001       2002         2003




        Second, the number of trade conditions as a share of total program conditions has
declined in recent years, partly because conditions related to financial sector reforms have
increased, and many countries have more open trade regimes in the latter part of the sample.
As presented in Figure 2, the number of trade conditions per program (among programs with
trade conditions) exhibits an inverse-V shape over time, peaking in 1999 (at more than 5
trade conditions per program) and then declining to 2.5 in 2003.
                          Figure 2. Average Number of Trade Conditions in Programs that Had Trade Conditions

                 6.00



                 5.00



                 4.00



                 3.00



                 2.00



                 1.00



                 0.00
                                           1993     1994    1995   1996   1997    1998    1999    2000     2001        2002        2003




        Third, the majority of trade conditions are designed to reduce market distortions and
to increase trade openness. These distortions can be either tariff or nontariff measures.
Among the 77 countries that had trade conditions in their programs, 55 had conditions
directly on tariffs. Other conditions have supported increased efficiency including through
administrative streamlining and sometimes revenue collection. In terms of the composition of
all trade conditions during the sample period, more than a quarter of all trade conditions are
related to tariff reductions and rationalization. Another quarter focuses on removing nontariff
                                                             -5-


barriers such as exemptions, licensing requirements, quantitative restrictions, and other
restrictions on current account transactions.3 Over time, tariff reduction and removal of
quantitative restrictions as a share of total trade conditions have declined, whereas customs
reforms and other measures have increased in relative importance (Figure 3).


                                Figure 3. Evolving Composition of Trade Conditions
             100%

              90%

              80%

              70%

              60%

              50%

              40%

              30%

              20%

              10%

               0%
                 1993   1994      1995        1996        1997        1998        1999        2000         2001   2002   2003

                               Tariff reduction and rationalization
                               Removal of quantitative restrictions and licensing requirements
                               Other measures (including customs reforms and elimination of exemptions))




         Fourth, not all conditions are of equal importance in IMF programs. The strongest
form of conditions is called “prior actions”; a failure to implement them would lead to an
automatic interruption of the programs.4 Approximately one-third of the trade conditions are
in this category. Another strong form of conditions is “performance criteria”; loan
disbursement is contingent on their fulfillment unless an explicit waiver is granted by the
Executive Board. About 20 percent of the trade conditions are in this second category. The
remaining trade conditions take the last and relatively weak form that is called “structural
benchmarks.” Their nonobservance does not automatically lead to an interruption of a
program, but may affect IMF staff’s judgment as to whether to recommend completion of a
review. The IMF’s recent review of conditionality (IMF, 2005c) suggests that prior actions
are often used as a screening device by the staff to gauge the authorities’ commitment to
reform. This feature will be explored in discussing program ownership later.

       Fifth, another interesting pattern to note is that the implementation record for trade
conditions is strong on paper. About 70 percent of the trade conditions are recorded as having
been implemented on time by IMF staff in the IMF’s database on program conditions (Figure

3
 They include measures related to preshipment inspection, concessional financing for
exports, export-processing zones, and other country- and industry-specific issues.
4
 Some prior actions are remedial actions for performance criteria or key structural
benchmarks in earlier IMF-supported programs that have been missed.
                                                  -6-


4). However, nominal implementation of specific measures may not always mean that policy
actions have been taken with real and long-lasting effects. This paper examines the real
impact of trade conditions.

                              Figure 4. Nominal Implementation Ratio of Trade Conditions
         1.00

         0.90

         0.80

         0.70

         0.60

         0.50

         0.40

         0.30

         0.20

         0.10

         0.00
                1993   1994    1995    1996    1997     1998   1999    2000    2001    2002   2003



        To summarize, it is not unusual for developing countries to encounter trade reform
conditions in IMF supported programs. While many such conditions involve tariff
reductions, most deal with removing or reducing exemptions, licensing requirement or other
nontariff barriers, and administrative reforms at customs. In other words, most trade reform
conditions are not easily quantifiable. Reform conditions can also be classified based on the
degree of stringency (in terms of whether non-compliance by the country would lead the IMF
to stop disbursement of funding). The composition of these condition types reflects in part
IMF staff’s subjective assessment of the likelihood that the country will follow through the
reforms contained in a program. These facts provide a useful background that will guide the
subsequent empirical work.



3.   A SIMPLE MODEL

        To clarify how trade reform conditions embedded in an international financial
assistance package may engender actual trade reforms, this section discusses a very simple
model. It highlights the point that trade reform conditions by themselves may not always
induce real reforms. At the same time, there are cases in which reforms take place only
because an external assistance program is present.

        To see how domestic factors and external assistance program interact with each other,
it may be useful to summarize the domestic factors by a notion of “willingness to reform,” or
to use a buzzword in policy circles, the national “ownership” of a reform program. Drazen
(2003) defines “ownership” as the extent to which domestic resistance to a reform can be
overcome with a combination of carrots (external financing) and sticks (conditionality). A
pro-reform government wants to have conditionality in IMF programs rather than to do
reform on its own because the former helps it to buy support from powerful interest groups in
                                           -7-


the country that otherwise would veto the reform. On the other hand, the conditionality can
only work if resistance to reform from the interest groups is below some threshold so that
they would prefer reform with IMF financing to a combination of no reform and no IMF
financing.

       Suppose a country faces balance of payment difficulties and wants to borrow from the
IMF. The IMF agrees to make the lending only if the country implements trade reforms (in
addition to whatever else that the IMF thinks is good for the country). The policy decision in
the country is made jointly by the government and a powerful interest group in the following
way. The government makes a take-it-or-leave-it proposal to the interest group. The interest
group has a veto power, but it cannot make a counter offer. If it agrees, the reform goes
forward; if it does not, the reform dies.

         The objective function of the government is the welfare of the whole economy, which
leads it to favor the reform. The interest group’s objective function deviates from society’s
welfare maximization. Its derived indirect utility function, V(.), can be thought of as a
function of having the reform or not, and having the IMF program or not. In this setup, an
IMF program with reform conditionality would succeed in inducing a reform that otherwise
would not take place if and only if:

      V(reform, Fund program) > V(no reform, no program) ≥ V(reform, no program)
In other words, if there were no IMF program, the veto-wielding interest group would prefer
no reform (i.e., status quo). However, the group may prefer a combination of reform and an
IMF program to a combination of no reform and no program.

        Are conditions such as these two inequalities likely to hold? We now turn to a simple,
micro-founded model that will make it concrete how a combination of an IMF program and
reform conditions may make a difference for the success of the reform. The model makes the
median voter, rather than a specific interest group, to be the pivotal decision maker. Consider
a two-sector perfectly competitive, small, open economy in which each sector produces a
distinct good. The first sector produces an exportable good, x, whose output price is tied
down by the world market and set to be one. The second sector produces an import-
competing good, m, that receives a government tariff protection. The tariff-inclusive price for
good m is P.

        Both sectors use labor as the only factor of production and have constant-returns-to-
scale technology. Thus, using Yj to denote output in sector j,

       Yj = Lj/ aj

And using L to denote the size of the labor force,

       Lx + Lm = L
                                             -8-


Where aj > 0, j=x and m. Labor’s initial distribution in the two sectors, (L0x, L0m), is given by
history. For our discussion to be interesting, we assume that L0x < L0m. Perfect competition in
the domestic labor market ensures that

        wj = Pj/ aj

where Px=1 by assumption and Pm =P.

       Without a loss of generality, we set ax =1 and assume that the tariff on product m is
such that the initial price on m is P0=am. Therefore, the initial wages in the two sectors are
w0x= w0m=1.

        For this small open economy, the standard trade theory tells us that free trade is
socially optimal. Therefore, the objective of a reform program is to remove the tariff
protection in sector m. We need a reason for why the socially beneficial reform does not take
place. For this, we employ the insight from Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) in which
reallocating labor between sectors is costly and individuals face ex ante uncertainty about the
exact size of the cost. Let ck be the individual-specific cost for person k to switch from sector
m to sector x5. The cost is revealed when and only when the reform starts. However, the
probability density function of the cost, f(c), is common for all individuals and known to
them before the reform.

        Suppose individuals’ certainty-equivalent preferences (indirect utility functions) are
identical and given by

        U(P, I) = V(P) I = I/Pδ

where I is the individual’s certainty-equivalent income level, and 0 < δ < 1 is a parameter.

         Since we are discussing IMF-supported programs, it is reasonable to think of the
country as facing a temporary negative shock that is common to all individuals in the country
and that the country is unable to borrow from the international private capital market to
smooth consumption. For simplicity, we think of an individual’s income as her nominal wage
income (which varies between the two sectors) minus an amount due to the negative shock, s,
that is common to everyone in the economy. Such a negative shock occurs as the country
loses the access to the international capital market, so that it is not able to smooth its citizens’
consumption on its own.


5
  Following Wei (1997), this represents a simplification from the original setup in Fernandez
and Rodrik (1991) in which individuals have to make a general investment before learning
their sector-switching cost. Wei (1997) provides a three-sector model in which gradualist and
big-bang styles of reform strategies are compared.
                                            -9-


Ex Post Scenario

        The reform would lower P (and therefore the wage in sector m) while leaving the
price of good x (and the wage in sector x) unchanged. This will unambiguously raise the real
income for people in sector x. Everyone in Sector x therefore supports the reform. For people
in sector m, there is a difference between ex post and ex ante scenarios. Ex post, once the
reform is done, individuals would choose to stay in sector m or switch to sector x. An
individual k will switch to sector x if her switching cost is smaller than the wage differential
in the two sectors (which we label as c* for subsequent discussion):

       ck < w’x - w’m ≡c*

where an apostrophe denotes post-reform values. Once the reform is done, those people
whose cost of switching to sector x is low enough may find themselves having a higher level
of utility than before the reform and therefore may be glad that the reform has taken place.
The rest of the people in sector m, facing high enough switching costs, will find themselves
worse off after the reform and would seek to reverse it if they could.

       To be precise, an individual k in sector m will not regret the reform if and only if:

       U(P’, w’x-s-ck) ≥ U(P0, w0m-s)

Or, with simplification, (w’x-s-ck)/P’δ ≥ (w0m–s)/P0δ

       ck < (1-s) [1- ( P’/P0)δ]                                              Inequality (1)

         If the sum of the people in sector x and the people originally in sector m but with low
enough cost to switch to sector x exceeds half of the population, then the reform benefits a
majority of the population by definition. The reform will not be reversed by a majority voting
after it is implemented. If there exists a mechanism for ex post winners to compensate the ex
post losers after the reform, then any reform that enlarges the size of the pie (after the sector-
switching cost) will not be reversed (and in fact will be supported by the population ex ante
as well). Since it is not in the self-interest of the winners to compensate the losers ex post,
such a compensation mechanism is not generally available, and we will rule it out for the
purpose of the model exposition.

Ex Ante Scenarios

        How would a typical person k in sector m vote ex ante? Let us first consider the case
without an IMF program. All individuals in sector m are identical ex ante. Person k in sector
m will vote against the reform if her utility after the reform is expected to be lower than
before the reform:

       V(P’) {F(c*) [(wx’-s) - ∫0c* cf(c)/F(c*) dc] + [1-F(c*)] (wm’-s)} < V(P0) (wm0 –s)
                                            - 10 -


Or, after some simplification,

       F(c*) + [1- F(c*)] [1-c*/(1-s)] - ∫0c* cf(c)dc < ( P’/P0)δ            Inequality #2

        Since IMF programs are meant to provide insurance to countries experiencing
temporary balance of payments difficulties, especially to those that have lost access to the
international capital market, we make the assumption that the IMF loan program in the model
effectively eliminates the temporary shock and restores the income back to the wage level.
Person k in sector m may vote for the reform with an IMF program if her expected utility
with the completion of the reform together with an IMF program is higher than without the
reform and the IMF program:

       V(P’) {F(c*) [wx’ - ∫0c* cf(c)/F(c*) dc] + [1-F(c*)] wm’} > V(P0) (wm0 –s)
Or
       F(c*) + [1- F(c*)] [(1-c*)/(1-s)] - ∫0c* cf(c)dc > ( P’/P0)δ          Inequality #3

         Inequalities #2 and #3 have the same right-hand side. However, the left-hand side
differs in the second term which is a function of s, the size of the shock. Any s>0 would
make the left-hand side of #3 greater than the left-hand side of #2. This means that if a
person is to vote against the reform even with an IMF program (i.e., if Inequality #3 is
violated), then she would surely vote against the reform without an IMF program (i.e., then
Inequality #2 holds).

       We focus on the set of scenarios in which Inequality #1 holds for a sufficient number
of people originally in sector m so that the reform genuinely benefits a majority of the
population. There are still three cases to be considered:

•     Case (a): Both inequalities #2 and #3 hold. In this case, the reform is blocked without
an IMF program but moves forward with an IMF program.

•      Case (b): Inequality #2 does not hold. In this case, the reform will be implemented
       even without an IMF program. IMF programs play no role in inducing reforms.

•      Case (c): Inequality #3 is violated (which implies that Inequality #2 holds). In this
       case, everyone in sector m (and therefore the country) will reject the reform with or
       without an IMF program.

         Are all three cases feasible equilibria? We can verify that the answer is yes: Different
combinations of the parameters could generate each of these scenarios. As an illustration, let
us assume that the individual sector-switching cost, ck, follows a uniform distribution over
[0, cu], so that f(c) = 1/ cu and F(c*) = c*/ cu. Let us further assume that Lm/L=0.55 (the
original work force in the import-competing sector constitutes a majority in the country). It
can be verified that if cu =1, δ=0.3, P’/P=0.8, and s=0.2, we would be in Case (a): the reform
takes place if and only if there is an IMF program. On the other hand, if cu =0.5, δ=0.3,
P’/P=0.4, and s=0.5, we would be in Case (b): the reform takes place even without an IMF
program. In contrast, if cu =5, δ=0.3, P’/P=0.5, and s=0.2, we would be in Case (c): no reform
with or without an IMF program.
                                              - 11 -


        This discussion suggests that one cannot take for granted that IMF programs together
with conditionality on reforms will necessarily induce reforms. Indeed, as a variation of Case
(c), even if a government agrees to an IMF program (in order to obtain the loan to deal with
the negative shock), it may be evasive in implementing the reform or reverse the reform once
the IMF program is over.


4.   EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE


       The empirical part of the paper does not test the model directly. Instead, it seeks to
check if trade reform conditions are linked to changes in trade openness in countries that
have had IMF programs with reform conditions. It also seeks to find proxies for how likely a
country may be in Case (a) above.

Statistical Specification

        The statistical framework used to assess whether trade conditions affect trade
openness is an augmented gravity model. Such a model has enjoyed empirical success in
terms of its ability to explain a relatively large fraction of variations in observed volumes of
international trade, and has been applied to analyze the effect of a variety of policies on
trade.6

        The version used in this paper incorporates a number of recent theoretical insights,
especially those by Anderson and van Wincoop (AvW, 2003), and Helpman, Melitz, and
Rubinstein (HMR, 2005). Both papers have importer and exporter fixed effects to proxy for
remoteness (Wei, 1996) or multilateral resistance (AvW, 2003). HMR (2005) propose to
correct two additional selection biases: the first caused by zero bilateral trade among some
countries as the gains from trade are too small to overcome the necessary costs, and the second
by “an unobserved heterogeneity bias that results from the variation in the fraction of firms that
export from a source to a destination country.” The first bias is corrected by a standard
Heckman approach (and implemented by estimating an appropriate Mills ratio). For the second
bias, HMR (2005) propose a latent variable to control for the firm heterogeneity, which this
paper calls “HMR variable” for short. The Mills ratio and the HMR variable are added to the
analysis in this paper.

        The benchmark model is specified in the following form:

        Yi,j,t = α1IMPi + α2EXPj + α3Yeart + Xi,j,tβ + γTCi,t + εi,j,t                       (1)

The dependent variable Yi , j ,t is log of country i’s imports from country j in year t.


6
 Frankel and Wei (1993), Frankel, Stein, and Wei (1997), Rose (2004), and Subramanian
and Wei (2003), among others.
                                              - 12 -


IMPi , j , EXPi , j , and YEARt are the importer, exporter, and year fixed effects, respectively.
X i , j ,t is a list of variables that previous studies have found significant in explaining the
volume of trade, including log GDP, log per capita GDP, great circle distance between i and
j, dummies for common language and colonial links, shared borders, common currency,
common free trade area or common market, the Mills ratio, the HMR firm heterogeneity
variable, a dummy for imports by one WTO member from another member, and a dummy
for imports by one WTO member from a nonmember.

        TCi ,t is a dummy variable that measures the “treatment” effect of trade conditions. It
takes the value of one for country i in year t if the country has trade conditions in that year or
any year before t during 1993–2003. For example, as 1997 was the first year that trade
conditions were applied to Guinea during the sample period, the TC dummy for that country
takes the value of zero during 1993–1996 and one during 1997–2003.

        While separate importer and exporter fixed effects are included in this specification,
they are not time-varying. Otherwise, we would not be able to identify the effect of the trade
conditions (which is part of the time-varying importer fixed effects).This is a shortcoming of
the specification.7 Even with only these fixed effects, identifying the effect of trade
conditions presents a challenge in some cases. For example, if a country had trade conditions
attached to their programs in 1993 or 1994, the TC dummy for this country would take the
value of one almost throughout the sample and therefore would be highly correlated with the
importer fixed effect for this country. On the other extreme, if a country had no trade
conditions during the sample period until 2002 or 2003, the TC dummy would take the value
of zero almost throughout the sample. In either case, the effect of the treatment of trade
conditions cannot be identified. In order to solve this problem, the benchmark analysis
focuses on a treatment group that started to have trade conditions no earlier than 1996 but no
later than 2000 during the sample period; 27 countries fall into this category (see Table 3,
Treatment Group 1, for a list).

       To bring into the analysis some of the countries that had trade conditions but are
excluded from the above definition of the treatment group, we also consider an alternative
treatment group for countries that had trade conditions in multiple years including early in
the sample period. We then compare their trade openness in the second half of the sample
period versus the first half.

        To estimate the treatment effect correctly, one needs to compare the treated group
with a control group. Ideally, the two groups would be identical in every dimension except
for one: the presence and absence of trade conditions. Program countries that did not have

7
  Subramanian and Wei (2003) have worked with bilateral trade equations both with time-
varying importer and exporter fixed effects and with non-time-varying fixed effects. They
find the two sets of fixed effects do not make a difference for the question they are studying,
which is the effect of the WTO membership on members’ imports from other members
versus their imports from nonmembers.
                                            - 13 -


any trade condition in the 11 years are obvious candidates for the control group. There are 20
such countries, listed as Control Group 1 in Table 3. The augmented gravity is used to
control for other ways in which treatment and control groups may be different. As a
robustness check, all developing IMF member countries without IMF programs during the
sample are used as an alternative control group (listed as Control Group 2 in Table 3).

Data Sources and Descriptions

       The sample consists of all developing IMF member countries during 1993–2003. The
data on program years and trade conditions are from a unique IMF database called
Monitoring of Fund Arrangements (MONA). Documents on programs and letters of intent on
some individual countries have been published on the IMF’s external Web site
(www.imf.org) especially since 1997. Information on the conditions and implementation
records on these countries/years are publicly available.

        The bilateral trade data are from the IMF’s Direction of Trade database, and are
deflated by the U.S. consumer price index. The data on real GDP and GDP per capita are
from the World Development Indicators, the International Financial Statistics, and the Penn
World Table. Control variables in the gravity regressions, such as the dummies for common
language, colonial ties, shared borders, common currency, and free trade area, are derived
from the web sites of Andrew Rose (www.haas.berkeley.edu/arose) and Shang-Jin Wei
(www.nber.org/~wei), with minor corrections.

Features of the Treatment and Control Groups

       It may be useful to take a look at some main characteristics of the countries in the
treatment and control groups. We first document the proportion of countries in different
income groups at the beginning and end of the sample. Table 4a shows, both groups have
countries at different levels of income, though the treatment group tends to have relatively
more low-income countries. The subsequent analysis will take into account the effect of
income on trade openness.

        The average tariff level in 1997 was somewhat higher for program countries with
trade conditions than for program countries without trade conditions, but somewhat lower
than for countries without programs (Table 4b). The same pattern holds in 2003 as well. All
three groups exhibit a decline in their tariff levels from 1997 to 2003, with the largest
decrease registered by program countries with trade conditions. However, given the
significant heterogeneity within each group, as measured by the standard deviation of either
the level of or the change in tariffs, the pair-wise differences across the three groups are not
substantial. In any case, the subsequent analysis will take into account the effect of initial
conditions (as part of the importer fixed effects) on measured trade openness.
                                          - 14 -


Basic Estimates of an Average Effect

        We now turn to the regression results. The specification in Column 1 of Table 5
includes separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects. The coefficient on the trade
condition variable is positive and highly significant. According to the point estimate: having
trade conditions is associated with a higher import volume by 11 percent (e.g., an increase in
import-to-GDP ratio from 10 to 11.1 percent). In other words, the trade conditions are
effective in promoting trade, and the average impact is big.

        The results for most standard gravity variables—log distance, log GDP, common
border, common language, and historical/colonial links—are in line with the extant literature.
One notable new result is that the coefficient on imports by one WTO member country from
another member is positive (0.31) and statistically significant, but that by one WTO member
from a nonmember is negative (-0.18) and statistically significant. This complements the
findings in Subramanian and Wei (2003), and suggests that, for developing country WTO
members, trade liberalization measures do not automatically extend to imports from non-
WTO members (which are mostly also developing countries). Another interesting result is
that the coefficient on the dummy for free trade agreements/customs union is not different
from zero. One possible explanation is that many regional trade agreements among
developing countries are not effective in reality.

        In the second column of Table 5, two dummies for years during an IMF program and
years after the program, respectively, are added to capture any systematic factors affecting
trade that are associated with IMF programs. The coefficient on the program dummy is
negative (-0.09), but that on the post-program dummy is positive (0.05). On average, for a
program country without trade conditions, imports contract during the program years but
then recover after the program. Taking into account these features associated with the IMF
programs, the average effect of trade conditions on trade openness increases to 16 percent.

        In the third column of Table 5, two measures of the importer’s real exchange rate
(RER) are added. A (trade-weighted) multilateral RER produces a positive coefficient: a 1
percent appreciation of the home currency tends to increase imports from the rest of the
world by 0.7 percent. A bilateral RER also produces a positive coefficient: a 1 percent
appreciation of the home currency against the currency of a particular trading partner above
the average appreciation rate produces an additional 0.1 percent increase in imports from that
trading partner above and beyond the increase in imports from the rest of the world. It is
interesting to note that, once the RER variables are included, the negative coefficient on the
dummy for IMF program years shrinks to –0.04 and in fact is not statistically different from
zero. This suggests that the contraction in imports associated with IMF program years is
likely due to a correction of previously overvalued real exchange rate in many program
countries. In any case, the coefficient on the dummy for trade conditions changes very little
(0.17 and statistically significant).

       In the next three columns of Table 5, the model is augmented with insights from
Helpman, Melitz, and Rubinstein (2004). In particular, a Mills ratio is calculated to account
for non random occurrence of zero-trade among some country pairs, and an HMR variable is
                                           - 15 -


constructed to account for unobserved heterogeneity in the incidence of exporting firms
across different countries. Both new regressors are positive and statistically significant,
supporting the theory in Helpman, Melitz, and Rubinstein (2004). However, for the central
question in this paper, the addition of these two regressors makes little difference: the
estimated average effect of trade conditions is the same as before (with the point estimates
slightly larger but not by a statistically significant amount).

Persistence of the Effect

         Is the effect of trade conditions temporary (i.e., reversed after the expiration of the
program) or long-lasting? Does the result survive once the specification deviates from
assigning equal weights to imports from all trading partners? Table 6 addresses these
questions. First, in all four regressions in the table, the TC dummy is now split into two
dummies, representing the years in which trade conditions are applied during IMF programs,
and the years after the conclusion of these programs, respectively. Second, four different
weighting schemes are employed. The first column gives equal weights to all trading partners
for a given importer. The last three columns weight different trading partners in proportion to
their size, with the latter represented by their log GDP (Column 2), log population (Column
3), and log initial exports to the importing country in question (Column 4). The coefficient on
trade conditions during program years is positive in columns 1-3, ranging from 0.12 to 0.14,
but the coefficient in the last column is –0.09. However, the coefficient on trade conditions
after the expiration of the programs is positive and significant throughout the four columns,
ranging from 0.13 to 0.37. Therefore, while the initial effect is somewhat sensitive to the
weighting scheme (positive and significant in most but not all cases), the effect eventually
becomes stronger and statistically significant for all specifications.

        As another way to trace out the trajectory of the effect of the trade conditions, the TC
dummy can be decomposed into a sequence of dummies, representing, respectively, the year
TCs are introduced, the first year after that, the second after that, and so on. Table 7 reports
the results from this exercise. The three columns weight the observations equally, by
partners’ log GDP, and log population, respectively. The estimated patterns are similar across
the specifications. The effect of trade conditions is nil in the year they are introduced
(probably because the required reforms take time, or some programs were introduced toward
the end of the year), but rise to 16–18 percent, and then come down to around 10 percent.
This suggests that the effect of trade conditions is not temporary on average.

Role of the Willingness to Reform

        We now attempt to measure “willingness to reform” and gauge its importance in the
effectiveness of trade reform conditions. This is challenging as a country’s willingness to
reform is not directly observable or recorded in any standard way. In this paper, we propose
two proxies. The first proxy (“ownership 1”) is a country’s track record in implementing
nontrade structural benchmarks (e.g., conditions on monetary or fiscal reforms). Specifically,
we look at the percentage of non-trade structural benchmark conditions in the first program
during 1993–2003 that were considered implemented by IMF staff (which is computed by us
based on the information in the MONA database). Since non-implementation of these
                                            - 16 -


conditions does not automatically interrupt disbursement of IMF loans, our maintained
assumption is that lower ownership of a program may lead to less implementation.
Furthermore, if a country is unwilling to implement nontrade structural benchmarks, it is also
likely to be less willing to implement trade conditions.

        The second proxy (“ownership 2”) is our best guess of IMF staff’s subjective
assessment of a country’s willingness to reform at the time when a program is negotiated. As
discussed earlier, IMF staff has some discretion over how strong they wish to make a given
condition to be. In particular, the staff tends to demand more prior actions – the strongest
form of conditions - in countries that are perceived to have a high risk of going off track in
subsequent periods.8 Therefore, staff’s subjective assessment of ownership may be captured
by the share of non-prior actions in total conditions in the first program during 1993–2003.
Note that this proxy does not tell us the underlying information that leads the staff to their
assessment.

         Interestingly, the two proxies have a low correlation. This suggests that each may
capture some different aspects of country characteristics. If the two proxies lead to opposing
results, the inference on the role of ownership would be difficult. As it turns out, they
produce results that basically agree with each other. To investigate how a country’s
willingness to reform affects the effectiveness of trade conditions, the basic model is
extended to the following specification.

       Yi,j,t = α1IMPi + α2EXPj + α3Yeart + Xi,j,tβ + γ1TCi,t + γ2TCi,t*Ownershipi,t + εi,j,t   (2)

Now, the effect of trade conditions is decomposed to two additive components: γ1 + (γ2
ownership). The estimation results are reported in Table 8. In the first three columns, all
observations are weighted equally. With the first proxy for ownership (implementation
record of nontrade structural benchmarks), γ1 is not different from zero statistically, whereas
γ2 is positive but insignificant. With the second proxy for ownership (share of non-prior
actions in total conditions) (Column 2), γ1 becomes negative and significant, whereas γ2 is
positive and significant. When both measures of ownership are included in the same
regression (in Column 3), both are positive, but only the second measure is significant. The
coefficient for both proxies is numerically larger. In the last three columns, the country pair
observations for given importer are weighted by trading partners’ log GDP. The findings
remain qualitatively unchanged.

       So far, ownership is treated as a continuous variable. An alternative is to transform
each proxy for ownership into two discrete cases: high and low ownership baskets using the
median value of each proxy as the demarcation point. This transformation places less weight
on countries that happen to have extreme values of either ownership or change in trade

8
 For example, “Review of the 2002 Conditionality Guidelines”
(www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2005/030305.pdf), page 20, “In both GRA- and PRGF-
supported programs, prior actions are used as a screening device. Prior actions have
continued to be used more in countries with relatively weak track records.”
                                           - 17 -


volume, and potentially could solve the puzzle of why γ1 is negative in the previous table
when the second proxy is used. The regression results with high/low ownership
classifications are reported in Table 9. This time, for both measures, the effect of trade
conditions is zero in the case of low ownership, but positive and significant in the case of
high ownership. In the latter case, trade conditions are associated with an increase in trade
volume by 27–30 percent (e.g., an increase in imports from 10 percent of GDP to 12.7-13
percent of GDP).

        To summarize, the trade conditions are not associated with higher trade volume at
low values of ownership. All the positive average effect of the trade conditions documented
in previous tables comes from countries with sufficiently high ownership. These results
support the view that country ownership is critical for the success of trade conditions. The
second proxy for ownership suggests that IMF staff are often able to make informed
judgments about ownership and the odds for real trade reforms at the start of a program.

5.   Robustness Checks and Extensions

Correcting for a Possible Selection Bias

        The inclusion of trade conditions in IMF programs may not be a random event. This
could induce a selection bias if only countries that wanted to do trade reforms on their own
would invite the IMF to include trade conditions in their programs, generating a positive
association between trade conditions and trade reforms even though the former does not
cause the latter. To address this possible bias, we employ a Heckman selection procedure to
model the decision by the IMF to include trade conditions. Specifically, we look for some
variables that are correlated with the IMF’s decision to include trade reform conditions in a
program. The IMF maintains a measure of the restrictiveness of every member country’s
trade regime—the Trade Restrictive Index (TRI)—calculated by its Policy Development and
Review Department and used as a guidance indicator for country work.9 A reasonable
assumption is that trade conditions are more likely to be introduced in countries that are
judged to have sufficiently restrictive regimes according to the TRI index (at least during
most of the sample period). This feature can be utilized to devise a correction for the possible
selection bias.
        We implement the correction in two steps. First, a probit regression is used to
estimate the relationship between the trade conditions dummy and the TRI index. Second, an
implied Mills ratio is calculated to correct for the selection bias in the main regression.
The first stage Probit regression is reported in Table 10. The analysis confirms a positive
relationship between a high initial value of the TRI index and an inclusion of trade conditions
in a program: countries that are judged to have a relatively restrictive trade regime are more

9
  The IMF’s TRI index aims to combine information on nontariff barriers with tariff data, and
takes a value between 1 and 10, with 1 being the most open, and 10 being the most
restrictive. Due to the TRI’s methodological limitations, its values for individual countries
are not generally reported in the staff reports. See IMF (2005b) for details.
                                             - 18 -


likely to incur trade reform conditions in their programs. While the TRI may not be an ideal
measure of a country’s trade regime, its accuracy does not affect our selection equation since
we are primarily interested in forecasting how IMF selects which countries to have trade
reform conditions rather than judging which countries ought to have the conditions.
         Tables 11 and 12 report the second-stage regression results that correct for the
selection bias in this way (i.e., including a Mills ratio variable based on the Probit regression
in Table 10). While the Mills ratio variable for the selection of trade conditions is statistically
significant in all regressions, its inclusion does not affect the point estimates or the statistical
significance of the trade conditions variable. We conclude therefore that the selection bias (in
terms of the estimated effect of trade conditions on trade openness) is not quantitatively
important. The ownership effect also remains strong after accounting for the selection bias.
To be precise, in Table 11 in which two continuous measures of ownership are used, while
the first proxy for ownership (implementation record of nontrade structural benchmarks) is
positive but insignificant, the second proxy (share of non-prior actions in all conditions)
remains positive and significant. This suggests that the second proxy is a more robust
predictor of subsequent effectiveness of trade conditions. For both proxies, the size of the
estimated effect of willingness to reform/ownership on trade openness is broadly similar to
the earlier analysis without controlling for the selection bias. In Table 12, in which high and
low willingness to reform/ownership cases are represented by two indicator variables, while
the Mills ratio variable for an endogenous selection of trade conditions is significant, the
effects of trade conditions are positive and significant in the high ownership cases and
indifferent from zero in the low ownership cases.

Alternative Control and Treatment Groups

        We now check the robustness of our main results to alternative control and treatment
groups. The control group in the previous analysis is the set of countries that had IMF
programs but no trade reform conditions. An alternative control group is all developing
countries that did not go through any IMF program during 1993–2003. Table 13 repeats the
basic analysis but using this alternative control group. As one can see, the findings remain
the same. Trade conditions are associated with an increase in trade volume, but the positive
effect comes from program countries with high degrees of ownership.

         The treatment group so far is the set of countries that had at least one IMF program
with trade reform conditions during the middle part of the sample (1996-2000). A different
treatment group is a set of countries that had at least seven years of IMF programs with trade
conditions during 1993-2003. By coincidence, the countries in this treatment group
(Treatment Group 2 in Table 3) do no overlap with those in the treatment group used in the
earlier regressions (Treatment Group 1 in Table 3) with the exception of one country.
Therefore, this provides an independent opportunity to check whether/how trade conditions
affect trade openness. The results with the new treatment group are reported in Table 14.
Because most countries in this group had trade conditions in the early part of the sample
period, the regressions in Table 14 compare their trade volume in the second half of the
sample with the first half, conditional on other determinants of trade. The first regression
shows a positive and significant average effect: countries in this group tend to have 10
percent higher trade in the second half of the sample period than in the first half. The second
                                           - 19 -


and third regressions examine the effect of ownership using the two proxies. The conclusion
with this different treatment group is remarkably similar to the earlier tables: Only countries
with high degrees of ownership exhibit significantly higher trade volume in the second part
of the sample period.

Additional Extensions and Robustness Checks

         The next extension investigates whether trade conditions work differently in countries
eligible for the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) versus non-PRGF countries.
The PRGF programs are designed for low-income countries with both balance of payments
problems and structural issues. Many of the PRGF-eligible countries are prolonged users of
IMF resources. It is conceivable that trade conditions in PRGF programs might have different
impact from those in non-PRGF programs. To see if this is the case, separate regressions are
run for these two sets of countries. Table 15 reports the regression results for the PRGF case.
In the first two columns, the coefficients on the trade conditions dummy are insignificant. In
the last two columns, where the proxies for ownership and the trade conditions dummy are
interacted, both proxies for ownership show positive coefficients, but only the second proxy
is significant. Therefore, the central message is the same as before: The second proxy for
ownership is a better predictor of the subsequent effectiveness of trade conditions, and the
positive effect of trade conditions comes entirely from high-ownership programs.

        Table 16 repeats the same four regressions for the non-PRGF treatment and control
groups. The qualitative results are the same as before. The positive coefficients in the first
two regressions are not statistically different from zero. With the first proxy for ownership,
the interaction term between ownership and the trade conditions is not significant either. On
the other hand, with the second proxy, the interaction term is still positive and significant.

        Some of the trade conditions might have ambiguous effects on trade openness. For
example, customs reforms that are designed to strengthen tariff collection could reduce trade
openness. To be on the conservative side, Table 17 reports regressions excluding the three
countries in the sample that do not have explicit trade liberalization measures as part of their
trade conditions. This change strengthens the basic conclusion, i.e., it produces a somewhat
larger effect of trade conditions on trade openness.

Real Reforms Versus Nominal Implementation

        It is possible that the two proxies for ownership are merely noisy estimates of whether
trade conditions in the program agreements are implemented by the authorities.
Conceptually, implementation of trade conditions and ownership are not the same thing:
authorities with a low willingness to undertake trade reforms could implement the trade
conditions to the letter of an agreement to secure financing from the IMF, but then undo the
reforms by means not explicitly prohibited in the program agreement. To see this, Table 18
reports a set of regressions that include an explicit measure of the implementation of trade
conditions (as assessed by the staff during reviews of the programs), interacted with the
incidence of trade conditions. The coefficient on the new variable is insignificantly different
from zero throughout the table. The two ownership measures are positive, though only the
                                          - 20 -


second proxy for ownership is statistically significant. This suggests that nominal
implementation of trade conditions does not always translate into real and significant trade
reforms, and that ownership may be a more reliable predictor for the effectiveness of trade
conditions.

6.   CONCLUSIONS

        This paper aims to deepen our understanding of whether trade reform conditions in
IMF programs have succeeded in raising trade openness in developing countries, something
that the GATT/WTO has not been found to be particularly successful in doing. The paper
finds several interesting results.

        First, trade conditions are effective in increasing trade openness on average, but the
effect comes almost entirely from programs for which country ownership (willingness to
reform) is assessed to be high. Two proxies for ownership are constructed using information
from the implementation record of nontrade structural benchmarks and staff’s judgment on
countries’ commitment to reform as reflected in the share of prior actions in program
conditions. Both proxies lead to the same conclusion that reform conditions in IMF programs
do not automatically lead to real reforms, and that ownership is fundamentally important to
the success of trade conditionality in increasing a country’s openness to trade.

        Second, implementation of trade conditions on paper does not always translate into a
real and sustained increase in the openness of a country’s trade regime. This suggests that
many conditions may be implemented to the letter but undone in spirit by other means or
reversed once a program expires.

       This paper represents a first systematic study of the effectiveness of trade reform
conditions. However, it does not empirically estimate the determinants of a country’s
willingness to reform due to lack of the relevant data. Linking measures of willingness to
reform explicitly to domestic policy economy factors would be a fruitful topic for future
research.
                                                    - 21 -




       Table 1. IMF-Supported Programs with and without Trade Conditionality, 1993–2003

                       T: Programs with trade conditionality               P: Programs without trade conditions
Country                   1993    1994     1995     1996     1997   1998      1999    2000     2001     2002    2003
Albania                      T       T        T        T               T         T        T        T        T      T
Algeria                      T       T        T        T        T      T
Argentina                                              P        P      P         P       T       T        T       T
Armenia                                       T        T        P      P         P               T        T       T
Azerbaijan                                    T        T        T      T         T               T        T       T
Bangladesh                                                                                                        T
Belarus                                        P       P
Benin                        T       T        T        T        T     T          T       T       P        P       P
Bolivia                              P         P       P        P     T          T       T       T                T
Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                T          T       T       T        T       T
Brazil                                                                P          P       P       P        P
Bulgaria                                               P        T     T          T       T       T        T       T
Burkina Faso                 T       T        T        T        T     T          T       T       T        T       P
Cambodia                             T        T        T        T                T       T       T        T       T
Cameroon                             P         P       P        P     P          P       T       T        T       T
Cape Verde                                                            T          T       T                P       P
Central African Republic             T        T                       T          T       T       T
Chad                                          T        T        T     T          T       P       P        P       P
Colombia                                                                         P       P       P        P       P
Congo, Dem. Rep. of                                                                                       T       T
Congo, Rep. of                       T        T        P        P
Costa Rica                   P       P         P       P        P
Côte d'Ivoire                        P         P       P        P     T          T       T       T
Croatia                              P         P       P        T     T          T       T       T        T        P
Czech Republic                P      P
Djibouti                                                P       P      P         P        P       P       P
Dominica                                                                                                  P        P
Dominican Republic            P      P                                                                             P
Ecuador                              T         T                                          P       P                P
Egypt                         T      T         T        T       T      T
El Salvador                   P      P         P        P       P      P         P        P
Equatorial Guinea             T      T         T        T
Estonia                       P      P         P        T       T      P         P        P       P
Ethiopia                                                T       T      T         T                T       T        T
Gabon                                P         T        T       T      T         T        T       T       T
Gambia, The                                                            T         T        T       T
Georgia                                        P        T       T      T         T                T       T        T
Ghana                                          T        T       T      T         T        T       T       T        P
Guatemala                                                                                                 P        P
Guinea                                                          T      T         T        T       P       P        P
Guinea-Bissau                                  T        T       T      T                  P       P       P        P
Guyana                               T         T        T       T      T         T        T       T       P        P
Haiti                                          T        T       T      T         T
Honduras                                                                         T        T       T       T
Hungary                       P      P                  T       T      T
                                                     - 22 -




Table 1. IMF-Supported Programs with and without Trade Conditionality (continued)

                        T: Programs with trade conditionality               P: Programs without trade conditions
Country                    1993    1994     1995     1996     1997   1998      1999    2000     2001     2002    2003
Indonesia                                                        T      T         T        T        P        P      P
Jordan                                T        T        T        T      T         T        T        T        T      T
Kazakhstan                            T        T        T        T      T         T        T        T        T
Kenya                         T       T                 P        P      P         P        T        T        T      T
Korea, Republic of                                               P      P         P        P
Kyrgyz Republic               P       T        T        T        T      T         T        T        T        P      P
Lao P.D.R.                    T       T        T        T                                           T        T      T
Latvia                        P       P        T        T        P     P          T        T        T        P
Lesotho                               P         P       P        P                                  P        P      P
Lithuania                     P       T        T        T        T                         T        T        T      T
Macedonia, FYR                                  P       P        P     P          P        P        P        P      T
Madagascar                                              T        T     T          T                 P        P      P
Malawi                                P        T        T        T     T                   T        T        T      T
Mali                                                    T        T     T          T        P        P        P      P
Mauritania                                     T        T        T     T          T        T        T        T
Mexico                                          P       P        P                P        P
Moldova                       T       T        T        T        T     T          T        T        T        T      T
Mongolia                      T       T        T        T        P     P          P        P        P        P      P
Mozambique                            P         P       T        T     T          T        T        T        T      T
Nepal                                                                                                               T
Nicaragua                             T        T       T        T      T          T        T        T        P      P
Niger                                 P        P       T        T      T          T        P        P        P      P
Nigeria                                                                                    T        T
Pakistan                      P       T        T       T        T      T          T        T        T        T      T
Panama                                         T       T        T      T          T        T        P        P
Papua New Guinea                               P       P        P                          P        P
Paraguay                                                                                                            T
Peru                          P       P        P       P        P      P          P        P        P        P      P
Philippines                           T        T       T        T      P          P        P
Poland                        P       P        P       P
Romania                               P        P       P        P      P          T       T       T        P       P
Russian Federation                             T       T        T      T          T       T
Rwanda                                                                 T          T       T       T        P       P
São Tomé and Príncipe                                                                     T       T        T       T
Senegal                               T        T       T        T      T          T       T       T                P
Serbia and Montenegro                                                                                      T       T
Sierra Leone                          P        P                                                  P        P       P
Slovak                                P        P        P
Sri Lanka                                                                                         T        T
Tajikistan                                                             T          T       T       T        P       P
Tanzania                                                P       P      P          P       T       T        T       T
Thailand                                                        P      P          P       P
Togo                                  P        P       P        P
Turkey                                P        P       P                          P       P       P        T       T
Uganda                                T        T       T        T      T          T       T                P       P
                                                                     - 23 -




               Table 1. IMF-Supported with and without Trade Conditionality (continued)

                                        T: Programs with trade conditionality                       P: Programs without trade conditions
          Country                          1993    1994     1995     1996     1997           1998      1999    2000     2001     2002    2003
          Ukraine                                              T        T        T              T         T        T        T        T
          Uruguay                                                       P        P              P         P        T        T        T      T
          Uzbekistan                                           T        T        T
          Venezuela                                                     P        P
          Vietnam                             T       T        T        T        T                                                T        T          T
          Yemen                                                         P        T             T           T           T          T
          Yugoslavia                                                                                                              P        P
          Zambia                                               P           P                               T           T          T        T          T
          Zimbabwe                                                                             T           T           T




                                               Table 2. Summary Statistics of Trade Conditions, 1993-2003
                                                            1993    1994       1995   1996     1997      1998   1999       2000   2001     2002     2003   Total
Fund-supported programs                                       23      33         28     32       21        21     20         23     21       17       15    254
IMF-supported Programs with trade condition                   11      15         17     19       10        16     13         12     10        8        6    137
  PRGF                                                         8       7          5     11        4        11      7          6      7        2        2     70
  EFF                                                          1       3          2      5        3         3      2          0      0        1        0     20
  SBA                                                          2       5         10      3        3         2      4          6      3        5        4     47

Number of trade conditions                                    23      29         36     59       47        77     67         28       26     24       11    427
  Prior Action (in percent)                                    9      34         33     41       62        29     24         25       42     17       45     33
  Structural Benchmark (in percent)                           78      55         47     46       30        57     46         50       38     71       36     50
  Performance Criteria (in                                    13      10         19     14        9        14     30         25       19     13       18     17
 percent)
Nature of trade condition                                     23      29         36     59       47        77     67         28       26     24       11    427
 Tariff reduction & rationalization                            6       6         14     22       13        25     19         15        2      2        4    128
 Removal of licensing requirement                             10      10          8      9        6         5      4          3        2      1        0     58
 Elimination of exemptions                                     2       0          0      6        3         7      5          1        1      0        1     26
 Removal of quantitative restrictions                          1       4          2      4        4         2      5          0        4      0        0     26
 Custom reform                                                 1       1          0      7        6
                                                                                                           23     14          1       12       10      0      75
  Other measures                                                3      8         12     11          15     15     20          8        5       11      6     114
Notes. PRGF = Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility.
       EFF = Extended Fund Facility
       SBA = Stand-By Arrangement
                                          - 24 -




                         Table 3. List of Countries in the Sample

Treatment Group 1        Control Group 1           Control Group 2        Treatment Group 2
Argentina                Belarus                   Angola                 Albania
Bolivia                  Brazil                    Antigua and Barbuda Benin
Bosnia & Herzegovina     Colombia                  Bahamas, The           Burkina Faso
Bulgaria                 Costa Rica                Kingdom of Bahrain Cambodia
Cameroon                 Czech Republic            Barbados               Gabon
Cape Verde               Djibouti                  Belize                 Ghana
Côte 'd’Ivoire           Dominica                  Burundi                Guinea-Bissau
Croatia                  Dominican Republic        Chile                  Guyana
Estonia                  El Salvador               China                  Jordan
Gambia, The              Guatemala                 Hong Kong SAR          Kazakhstan
Georgia                  Korea, Republic of        Comoros                Kenya
Guinea                   Mexico                    Cyprus                 Kyrgyz Republic
Hungary                  Papua New Guinea          Fiji                   Lao P.D.R.
Indonesia                Peru                      Grenada                Latvia
Madagascar               Poland                    India                  Lithuania
Mali                     Sierra Leone              Iran, I.R. of          Malawi
Mozambique               Slovak                    Israel                 Mauritania
Niger                    Thailand                  Jamaica                Moldova
Nigeria                  Togo                      Kiribati               Mozambique
Romania                  Venezuela                 Kuwait                 Nicaragua
Rwanda                                             Lebanon                Pakistan
São Tomé and Príncipe                              Liberia                Senegal
Tajikistan                                         Malaysia               Uganda
Tanzania                                           Maldives               Ukraine
Uruguay                                            Mauritius              Vietnam
Yemen                                              Morocco
Zambia                                             Oman
                                                   Samoa
                                                   Saudi Arabia
                                                   Seychelles
                                                   Singapore
                                                   Slovenia
                                                   Solomon Islands
                                                   South Africa
                                                   St. Kitts and Nevis
                                                   St. Lucia
                                                   St. Vincent and the Grenadines
                                                   Sudan
                                                   Suriname
                                                   Syrian Arab Republic
                                                   Tonga
                                                   Trinidad and Tobago
                                                   Tunisia
                                                   Turkmenistan
                                                   United Arab Emirates
                                                   Vanuatu

 Notes: The groups are defined as follows:
 Treatment Group 1: countries with trade conditions during 1995-2001.
 Control Group 1: countries went through IMF-supported programs without trade conditions.
 Control Group 2: developing countries that did not went through programs.
 Treatment Group 2: countries with trade conditions for more than 7 years.
 Mozambique is in both treatment groups 1 and 2. No other country appears in more than one group.
                                                     - 25 -




           Table 4a. Characteristics of Countries in the Treatment and Control Groups
                                                         Proportion of Countries in Different Income Groups
                                                               (Percent, GDP measured in 2000 US$)
                                                               1993                               2003
                                                    <800    800 -- 3000 >3000         <800 800 -- 3000 >3000
Program countries with trade conditions             63.0        27.4        9.6        54.8       28.8      16.4
Program countries without trade conditions          20.0        45.0       35.0        20.0       40.0      40.0
Developing countries without programs               22.0        36.6       41.5        14.6       31.7      53.7




                   Table 4b. Average Tariffs in the Treatment and Central Groups
                                                                  Average Tariff (in percent)
                                                    1997                 2003             Changes from 1997 to 2003
                                                      Standard              Standard                   Standard
                                             Mean     Deviation    Mean     Deviation      Mean        Deviation
Program countries with trade conditions      16.8        8.0       13.5        6.2         -3.3           6.0
Program countries without trade conditions   12.9        4.8       10.3        4.3         -2.6           3.9
Developing countries without programs        17.1       10.7       13.9        9.6         -3.2           5.3
                                                        - 26 -




                                   Table 5. Average Effect of Trade Conditions

Dependent variable: real bilateral imports in log              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
Trade condition                                             0.109       0.162       0.167       0.117       0.169         0.177
                                                          (0.041)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.041)     (0.042)       (0.043)
IMF program                                                            -0.092      -0.037                  -0.094        -0.041
                                                                      (0.029)     (0.029)                 (0.029)       (0.029)
Post-IMF program                                                        0.046       0.078                   0.040         0.069
                                                                      (0.042)     (0.041)                 (0.042)       (0.041)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                                                   0.467       0.466         0.525
                                                                                              (0.102)     (0.102)       (0.103)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                                                0.435       0.441         0.370
                                                                                              (0.164)     (0.164)       (0.163)
Real exchange rate                                                                  0.006                                 0.006
(multilateral)                                                                    (0.001)                               (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                                                  0.001                                 0.001
(bilateral)                                                                       (0.000)                               (0.000)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                       -0.178      -0.158      -0.191      -0.159      -0.141        -0.170
                                                          (0.099)     (0.099)     (0.099)     (0.098)     (0.098)       (0.098)
Importer and partner WTO                                    0.306       0.327       0.281       0.318       0.338         0.292
members                                                   (0.067)     (0.067)     (0.067)     (0.067)     (0.067)       (0.066)
Common border                                               0.798       0.797       0.788       0.669       0.666         0.690
                                                          (0.201)     (0.201)     (0.201)     (0.213)     (0.213)       (0.213)
Ever colony                                                 1.423       1.422       1.425       1.395       1.395         1.390
                                                          (0.220)     (0.220)     (0.219)     (0.222)     (0.222)       (0.222)
Common                                                      1.074       1.073       1.062       1.064       1.063         1.049
colony                                                    (0.118)     (0.118)     (0.118)     (0.118)     (0.118)       (0.118)
Common language                                              0.67        0.67       0.667       0.552       0.549         0.586
                                                          (0.081)     (0.081)     (0.081)     (0.111)     (0.111)       (0.111)
Common currency                                             0.119       0.119       0.117      -0.077      -0.081        -0.015
                                                          (0.249)     (0.249)     (0.249)     (0.279)     (0.279)       (0.279)
Log distance                                               -1.471      -1.471      -1.463      -1.273      -1.269        -1.317
                                                          (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.037)     (0.113)     (0.113)       (0.113)
Free trade area                                            -0.151      -0.154      -0.137      -0.357       -0.36        -0.358
                                                          (0.099)     (0.099)     (0.098)     (0.109)     (0.109)       (0.109)
Log real GDP importer                                       0.863       0.749       0.652       0.797       0.683         0.595
                                                          (0.139)     (0.140)     (0.140)     (0.140)     (0.141)       (0.140)
Log real GDP exporter                                       0.409       0.410       0.424       0.379       0.379         0.408
                                                          (0.163)     (0.163)     (0.164)     (0.169)     (0.169)       (0.170)
Log population importer                                    -1.581      -1.312      -0.965      -1.052      -0.773        -0.617
                                                          (0.288)     (0.292)     (0.294)     (0.427)     (0.429)       (0.432)
Log population exporter                                    -0.113      -0.128       0.008        0.61       0.606         0.605
                                                          (0.355)     (0.354)     (0.353)     (0.175)     (0.176)       (0.176)
Observations                                               49068       49068       49068       49068       49068         49068
R-squared                                                    0.71        0.71        0.71        0.71        0.71          0.71

  Note: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                                      - 27 -




       Table 6.      “During -Program” and “Post-Program” Effects in Weighted Regressions

Regression weights                                         Equal            Log real      Log            Log real
                                                           weights          GDP           populatio      imports
Trade Conditions during IMF program                                 0.140           0.115 n       0.118          -0.095
                                                                  (0.042)         (0.039)       (0.040)         (0.035)
Trade conditions after IMF program                                  0.374           0.347         0.354           0.126
                                                                  (0.073)         (0.068)       (0.069)         (0.059)
Real exchange rate                                                  0.007           0.006         0.007           0.006
(multilateral)                                                    (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                                  0.001           0.001         0.001           0.000
(bilateral)                                                       (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)
IMF program                                                        -0.027          -0.015        -0.014           0.057
                                                                  (0.029)         (0.028)       (0.028)         (0.025)
Post-IMF program                                                   -0.003           0.007         0.011           0.054
                                                                  (0.043)         (0.041)       (0.042)         (0.035)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                               -0.206          -0.227        -0.215          -0.227
                                                                  (0.098)         (0.097)       (0.098)         (0.101)
Importer and partner WTO                                            0.256           0.241         0.250           0.151
members                                                           (0.066)         (0.063)       (0.065)         (0.053)
Common border                                                       0.689           0.708         0.719           0.520
                                                                  (0.213)         (0.208)       (0.212)         (0.189)
Ever colony                                                         1.390           1.390         1.386           1.644
                                                                  (0.222)         (0.210)       (0.213)         (0.250)
Common                                                              1.049           1.066         1.054           1.141
colony                                                            (0.118)         (0.117)       (0.118)         (0.128)
Common language                                                     0.585           0.578         0.553           0.450
                                                                  (0.111)         (0.108)       (0.108)         (0.114)
Common currency                                                    -0.017          -0.013        -0.046           0.264
                                                                  (0.278)         (0.271)       (0.271)         (0.294)
Log distance                                                       -1.315          -1.326        -1.306          -1.359
                                                                  (0.113)         (0.110)       (0.110)         (0.122)
Free trade area                                                    -0.359          -0.379        -0.368          -0.030
                                                                  (0.109)         (0.105)       (0.107)         (0.108)
Log real GDP importer                                               0.601           0.664         0.661           1.031
                                                                  (0.140)         (0.135)       (0.136)         (0.137)
Log real GDP exporter                                               0.406           0.405         0.431           0.412
                                                                  (0.170)         (0.161)       (0.162)         (0.199)
Log population importer                                            -0.766          -0.856        -0.776          -1.441
                                                                  (0.432)         (0.417)       (0.422)         (0.431)
Log population exporter                                             0.607           0.617         0.576           0.765
                                                                  (0.176)         (0.170)       (0.171)         (0.288)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                       0.526           0.443         0.425           0.332
                                                                  (0.103)         (0.101)       (0.103)         (0.163)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                    0.372           0.342         0.370           0.189
                                                                  (0.163)         (0.158)       (0.159)         (0.175)
Observations                                                       49068           49068         49068           34306
R-squared                                                            0.71            0.72           0.72           0.76

 Notes: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                            - 28 -




               Table 7. Time Profile of the Impact from Trade Conditions

                                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)
Year trade conditions introduced                                     0.030        0.024       0.027
                                                                   (0.044)      (0.040)     (0.041)
1st year after trade conditions was                                  0.172        0.154       0.158
introduced                                                         (0.046)      (0.043)     (0.044)
2nd year                                                             0.138        0.113       0.113
                                                                   (0.049)      (0.046)     (0.047)
Third year                                                           0.160        0.135       0.139
                                                                   (0.048)      (0.046)     (0.046)
Fourth year                                                          0.127        0.101       0.104
                                                                   (0.050)      (0.048)     (0.048)
Fifth year                                                           0.155        0.123       0.127
                                                                   (0.053)      (0.050)     (0.051)
Sixth year                                                           0.109        0.085       0.091
                                                                   (0.057)      (0.054)     (0.055)
Mills ratio for non-zero trade                                       0.527        0.444       0.426
                                                                   (0.103)      (0.101)     (0.103)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                     0.363        0.334       0.362
                                                                   (0.164)      (0.158)     (0.159)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                -0.180       -0.200      -0.188
                                                                   (0.099)      (0.099)     (0.099)
Importer and partner WTO                                             0.281        0.267       0.276
members                                                            (0.068)      (0.065)     (0.066)
Common border                                                        0.693        0.712       0.723
                                                                   (0.213)      (0.208)     (0.212)
Ever colony                                                          1.389        1.390       1.386
                                                                   (0.222)      (0.210)     (0.213)
Common                                                               1.050        1.067       1.054
colony                                                             (0.118)      (0.117)     (0.118)
Common language                                                      0.589        0.582       0.557
                                                                   (0.111)      (0.108)     (0.109)
Common currency                                                     -0.011       -0.008      -0.040
                                                                   (0.279)      (0.271)     (0.272)
Log distance                                                        -1.321       -1.331      -1.311
                                                                   (0.113)      (0.110)     (0.110)
Free trade area                                                     -0.356       -0.377      -0.365
                                                                   (0.109)      (0.105)     (0.107)
Log real GDP importer                                                0.683        0.742       0.740
                                                                   (0.141)      (0.136)     (0.137)
Log real GDP exporter                                                0.408        0.406       0.432
                                                                   (0.170)      (0.161)     (0.162)
Log population importer                                             -0.757       -0.841      -0.763
                                                                   (0.430)      (0.414)     (0.420)
Log population exporter                                              0.608        0.619       0.578
                                                                   (0.175)      (0.170)     (0.171)
Real exchange rate                                                   0.007        0.007       0.007
(multilateral)                                                     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                                   0.001        0.001       0.001
(bilateral)                                                        (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
Observations                                                        49068        49068       49068
R-squared                                                             0.71         0.72        0.72

  Notes: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and
year fixed effects are included but not reported.
                                                - 29 -




                                     Table 8. Role of Ownership

Weighting:                                            Equally weighted           Weighted by Partners'
                                                                                 Log     real GDP
Trade condition                                     0.036 -0.514 -0.704            0.030 -0.578 -0.746
                                                  (0.114) (0.199) (0.196)        (0.103) (0.188) (0.188)
Trade condition * ownership 1                       0.228           0.260          0.197             0.231
                                                  (0.155)         (0.152)        (0.141)           (0.139)
Trade condition * ownership 2                               0.795 0.829                     0.840    0.870
                                                          (0.233) (0.227)                 (0.218) (0.214)
Importer WTO member, but not partner               -0.173 -0.203 -0.208           -0.195 -0.226 -0.231
                                                  (0.098) (0.098) (0.098)        (0.098) (0.098) (0.098)
Importer and partner WTO                            0.288   0.260 0.254            0.273    0.243    0.238
members                                           (0.066) (0.067) (0.067)        (0.064) (0.064) (0.064)
Common border                                       0.691   0.688 0.689            0.710    0.707    0.708
                                                  (0.213) (0.213) (0.213)        (0.208) (0.208) (0.208)
Ever colony                                         1.389   1.391 1.390            1.390    1.391    1.391
                                                  (0.222) (0.222) (0.222)        (0.210) (0.210) (0.210)
Common                                              1.050   1.047 1.047            1.067    1.064    1.064
colony                                            (0.118) (0.118) (0.118)        (0.117) (0.117) (0.117)
Common language                                     0.587   0.583 0.585            0.579    0.576    0.577
                                                  (0.111) (0.111) (0.111)        (0.108) (0.107) (0.107)
Common currency                                    -0.013 -0.018 -0.015           -0.010 -0.015 -0.013
                                                  (0.279) (0.278) (0.279)        (0.271) (0.271) (0.271)
Log distance                                       -1.318 -1.312 -1.313           -1.328 -1.322 -1.323
                                                  (0.113) (0.112) (0.113)        (0.110) (0.109) (0.109)
Free trade area                                    -0.358 -0.360 -0.359           -0.378 -0.380 -0.380
                                                  (0.108) (0.109) (0.108)        (0.105) (0.105) (0.105)
Log real GDP importer                               0.611   0.658 0.679            0.673    0.725    0.744
                                                  (0.141) (0.141) (0.141)        (0.136) (0.136) (0.136)
Log real GDP exporter                               0.407   0.410 0.409            0.406    0.409    0.408
                                                  (0.170) (0.169) (0.170)        (0.161) (0.161) (0.161)
Log population importer                            -0.591 -0.414 -0.375           -0.688 -0.495 -0.460
                                                  (0.431) (0.434) (0.432)        (0.416) (0.417) (0.416)
Log population exporter                             0.607   0.599 0.602            0.618    0.610    0.612
                                                  (0.176) (0.175) (0.176)        (0.170) (0.170) (0.170)
Real exchange rate                                  0.006   0.006 0.006            0.006    0.006    0.006
(multilateral)                                    (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)        (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                  0.001   0.001 0.001            0.001    0.001    0.001
(bilateral)                                       (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)        (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                       0.527   0.525 0.526            0.443    0.442    0.443
                                                  (0.103) (0.103) (0.103)        (0.101) (0.101) (0.101)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                    0.368   0.377 0.375            0.338    0.347    0.345
                                                  (0.163) (0.163) (0.163)        (0.158) (0.158) (0.158)
IMF program                                        -0.039 -0.019 -0.015           -0.027 -0.006 -0.002
                                                  (0.029) (0.029) (0.029)        (0.027) (0.028) (0.028)
Post IMF program                                    0.075   0.100 0.107            0.084    0.113    0.119
                                                  (0.040) (0.043) (0.042)        (0.038) (0.040) (0.039)
Observations                                       49068 49068 49068              49068 49068 49068
R-squared                                            0.71    0.71    0.71           0.72      0.72     0.72

  Notes: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed
effects are included but not reported.
                                         - 30 -




                   Table 9. High versus Low Ownership Relative to Median

                                                                                  (1)                  (2)
Trade condition * High ownership 1                                             0.297
                                                                             (0.050)
Trade condition * Low ownership 1                                              0.034
                                                                             (0.060)
Trade condition * High ownership 2                                                               0.272
                                                                                               (0.061)
Trade condition * Low ownership 2                                                                0.076
                                                                                               (0.051)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                          -0.162            -0.206
                                                                             (0.097)           (0.098)
Importer and partner WTO                                                       0.297             0.258
members                                                                      (0.066)           (0.067)
Common border                                                                  0.691             0.689
                                                                             (0.213)           (0.213)
Ever colony                                                                    1.388             1.390
                                                                             (0.222)           (0.222)
Common                                                                         1.048             1.047
colony                                                                       (0.118)           (0.118)
Common language                                                                0.586             0.585
                                                                             (0.111)           (0.111)
Common currency                                                               -0.015            -0.016
                                                                             (0.279)           (0.278)
Log distance                                                                  -1.315            -1.314
                                                                             (0.113)           (0.113)
Free trade area                                                               -0.359            -0.359
                                                                             (0.109)           (0.109)
Log real GDP importer                                                          0.587             0.620
                                                                             (0.140)           (0.140)
Log real GDP exporter                                                          0.408             0.411
                                                                             (0.170)           (0.169)
Log population importer                                                       -0.619            -0.506
                                                                             (0.431)           (0.432)
Log population exporter                                                        0.605             0.600
                                                                             (0.176)           (0.175)
Real exchange rate                                                             0.006             0.006
(multilateral)                                                               (0.001)           (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                                             0.001             0.001
(bilateral)                                                                  (0.000)           (0.000)
IMF program                                                                   -0.026            -0.033
                                                                             (0.029)           (0.029)
Post IMF program                                                               0.075             0.086
                                                                             (0.041)           (0.042)
Mills ratio for non-zero trade                                                 0.532             0.526
                                                                             (0.103)           (0.103)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                               0.372             0.373
                                                                             (0.163)           (0.163)
IMF program                                                                   -0.026            -0.033
                                                                             (0.029)           (0.029)
Post IMF program                                                               0.075             0.086
                                                                             (0.041)           (0.042)
Observations                                                                  49068             49068
R-squared                                                                       0.71              0.71

  Notes: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year
fixed effects are included but not reported.
                                           - 31 -




Table 10: Predicting Which Countries/Years Have Trade Conditions
Using IMF’s Trade Restrictive Index (Probit Regression)

Dependent variable: dummy for trade conditions

Trade Restrictive Index                                              0.093
                                                                   (0.045)
Constant                                                            -1.568
                                                                   (0.208)
Pseudo R2                                                             0.03
                                                        - 32 -




      Table 11: Accounting for Endogenous Trade Condtions Using Trade Restrictive Index
                                                                          (1)                     (2)                        (3)
Trade condition                                                        0.068                  -0.069                     -0.642
                                                                     (0.046)                 (0.117)                    (0.199)
Trade condition * ownership 1                                                                  0.224
                                                                                             (0.155)
Trade condition * ownership 2                                                                                             0.811
                                                                                                                        (0.233)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                 -0.197                   -0.200                     -0.232
                                                                    (0.098)                  (0.098)                    (0.098)
Importer and partner WTO members                                      0.266                    0.262                      0.232
                                                                    (0.066)                  (0.067)                    (0.067)
Common border                                                         0.691                    0.692                      0.689
                                                                    (0.213)                  (0.213)                    (0.213)
Ever colony                                                           1.390                    1.389                      1.391
                                                                    (0.222)                  (0.222)                    (0.222)
Common colony                                                         1.049                    1.050                      1.046
                                                                    (0.118)                  (0.118)                    (0.118)
Common language                                                       0.586                    0.587                      0.584
                                                                    (0.111)                  (0.111)                    (0.111)
Common currency                                                      -0.015                   -0.013                     -0.018
                                                                    (0.279)                  (0.279)                    (0.279)
Log distance                                                         -1.317                   -1.319                     -1.313
                                                                    (0.113)                  (0.113)                    (0.112)
Free trade area                                                      -0.359                   -0.359                     -0.361
                                                                    (0.109)                  (0.108)                    (0.109)
Log real GDP importer                                                 0.567                    0.582                      0.630
                                                                    (0.141)                  (0.142)                    (0.141)
Log real GDP exporter                                                 0.409                    0.408                      0.411
                                                                    (0.170)                  (0.170)                    (0.169)
Log population importer                                              -0.654                   -0.627                     -0.448
                                                                    (0.432)                  (0.431)                    (0.434)
Log population exporter                                               0.605                    0.608                      0.600
                                                                    (0.176)                  (0.176)                    (0.176)
Real exchange rate (multilateral)                                     0.007                    0.006                      0.006
                                                                    (0.001)                  (0.001)                    (0.001)
Real exchange rate (bilateral)                                        0.001                    0.001                      0.001
                                                                     0.000                    0.000                      0.000
Mills ratio for TC selection                                         -0.115                   -0.114                     -0.120
                                                                    (0.031)                  (0.031)                    (0.031)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                         0.526                    0.527                      0.526
                                                                    (0.103)                  (0.103)                    (0.103)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                      0.369                    0.367                      0.376
                                                                    (0.163)                  (0.163)                    (0.163)
IMF program                                                          -0.033                    -0.03                     -0.010
                                                                    (0.029)                  (0.029)                    (0.029)
Post IMF program                                                      0.087                    0.092                      0.119
                                                                    (0.041)                  (0.040)                    (0.042)
Observations                                                         49068                    49068                      49068
R-squared                                                               0.71                    0.71                       0.71
Note 1: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                                        - 33 -




          Table 12. Discrete Measures of Ownership, with Correction for Selection Bias

                                                                                        (1)                          (2)
Trade condition * High ownership 1                                                   0.188
                                                                                   (0.052)
Trade condition * Low ownership 1                                                   -0.077
                                                                                   (0.064)
Trade condition * High ownership 2                                                                               0.162
                                                                                                               (0.063)
Trade condition * Low ownership 2                                                                               -0.039
                                                                                                               (0.054)
Mills ratio for non-zero trade                                                       0.533                       0.527
                                                                                   (0.103)                     (0.103)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                                     0.372                       0.373
                                                                                   (0.163)                     (0.163)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                                -0.189                      -0.235
                                                                                   (0.098)                     (0.099)
Importer and partner WTO                                                             0.271                       0.230
members                                                                            (0.066)                     (0.067)
Common border                                                                        0.692                       0.690
                                                                                   (0.213)                     (0.213)
Ever colony                                                                          1.388                       1.390
                                                                                   (0.222)                     (0.222)
Common                                                                               1.048                       1.047
colony                                                                             (0.118)                     (0.118)
Common language                                                                      0.586                       0.585
                                                                                   (0.111)                     (0.111)
Common currency                                                                     -0.015                      -0.016
                                                                                   (0.279)                     (0.279)
Log distance                                                                        -1.316                      -1.315
                                                                                   (0.113)                     (0.113)
Free trade area                                                                     -0.360                      -0.360
                                                                                   (0.109)                     (0.109)
Log real GDP importer                                                                0.558                       0.591
                                                                                   (0.141)                     (0.140)
Log real GDP exporter                                                                0.408                       0.412
                                                                                   (0.170)                     (0.169)
Log population importer                                                             -0.656                      -0.541
                                                                                   (0.431)                     (0.432)
Log population exporter                                                              0.606                       0.600
                                                                                   (0.176)                     (0.175)
Real exchange rate                                                                   0.007                       0.007
(multilateral)                                                                     (0.001)                     (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                                                   0.001                       0.001
(bilateral)                                                                         0.000                       0.000
IMF program                                                                         -0.018                      -0.024
                                                                                   (0.029)                     (0.029)
Post-IMF program                                                                     0.093                       0.104
                                                                                   (0.041)                     (0.042)
Mills ratio for TC selection                                                        -0.116                      -0.118
                                                                                   (0.031)                     (0.031)
Observations                                                                        49068                       49068
R-squared                                                                             0.71                        0.71

  Notes: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects
are included but not reported.
                                                        - 34 -




                                     Table 13. Alternative Control Group
                        (Sample: Treatment Group 1 and Control Group 2 in Table 3)

                                                                              (1)                (2)                (3)
Trade condition                                                            0.145             -0.045             -0.546
                                                                         (0.045)            (0.133)            (0.228)
Trade Condition * Ownership 1                                                                 0.286
                                                                                            (0.186)
Trade Condition * Ownership 2                                                                                    0.763
                                                                                                               (0.253)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                       -0.22             -0.223             -0.241
                                                                         (0.087)            (0.087)            (0.087)
Importer and partner WTO                                                   0.216              0.213              0.196
members                                                                  (0.054)            (0.054)            (0.054)
Common border                                                              0.199              0.205              0.228
                                                                         (0.276)            (0.276)            (0.276)
Ever colony                                                                1.433              1.431              1.432
                                                                         (0.205)            (0.205)            (0.205)
Common                                                                     0.633              0.633              0.632
colony                                                                   (0.090)            (0.090)            (0.090)
Common language                                                            0.183               0.19              0.213
                                                                         (0.097)            (0.096)            (0.098)
Common currency                                                           -0.209             -0.197             -0.156
                                                                         (0.251)            (0.251)            (0.252)
Log distance                                                              -1.235             -1.244              -1.28
                                                                         (0.101)            (0.100)            (0.102)
Free trade area                                                           -0.112             -0.111             -0.109
                                                                         (0.110)            (0.110)            (0.110)
Log real GDP importer                                                      0.959              0.966              1.009
                                                                         (0.153)            (0.153)            (0.154)
Log real GDP exporter                                                      0.300              0.298              0.310
                                                                         (0.179)            (0.179)            (0.178)
Log real population importer                                              -0.576             -0.577             -0.601
                                                                         (0.151)            (0.151)            (0.151)
Log real population exporter                                               1.439              1.427              1.310
                                                                         (0.439)            (0.439)            (0.441)
Bilateral real exchange                                                    0.000              0.000              0.000
rate                                                                     (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                              0.360              0.361              0.359
                                                                         (0.093)            (0.093)            (0.093)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                           0.811              0.797              0.742
                                                                         (0.148)            (0.148)            (0.151)
IMF program                                                               -0.220             -0.204             -0.173
                                                                         (0.054)            (0.052)            (0.057)
Post IMF program                                                          -0.043             -0.024              0.020
                                                                         (0.083)            (0.079)            (0.088)
Observations                                                              56755              56755              56755
R-squared                                                                   0.73               0.73               0.73

  Notes: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                                        - 35 -




                                     Table 14. Continuous Trade Reforms
                             (Sample: Treatment group 2 and control group 1 in Table A3.)

                                                                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)
Trade condition                                                                0.096              -0.309              -0.490
                                                                             (0.048)             (0.089)             (0.482)
Trade condition * Ownership1                                                                       0.590
                                                                                                 (0.113)
Trade condition * Ownership 2                                                                                          0.601
                                                                                                                      (0.491)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                          -0.159              -0.137               -0.167
                                                                             (0.101)             (0.101)              (0.101)
Importer and partner WTO members                                               0.343               0.361                0.334
                                                                             (0.066)             (0.066)              (0.067)
Common border                                                                  0.810               0.799                0.808
                                                                             (0.220)             (0.220)              (0.220)
Ever colony                                                                    1.338               1.338                1.339
                                                                             (0.210)             (0.211)              (0.210)
Common colony                                                                  1.255               1.255                1.254
                                                                             (0.116)             (0.116)              (0.116)
Common language                                                                0.599               0.587                0.597
                                                                             (0.118)             (0.118)              (0.118)
Common currency                                                               -0.024              -0.046               -0.028
                                                                             (0.311)             (0.311)              (0.311)
Log distance                                                                  -1.246              -1.228               -1.243
                                                                             (0.129)             (0.129)              (0.129)
Free trade area                                                                0.384               0.381                0.384
                                                                             (0.127)             (0.127)              (0.127)
Log real GDP importer                                                          0.554               0.616                0.566
                                                                             (0.173)             (0.173)              (0.173)
Log real GDP exporter                                                          0.472               0.471                0.471
                                                                             (0.195)             (0.195)              (0.195)
Log real population importer                                                   0.146               -0.02                0.196
                                                                             (0.506)             (0.506)              (0.507)
Log real population exporter                                                   0.551               0.539                0.549
                                                                             (0.194)             (0.194)              (0.194)
Bilateral real exchange rate                                                  -0.001              -0.001               -0.001
                                                                             (0.000)             (0.000)              (0.000)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                                  0.183               0.182                0.182
                                                                             (0.104)             (0.104)              (0.104)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                               0.293               0.319                0.297
                                                                             (0.186)             (0.186)              (0.186)
IMF program                                                                   -0.163              -0.156               -0.161
                                                                             (0.044)             (0.044)              (0.044)
Post IMF program                                                              -0.196              -0.191               -0.193
                                                                             (0.054)             (0.054)              (0.054)
Observations                                                                  41375               41375                41375
R-squared                                                                        0.71                0.71                0.71
Note 1: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                                        - 36 -




                                          Table 15. PRGF Programs

                                                                        (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)
Trade condition                                                      0.002          -0.001         -0.189            -0.523
                                                                   (0.069)         (0.069)        (0.153)           (0.259)
Trade condition * ownership 1                                                                       0.298
                                                                                                  (0.196)
Trade condition * ownership 2                                                                                         0.589
                                                                                                                    (0.291)
IMF program                                                          0.193           0.201          0.211             0.230
                                                                   (0.058)         (0.057)        (0.056)           (0.059)
Post IMF program                                                     0.321           0.333          0.359             0.361
                                                                   (0.097)         (0.097)        (0.093)           (0.099)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                -0.588          -0.534         -0.539            -0.522
                                                                   (0.201)         (0.193)        (0.193)           (0.193)
Importer and partner WTO members                                     0.241           0.184          0.179             0.199
                                                                   (0.134)         (0.134)        (0.134)           (0.134)
Common border                                                        0.862           0.870          0.873             0.862
                                                                   (0.331)         (0.353)        (0.353)           (0.353)
Ever colony                                                          1.764           1.273          1.272             1.277
                                                                   (0.371)         (0.430)        (0.430)           (0.430)
Common colony                                                        0.769           0.886          0.890             0.885
                                                                   (0.145)         (0.141)        (0.141)           (0.141)
Common language                                                      0.292           0.467          0.469             0.459
                                                                   (0.122)         (0.169)        (0.169)           (0.168)
Common currency                                                      0.488           0.749          0.751             0.736
                                                                   (0.243)         (0.325)        (0.325)           (0.325)
Log distance                                                        -1.696          -2.068         -2.070            -2.057
                                                                   (0.087)         (0.198)        (0.198)           (0.198)
Free trade area                                                      1.668           1.539          1.529             1.539
                                                                   (0.288)         (0.301)        (0.302)           (0.301)
Log real GDP importer                                                0.243           0.283          0.293             0.263
                                                                   (0.228)         (0.226)        (0.226)           (0.226)
Log real GDP exporter                                               -0.133          -0.042         -0.046            -0.039
                                                                   (0.272)         (0.273)        (0.275)           (0.272)
Log population importer                                             -2.353          -3.679         -3.662            -3.333
                                                                   (0.601)         (0.790)        (0.791)           (0.804)
Log population exporter                                              1.648           1.325          1.331             1.312
                                                                   (0.590)         (0.307)        (0.309)           (0.306)
Real exchange rate (multilateral)                                    0.000           0.000          0.000             0.000
                                                                   (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
Real exchange rate (bilateral)                                       0.000           0.000          0.000             0.000
                                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)           (0.000)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                                        2.047          2.047             2.042
                                                                                   (0.201)        (0.201)           (0.202)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                                     0.299          0.295             0.317
                                                                                   (0.273)        (0.273)           (0.272)
Observations                                                        17519           17519          17519             17519
R-squared                                                             0.64            0.64           0.64              0.64
Note 1: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects
are included but not reported.
                                                       - 37 -




                                          Table 16. Non-PRGF Programs

                                                                     (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)
Trade condition                                                   0.054            0.056           -0.005            -0.445
                                                                (0.059)          (0.059)          (0.182)           (0.308)
Trade condition * ownership 1                                                                       0.089
                                                                                                  (0.264)
Trade condition * ownership 2                                                                                         0.580
                                                                                                                    (0.345)
IMF program                                                      -0.043           -0.044           -0.044            -0.033
                                                                (0.035)          (0.035)          (0.035)           (0.035)
Post IMF program                                                  0.041            0.039            0.037             0.054
                                                                (0.047)          (0.047)          (0.047)           (0.047)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                              0.003            0.006            0.005            -0.026
                                                                (0.110)          (0.110)          (0.110)           (0.111)
Importer and partner WTO                                          0.193            0.197            0.197             0.166
members                                                         (0.075)          (0.075)          (0.075)           (0.076)
Common border                                                     0.588            0.354            0.355             0.356
                                                                (0.225)          (0.238)          (0.238)           (0.238)
Ever colony                                                       1.163            1.187            1.187             1.188
                                                                (0.271)          (0.272)          (0.272)           (0.272)
Common                                                            2.369            2.360            2.360             2.358
colony                                                          (0.224)          (0.225)          (0.225)           (0.225)
Common language                                                   0.884            0.637            0.638             0.640
                                                                (0.115)          (0.146)          (0.147)           (0.146)
Common currency                                                   1.276            0.847            0.850             0.851
                                                                (0.962)          (0.975)          (0.976)           (0.974)
Log distance                                                     -1.317           -0.941           -0.942            -0.944
                                                                (0.042)          (0.134)          (0.134)           (0.134)
Free trade area                                                  -0.058           -0.128           -0.127            -0.128
                                                                (0.100)          (0.107)          (0.107)           (0.107)
Log real GDP importer                                             0.204            0.108            0.099             0.195
                                                                (0.217)          (0.218)          (0.217)           (0.220)
Log real GDP exporter                                             0.651            0.568            0.568             0.570
                                                                (0.196)          (0.204)          (0.204)           (0.204)
Log population importer                                          -1.401           -0.330           -0.345            -0.248
                                                                (0.454)          (0.589)          (0.590)           (0.585)
Log population exporter                                          -0.838            0.284            0.285             0.285
                                                                (0.426)          (0.205)          (0.205)           (0.205)
Real exchange rate                                                0.012            0.012            0.012             0.012
(multilateral)                                                  (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                                0.002            0.002            0.002             0.002
(bilateral)                                                     (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                                      0.106            0.106             0.111
                                                                                 (0.116)          (0.116)           (0.117)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                                   0.598            0.596             0.594
                                                                                 (0.196)          (0.196)           (0.196)
Observations                                                     31232            31232            31232             31232
R-squared                                                          0.76             0.76             0.76              0.76

  Notes: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                                        - 38 -




          Table 17. Excluding Programs without Explicit Trade Liberalization Conditions

                                                                              (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)
Trade condition                                                            0.163          0.173          0.063           -0.494
                                                                         (0.046)        (0.046)        (0.124)          (0.211)
Trade condition * ownership 1                                                                            0.184
                                                                                                       (0.175)
Trade condition * ownership 2                                                                                             0.781
                                                                                                                        (0.253)
IMF program                                                               -0.042        -0.046          -0.043           -0.025
                                                                         (0.030)       (0.030)         (0.030)          (0.031)
Post IMF program                                                           0.090         0.081           0.086            0.107
                                                                         (0.042)       (0.042)         (0.041)          (0.043)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                      -0.202        -0.180          -0.184           -0.218
                                                                         (0.100)       (0.100)         (0.100)          (0.100)
Importer and partner WTO members                                           0.297         0.307           0.302            0.270
                                                                         (0.067)       (0.067)         (0.067)          (0.067)
Common border                                                              0.797         0.674           0.676            0.674
                                                                         (0.213)       (0.226)         (0.226)          (0.226)
Ever colony                                                                1.470         1.442           1.442            1.443
                                                                         (0.233)       (0.235)         (0.235)          (0.235)
Common colony                                                              1.044         1.028           1.028            1.025
                                                                         (0.127)       (0.127)         (0.127)          (0.127)
Common language                                                            0.693         0.587           0.589            0.586
                                                                         (0.086)       (0.116)         (0.116)          (0.116)
Common currency                                                           -0.104        -0.270          -0.268           -0.269
                                                                         (0.254)       (0.285)         (0.285)          (0.285)
Log distance                                                              -1.451        -1.269          -1.270           -1.267
                                                                         (0.038)       (0.116)         (0.116)          (0.116)
Free trade area                                                           -0.140        -0.348          -0.347           -0.350
                                                                         (0.099)       (0.109)         (0.109)          (0.109)
Log real GDP importer                                                      0.670         0.604           0.609            0.668
                                                                         (0.141)       (0.142)         (0.142)          (0.143)
Log real GDP exporter                                                      0.401         0.376           0.376            0.378
                                                                         (0.169)       (0.175)         (0.176)          (0.175)
Log population importer                                                   -1.011        -0.557          -0.527           -0.346
                                                                         (0.300)       (0.441)         (0.440)          (0.444)
Log population exporter                                                   -0.073         0.609           0.611            0.605
                                                                         (0.364)       (0.180)         (0.180)          (0.180)
Real exchange rate (multilateral)                                          0.006         0.006           0.006            0.006
                                                                         (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)
Real exchange rate (bilateral)                                             0.001         0.001           0.001            0.001
                                                                         (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)
Mills ratio for nonzero trade                                                            0.494           0.495            0.494
                                                                                       (0.104)         (0.104)          (0.104)
HMR probability of nonzero trade                                                         0.413           0.411            0.417
                                                                                       (0.168)         (0.168)          (0.168)
Observations                                                             45878          45878           45878            45878
R-squared                                                                  0.71            0.71           0.71             0.71
Note 1: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                                        - 39 -




                          Table 18. Nominal Implementation of Trade Conditions
                                                                             (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)
Trade condition                                                           0.158           0.180          0.060           -0.540
                                                                        (0.102)         (0.102)        (0.151)          (0.194)
Trade condition * Implementation of trade                                 0.011          -0.005         -0.040            0.028
conditions                                                              (0.113)         (0.113)        (0.106)          (0.110)
Trade condition * ownership 1                                                                            0.238
                                                                                                       (0.146)
Trade condition * ownership 2                                                                                             0.801
                                                                                                                        (0.226)
Importer WTO member, but not partner                                     -0.191         -0.170          -0.174           -0.202
                                                                        (0.099)        (0.098)         (0.098)          (0.098)
Importer and partner WTO                                                  0.281          0.291           0.287            0.260
members                                                                 (0.067)        (0.066)         (0.066)          (0.067)
Common border                                                             0.788          0.689           0.690            0.689
                                                                        (0.201)        (0.213)         (0.213)          (0.213)
Ever colony                                                               1.425          1.390           1.389            1.391
                                                                        (0.219)        (0.222)         (0.222)          (0.222)
Common                                                                    1.063          1.049           1.049            1.047
colony                                                                  (0.118)        (0.118)         (0.118)          (0.118)
Common language                                                           0.667          0.586           0.586            0.584
                                                                        (0.081)        (0.111)         (0.111)          (0.111)
Common currency                                                           0.117         -0.015          -0.014           -0.017
                                                                        (0.249)        (0.278)         (0.278)          (0.278)
Log distance                                                             -1.463         -1.317          -1.317           -1.313
                                                                        (0.038)        (0.113)         (0.113)          (0.112)
Free trade area                                                          -0.137         -0.358          -0.358           -0.360
                                                                        (0.098)        (0.109)         (0.108)          (0.109)
Log real GDP importer                                                     0.653          0.595           0.609            0.661
                                                                        (0.141)        (0.141)         (0.142)          (0.142)
Log real GDP exporter                                                     0.424          0.408           0.407            0.410
                                                                        (0.164)        (0.170)         (0.170)          (0.169)
Log population importer                                                  -0.961         -0.619          -0.601           -0.405
                                                                        (0.290)        (0.431)         (0.431)          (0.431)
Log population exporter                                                   0.009          0.605           0.607            0.600
                                                                        (0.353)        (0.176)         (0.176)          (0.175)
IMF program                                                              -0.037         -0.041          -0.039           -0.018
                                                                        (0.029)        (0.029)         (0.029)          (0.029)
Post-IMF program                                                          0.079          0.069           0.073            0.102
                                                                        (0.040)        (0.040)         (0.040)          (0.041)
Real exchange rate                                                        0.006          0.006           0.006            0.006
(multilateral)                                                          (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)
Real exchange rate                                                        0.001          0.001           0.001            0.001
(bilateral)                                                              0.000          0.000           0.000            0.000
Mills                                                                                    0.525           0.527            0.525
ratio                                                                                  (0.103)         (0.103)          (0.103)
HMR ratio                                                                                0.370           0.369            0.375
                                                                                       (0.163)         (0.163)          (0.163)
Observations                                                             49068          49068           49068            49068
R-squared                                                                  0.71            0.71           0.71             0.71
Note 1: Standard errors are based on country pair clustering. Separate importer, exporter, and year fixed effects are
included but not reported.
                                        - 40 -




                                      REFERENCES

Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop, 2003, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the
      Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 1, pp. 170–92.

Drazen, Alan, 2003, “Conditionality and Ownership in IMF Lending: A Political Economy
      Approach,” Staff Papers, International Monetary Fund, Vol. 49, Special Issue.

The Economist, 2005, “Is There Any Point to the WTO?” (August).

Fernandez, Raquel, and Dani Rodrik, 1991, “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the
      Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, Vol. 85,
      pp. 1146-55.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei, 1994, "Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc: Exchange Rate
       Policies of the East Asian Economies," in Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings,
       Exchange Rates and Capital Flows, ed. by Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger (Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press).

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1997, Regional Trading Blocs in the World Economic System
       (Washington: Institute for International Economics).

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona, Rubinstein, 2005, “Trading Partners and Trade
      Volumes,” Harvard University Working Paper (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
      University).

International Monetary Fund, 2001, “Trade Policy Conditionality in Fund-Supported
        Programs,” www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/cond/2001/eng/trade/index.htm

———, 2005a, “Review of Fund Work on Trade,”
   www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2005/020705.htm

______, 2005b, “Trade Conditionality Under Fund-Supported Programs, 1990–2004,”
      www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2005/021405.pdf.

———, 2005c, “Review of the 2002 Conditionality Guidelines,”
   http://www.imf.org/External/np/pp/eng/2005/030305.htm.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton, 1999a, "Aggregating Governance
      Indicators," Policy Research Working Paper No. 2195 (Washington: World Bank).

———, 1999b, "Governance Matters,” Policy Research Working Paper No. 2196
   (Washington: World Bank).
                                       - 41 -




Rose, Andrew, 2002, “Do WTO Members Have More Liberal Trade Policy?” NBER
       Working Paper No. 9347 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
       Research).

———, 2004, “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?” American Economic
   Review, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 98–114.

Subramanian, Arvind, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2003, “The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly but
      Unevenly,” NBER Working Paper No. 10024 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
      Bureau of Economic Research); forthcoming, Journal of International Economics.

Wei, Shang-Jin, 1996, “Intra-National Versus Trade: How Stubborn are Nations in Global
       Integration?” NBER Working Paper No. 5531 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
       Bureau of Economic Research).

———, 1997, “Gradualism versus Big Bang: Speed and Sustainability of Reforms,”
   Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 1234–47. Reprinted in The
   Political Economy of Reform, ed. by Federico Sturzenegger and Mariano Tommasi
   (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1998).
