NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE ORIGINS OF "A MONETARY HISTORY"
Hugh Rockoff
Working Paper 12666
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12666

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006

I am grateful to Michael Bordo, Ross Emmett, Daniel Hammond, David Laidler, Malcolm Rutherford,
Anna J. Schwartz, and the participants in a seminar at Rutgers University in October 2006 for detailed
comments on previous drafts. I am also grateful to Claudia Goldin for making available tapes of interviews
that she conducted with Anna J. Schwartz and that she and Larry Katz conducted with Milton Friedman
for the NBER and to Daniel Hammond for alerting me to and making available documents from the
Milton Friedman papers. I am responsible for any of the errors and mistaken judgments that remain.
The final version of this paper will be published in The Elgar Companion to the Chicago School of
Economics, edited by Ross B. Emmett (Edward Elgar). The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

On the Origins of "A Monetary History"
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 12666
November 2006
JEL No. B22
ABSTRACT
This paper explores some of the scholarship that influenced Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz's
"A Monetary History". It shows that the ideas of several Chicago economists -- Henry Schultz, Henry
Simons, Lloyd Mints, and Jacob Viner -- left clear marks. It argues, however, that the most important
influence may have been Wesley Clair Mitchell and his classic book "Business Cycles" (1913). Mitchell,
and the NBER, provided the methodology for "A Monetary History", in particular the emphasis on
compiling long time series of monthly data and analyzing the effects of specific variables on the business
cycle. A common methodology and the stability of monetary relationships produced similar conclusions
about money. Friedman and Schwartz deemphasized Mitchell's "bank-centric" view of the monetary
transmission process, but they reinforced Mitchell's conclusion that money had an independent, predictable,
and important influence on the business cycle.
Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
Rutgers University
College Avenue Campus
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
rockoff@fas-econ.rutgers.edu

1. Introduction1
Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz’s A Monetary History of the United States (1963)
is arguably the most important book in economics since The General Theory (1936).2 It has
inspired and informed an enormous amount of research. Even footnotes have produced
voluminous and contentious literatures.3 This paper explores some of the work that influenced
the Monetary History. 4 It shows that the ideas of several Chicago economists – Henry Schultz,
Henry Simons, Lloyd Mints, and Jacob Viner – left clear marks. However, it argues that the most
important influence may have been Wesley Clair Mitchell and his classic book Business Cycles
(1913). Mitchell, and the NBER, provided the methodology, in particular the emphasis on long
accurate time series of monthly data and the analysis of the effects of specific variables on the
business cycle. Mitchell's book, as I try to show below, contained a preliminary exploration of
the issues examined in more detail, and for a longer historical period, in the Monetary History.
Mitchell concluded that money played an independent, predictable, and important role in shaping
the business cycle. Friedman and Schwartz’s work, although it differed on several particulars,
most importantly on the role of bank-lending policies in the transmission of monetary impulses,
strongly reinforced Mitchell’s basic conclusions.
Perhaps the most important reason for exploring the origins of the Monetary History is
that it facilitates understanding. Although the Monetary History is enormously influential, and
although its analyses of particular events are often taken to be authoritative, its basic findings are
often misunderstood because the book arose from a methodological tradition that differs
markedly from the tradition underlying modern macroeconomics. Young economists often find
the book especially challenging because they have not been trained in, perhaps not even exposed
to, the historical methods used by Friedman and Schwartz.
1

The influences on the Monetary History that I stress have largely been ignored in the
literature on the origins of the Monetary History. The initial reviews of the Monetary History
ignored Mitchell and the Chicago economists and viewed the Monetary History as a response to
Keynesian economics. Harry Johnson in his review of the Monetary History (1965), for example,
does not mention Mitchell or other earlier work on business cycles. Johnson briefly summarizes
Friedman and Schwartz's basic findings, indeed he accepts them, but he concentrates his
attention on the absence of a formal theoretical model, and on the implicit assumption that he
sees in Friedman and Schwartz that the demand for money was not a function of the rate of
interest.5 Johnson's (1971) evaluation of monetarism as a whole does not even mention the
Monetary History. Don Patinkin in a series of papers (1969, 1972, and 1975), although more
directly concerned with other aspects of Friedman's work, downplayed the contribution of the
Chicago economists, ignored Mitchell and the NBER, and stressed Friedman's unacknowledged
debt to Keynes.
Much of the subsequent literature focused on whether Friedman and Schwartz had
properly acknowledged their debt to previous analysts of the Great Depression. David Laidler
(1993), for example, showed that important elements of the work of the British economist Ralph
Hawtrey and the Harvard economists Allyn Young and Laughlin Currie can be found in the
Monetary History and related work by Friedman and by Friedman and Schwartz. Indeed, at
various times Friedman and Schwartz have conceded that they did not give due recognition to the
work of one or another previous scholars. I will consider one case, Jacob Viner, below. On the
other hand, Friedman and Schwartz's treatment of previous scholars has it defenders. Frank G.
Steindl (1995), notably, argued that while a number of economists in the 1930s, such as Currie,
had produced elements of the Friedman-Schwartz interpretation of the Depression, none

2

produced a detailed analysis of the way decisions by banks and the public influenced the supply
of money, and none produced an interpretation that integrated supply and demand.
Historians of economic thought interested in Mitchell, for example Howard Sherman
(2001), have downplayed Mitchell's views about the role of money in the business cycle, or
emphasized the differences between Mitchell and Friedman and Schwartz. Mitchell expressed
doubts about the usefulness of monetary aggregates and about the quantity theory; Friedman and
Schwartz embraced both. There is, of course, some truth in the initial reaction to the Monetary
History and the more recent writings of historians of economic thought. Friedman and Schwartz
were critics of the Keynesian orthodoxy of the day, and Friedman and Schwartz did compute
monetary aggregates and use the quantity theory. However, ignoring Mitchell's Business Cycles
or focusing on the differences between Mitchell and Friedman and Schwartz misses the
agreement on the most important issues: on methodology and on conclusions about the role of
money in the business cycle.
The institutional history of how the Monetary History came to be is relatively well
known. Indeed, Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, xxi) provide the essentials in the Monetary
History. And J. Daniel Hammond (1996) provides a carefully organized account of the origins of
the National Bureau's monetary project and a description of how the book uses the National
Bureau’s methodology. The National Bureau's money project was one of many started at the
Bureau to expand on issues that Mitchell had initially surveyed in Business Cycles (1913). The
project had started before Friedman and Schwartz took over. Originally James W. Angell and
Caroline Whitney, a student of Angell at Columbia who completed her degree at Columbia in
1935, were assigned to the project. Schwartz replaced Whitney, possibly because Whitney was
experiencing health problems. And when Angell later left the project, Arthur Burns, who had

3

replaced Mitchell as director of the NBER, asked Friedman to take over.6 The choice of
Friedman made sense. Friedman had successfully completed several projects at the Bureau. He
had already, moreover, developed an interest in the problem of inflation while working at the
Treasury in World War II, although Friedman's work at that time was Keynesian in the sense that
it emphasized taxes and spending rather than the stock of money. (Friedman 1943; Shoup,
Friedman, and Mack 1943). Most important, as it would turn out, Friedman's skills as a theorist
perfectly complemented those of Anna Schwartz, a superb economic historian. Burns also
suggested that Friedman talk to Walter W. Stewart at Princeton about the project, and it was
Stewart who suggested an “analytical narrative” as a background for the statistical study.7
Work on the Monetary History went on in two places. The statistical work was carried
out in New York under Anna Schwartz's direction, while Friedman remained at Chicago. There
Friedman recruited graduate students who participated in his workshop and who wrote
dissertations related to issues being explored in the Monetary History. Much of the joint work of
writing the Monetary History took place in correspondence between Friedman in Chicago and
Schwartz in New York. Although the institutional origins of the Monetary History have been
documented before, I believe there is more to be said about the basic conclusions about the role
of money in the business cycle reached in the Monetary History and the relationship between
those conclusions and the earlier work by Mitchell and by economists at Chicago.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In section 2 I describe Mitchell’s career and
his interest in money. In section 3 I develop 5 conclusions about the role of money in the
business cycle that summarize Mitchell's views as expressed in Business Cycles. I then describe
how Friedman and Schwartz's work reinforced, modified, and in one case rejected Mitchell’s
conclusions. In section 4 I explore the Chicago influences on the Monetary History. While

4

Mitchell’s work provided the methodology, it was the Chicago economists who provided much
of the analytic framework. In section 5 I explore Friedman’s (1950) mathematical model of
Mitchell’s views. The parallels between this model and Friedman's subsequent attempts to
mathematical models of his views strengthen the case for seeing a close connection between
Business Cycles (1913) and the Monetary History (1963). In section 6 I look at some of the
influential criticisms of the Monetary History. Here I argue that by time the Monetary History
appeared Mitchell’s work, indeed the Bureau’s approach in general, was unfamiliar to many
economists, and that this partly explains the failure of many economists to understand what
Friedman and Schwartz had accomplished. In section 7 I try to define more precisely the “clinical
methodology” that I believe underlies the work of Mitchell and of Friedman and Schwartz. In
section 8 I try to explain why Mitchell's conclusions about the role of money are so similar on so
many fronts to the conclusions reached by Friedman and Schwartz. In section 9 I summarize the
main conclusions.

2. Wesley Clair Mitchell
Wesley C. Mitchell is usually remembered today for his non-monetary contributions: his
founding of the National Bureau of Economic Research and the stimulus it provided for research
such as the early studies of national income. But Mitchell had a deep and continuing interest in
monetary phenomenon. Mitchell studied at the University of Chicago as both undergraduate and
graduate student during the 1890s, an exciting period in American monetary history that included
several financial panics and the famous "Battle of the Standards" (gold or bimetallism?).8 J.
Laurence Laughlin, a professor at Chicago who supervised Mitchell's dissertation and
encouraged Mitchell’s career, was a prominent defender of the gold standard. Mitchell's
5

dissertation, A History of the United States Notes completed in 1899, discussed the issue of fiat
paper money by the North during the Civil War. The University of Chicago Press published it as
A History of the Greenbacks in 1903.9 This volume covered the Civil War years (1861-1865) and
addressed the effects of the greenbacks on interest rates, prices, wages, and related variables.
Mitchell’s teaching career began at Chicago in 1900. In 1903 he moved to the University
of California at Berkeley where he would spend a remarkably productive decade. In 1908
Mitchell published Gold, Prices, and Wages under the Greenback Standard. Here Mitchell
covered the years 1862 to 1878, the entire period when the United States was on the "Greenback
Standard" – the currency was not convertible into gold. Theory played a role in the shaping of
this volume – Mitchell examined the relationship between the gold premium and prices, an item
Friedman and Schwartz would take up in the Monetary History, and he discussed the patterns of
lags among economic variables – but on the whole the emphasis was on data rather than analysis.
Mitchell described the book as the “statistical apparatus of a book still to be written.” (Quoted in
Burns 1949, 17-18).
In 1907 Mitchell lectured at Harvard on money and business cycles. In 1908 he returned
to California and began to work on his third classic: Business Cycles. Mitchell’s enormous
capacity for work served him well. Despite the huge scope of Mitchell’s vision, and the length of
the manuscript (600 pages), it was completed in record time. Burns (1949, 23) put it this way: “In
the amazingly short time of three years, Mitchell had worked out and written one of the
masterpieces in the world’s economic literature.”
Business Cycles (1913) consisted of three parts. The first was a review of existing
theories of the business cycle. The second was a compendium and analysis of time series (prices,
currency, profits, the condition of the banks, and so on) covering the United States, Britain,

6

France and Germany from 1890 to 1911. The third was a description and explanation of the
typical business cycle combined with a comparison of the United States and Britain during the
crisis of 1907. This final chapter, although cast as a description, comes closer than anything else
Mitchell wrote to representing his "model" of the business cycle.
Here Mitchell described something approaching a true cycle: Expansion was followed by
contraction and contraction by expansion, with some regularity. The expansion, which would
diffuse widely through the economy, automatically produced forces – falling profits resulting
from the pressure of costs on prices and tensions in the money market – that inevitably produced
a contraction. The contraction, which would also diffuse widely, then produced changes in
relative prices, such as a fall in costs relative to final product prices, which produced expansion.
Friedman and Schwartz agreed that adjustments in relative prices would reverse contractions, so
that in the end the economy would return to full employment, but they viewed the forces
depressing the economy as random shocks, rather than as the inevitable products of expansions.
A long-term statistical portrait of the economy, to put it somewhat differently, had the
appearance of a cycle, and the language of cycles could be used to describe the economy, but
only the forces making for recovery were truly inherent in the system.10
Mitchell did not argue that money was the central element in the business cycle. The
cycle, according to Mitchell, was a complex and recurring phenomenon dependent on a wide
range of factors, especially the interaction of wages, prices, and profits. Mitchell, however, did
accord money an independent and important role in the cycle, and he cited historical events such
as the increase in the world stock of gold after 1896 and the banking crisis of 1907 to make his
point.
In future years Mitchell served as the first director of the National Bureau of Economic

7

Research, and became a major public economist. He also remained a highly productive scholar.
In 1927 he published Business Cycles, the Problem and its Setting, which provided a much richer
empirical description of the business cycle than the 1913 volume, but did not attempt to push the
analysis of the causes of the cycle further. In 1946 Mitchell and Burns published Measuring
Business Cycles. In 1951 the NBER published posthumously an unfinished manuscript that
Mitchell was working on at his death in 1948, What Happens During Business Cycles, a
Progress Report. Each of the studies completed after 1913 contained new empirical data, and
new discussions of the timing of the business cycle. However, Mitchell never produced an
explicit analysis of the causes of the cycle to replace his 1913 effort.
Each topic that Mitchell addressed in his 1913 volume – prices, wages, employment,
national income, money, interest rates, and so on – became a project at the National Bureau of
Economic Research. A researcher was assigned the task of accumulating data – the Bureau had a
strong preference for monthly data – and turning points (from contraction to expansion and
expansion to contraction) were identified in the economy as a whole (reference cycles) and in
individual series (specific cycles). The specialists then analyzed the relationships between
specific cycles and reference cycles. Friedman and Schwartz completed some work of this kind,
Friedman and Schwartz (1963a), and they had intended to do an entire volume on money and
business cycles. This goal, however, was never reached. In the end they completed three
volumes: the Monetary History (1963), Monetary Statistics of the United States (1970), and
Monetary Trends in the United States and the United Kingdom (1982).
In the Monetary History episodes were treated chronologically, and the focus in each
discussion was on whether there was a relationship between changes in monetary policy and
changes in the economy. Differences from one episode to another in the time between changes in

8

monetary policy and responses were, for the most part, not addressed in detail. This issue was
addressed in some of the related work and surely would have been addressed in the volume on
cycles.
The reasons for Mitchell's decision not to revise his 1913 description of the cycle are
unclear. Perhaps he was simply waiting for the full flowering of the empirical work at the Bureau
that he had set in motion. Money is a good example. Given the prominent role played by money
in his 1913 account of the cycle, it made sense to wait until the Bureau’s money project had
clarified the role of money before revising his description. In the end, Mitchell's failure to
produce a revised description of the business cycle, and his concentration on data led to a telling
criticism of Mitchell and the Bureau. Burns and Mitchell (1946) was criticized by Tjalling
Koopmans (1947) as “Measurement without Theory,” a label that would trouble the Bureau and
its workers for years to come. Friedman's (1950) essay "Wesley C. Mitchell as an Economic
Theorist," which I will discuss below, was written partly to reverse the negative image of
Mitchell that had developed from Koopmans's criticism.
In 1941, in lieu of a new theoretical treatment of the business cycle, Mitchell republished
the third part of his 1913 book with "betterments in wording and correction of an arithmetical
blunder." (1959 [1913], p. Vii) Therefore, the third part of this early volume contains the fullest
available description of how Mitchell viewed the cycle and the role he assigned to money. The
quotations here will be from the 1959 printing, the first paperback edition.
Friedman clearly held Business Cycles (1913), if not all of Mitchell’s later work, in high
regard.11 In a response to a letter from mathematician Edwin B. Wilson for a list of works
Friedman considered "thoroughly good" in the sense that they used theory as a way of organizing
facts, and facts as a way of modifying theory, Friedman composed a list of five. Business Cycles

9

(1913) was at the top list, although Friedman did not indicate that his choices were listed in
order. (Stigler, 1994, 1200). The list also included, in second place, Burns and Mitchell's
Measuring Business Cycles (1946). Much later Friedman would say that the 1913 volume "was a
book," but the 1927 volume was not, referring to the lack of a theoretical framework in the later
volume. (Friedman 2002).
Friedman's understanding of Mitchell's approach recognized both strengths and
weaknesses. In a letter to Burns offering comments on Burns's (1949) description of Mitchell's
career, Friedman described Mitchell’s approach as follows.
In truth, Mitchell’s great and overwhelming genius was in his unparalleled capacity for
bringing together an enormous mass of material, putting it into systematic form, and
giving an orderly, lucid, and meaningful account of it. This capacity is demonstrated no
less in his expositions of empirical material – The History, Gold etc., – than in his
expositions of theoretical literature – part I of both Business Cycle Volumes, The Role of
Money in Economic Theory, Types of Economic Theory. But this virtue inevitably
carried with it a vice. He did such a masterful job – both intellectually and in literary form
and style – that he misled both himself and his readers into taking his descriptions as
explanations. I cannot emphasize too strongly that this vice (surely too strong a word)
was an inescapable a corollary of the virtue. Nor need I emphasize that this comment is a
very different from saying that analysis or theory were absent. They played a crucial role.
They provided the organizing principle for the descriptions; and the descriptions
themselves were analytical descriptions.12
One quantitative index of the influence of particular authors on the Monetary History is
the number of times they are cited in the text. Table 1 shows the top six authors, and by way of
contrast, some prominent authors who were not cited. By this criterion Mitchell, the most
frequently cited author (next to Milton Friedman) was the most influential. Citations to Mitchell
significantly outdistance those to Irving Fisher and other monetarists. Hayek, Keynes, and
Schumpeter were not cited. Citations, of course, are a crude index of influence. Ideas may be so
widely accepted that no citation is necessary; a source of data may be cited repeatedly. A book in
one's own library may be cited often; a book in the university library may be cited once. To go

10

deeper I develop 5 propositions that summarize Mitchell's main conclusions about the role of
money in the business cycle and show that these propositions also encompass the main findings
of Friedman and Schwartz.

3. From Mitchell to Friedman and Schwartz
Briefly these propositions can be described as follows: (1) there are changes in money
that are independent of the business cycle, (2) these changes are regularly associated with
changes in economic activity, (3) money therefore causes changes in economic activity, (4) while
money influences the business cycle, so do many other things, and (5) changes in bank-lending
rates are an important part of the transmission mechanism. Below I have placed my summary of
Mitchell's conclusions in italics, and my summary of how Friedman and Schwartz extended
Mitchell's conclusions underneath. I show that Friedman and Schwartz strongly reinforced
Mitchell's conclusions on the first three issues with new data and arguments. Friedman and
Schwartz did not break new ground on the fourth issue, the role of non-monetary forces, which
was outside their assignment, although they discussed a wide range of non-monetary forces. On
the last issue, the role of bank lending, Friedman and Schwartz reached a different conclusion
from Mitchell. Friedman and Schwartz emphasized a direct channel running from changes in
money to changes in national income, while Mitchell emphasized a channel that ran through
bank lending and credit markets. It is interesting in this respect that one of the main differences
of Friedman and Schwartz with their close allies Alan Meltzer and Karl Brunner was over
whether credit market effects should be ignored, and that the most widely accepted addition to
the Friedman and Schwartz interpretation of the Great Depression, the influential work of Ben
Bernanke (1983) restores the role of bank lending to the central role in the monetary transmission
11

process.
My propositions, although designed for the purpose of comparing Mitchell with Friedman
and Schwartz, are closely related to the propositions Friedman and Schwartz used to summarize
their findings. In their concluding chapter Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, 676) identified 4
principal findings: (1) "changes in the behavior of the money stock have been closely associated
with changes in economic activity," (2) "the interrelation between monetary and economic
change has been highly stable," (3) "monetary changes have often had an independent origin,"
and (4) "in monetary matters, appearances are deceiving." My propositions (1) – (3) cover
Friedman and Schwartz's (1) – (3). Their fourth proposition was also adumbrated by Mitchell
(1959 [1913], 1-2) who noted that observers usually attributed the revival of business from a
contraction to "happy accidents" and missed the underlying forces that tended to make for
recovery.
Here then are what I believe to be Mitchell's main conclusions about the role of money in
the business cycle.
(1) There are different types of money – gold, paper money issued by the government,
paper money issued by banks, and bank deposits. The amounts of gold and paper money issued
by the government are relatively independent of the business cycle, while the amount of deposits
is highly dependent on the business cycle. Paper money issued by banks is an intermediate case.
(Mitchell 1959 [1913], 50-52).
Mitchell was content to look at each component of the stock of money separately and was
skeptical about the wisdom of adding them up. Friedman and Schwartz, on the other hand, were
determined to add up assets and produce an estimate of the total quantity of money. Friedman
and Schwartz, however, preserved the most important aspect of Mitchell's analysis of the supply

12

of money by introducing the distinction between high-powered money and low-powered money.
This distinction preserved Mitchell's main point and clarified how gold and paper money issued
by the government (high-powered money) differed from bank deposits (low-powered money).
Friedman and Schwartz set out their formal analysis of the supply of money in Appendix B
(1963b, 780-789) of the Monetary History, and included sections on the supply of money in most
chapters, typically labeled "factors accounting for changes in the money stock."13 I will consider
their analysis in more detail in section 5.
Philip Cagan (1965) carried out much of the analysis of the supply of money in his
Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money, 1875-1960. Although published two
years after the Monetary History, Cagan’s manuscript was at hand when Friedman and Schwartz
were writing the Monetary History. Friedman and Schwartz cite this unpublished study 9 times
(see Table 1) and an earlier study by Cagan, “The Demand for Currency Relative to Deposits,”
three times. Clearly, Cagan deserves much of the credit for pushing forward this aspect of
Mitchell's analysis.
(2) Changes in the stock of money have been associated with predictable changes in
economic activity. Increases in money have been associated with economic expansions and
inflation; decreases with contractions and deflation.
Mitchell based his findings in Business Cycles mainly on his reading of the period 1890
to 1911, although his earlier work on the Civil War and postbellum periods must have played a
role as well. The events of most interest to monetary historians during the period 1890 to 1911
were the inflation from 1896 to 1911 and the financial panics in the United States in 1893 and
1907. His interpretations of these events were one of the main sources of his conclusions about
the role of money in the business cycle.

13

Mitchell argued, for example, that increases in the supply of gold influences the business
cycle. In Mitchell's words, (1959 [1913], 52)
An abundant supply of gold favors a revival of business activity by giving the banks
liberal reserves and thereby increasing their ability to lend credit at moderate rates of
interest. This feature of the situation grows more important as the revival ripens into
full prosperity. … That is, an increasing supply of gold favors the continuance of
prosperity by retarding the accumulation of one of the stresses characteristic of one
of its later stages --- namely, tension in the money market.
At a later point in his discussion Mitchell (1959 [1913], 138-39) was more explicit in
referring to the period after 1896, and in pointing to an effect on prices.14
Hence such an increase in the world’s production of gold as has been going on in
recent years tends to cut short and to mitigate depressions as well as to prolong and
to intensify prosperity. By thus altering somewhat both the intensity and the relative
duration of these two phases of business cycles, it tends to an upward direction to
those long-period movements of the price curve in which the years of depression and
of prosperity are averaged.
Friedman and Schwartz also analyzed the effect of the increase in world gold production
at the turn of the century. They agreed with Mitchell that the gold discoveries increased longterm inflation.
The proximate cause of the world price rise [from 1897 to 1914] was clearly the
tremendous outpourings of gold after 1890 that resulted from discoveries in South
Africa, Alaska, and Colorado, and from the development of improved methods of
mining and refining. (Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 137)
They were skeptical, however, that rapid growth of the stock of gold had increased the
rate of growth of real income over a period of several business cycles, a claim that might be read
into Mitchell's claim that economic expansions had been lengthened and contractions shortened.
One piece of evidence was their comparison of the period 1903-1913, a period of "moderately
stable growth" with 1882-1892. (Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 186-7) There was a substantial
difference in inflation: the national income deflator fell at a rate of 2.0 percent per year from

14

1882-1892, but rose at a rate of 2.0 percent per year from 1903 to 1913. There was not, however,
a dramatic difference in the growth of the real economy: real income rose 3.5 percent per year
from 1882 to 1892 and 3.3 percent per year from 1903 to 1913. (Friedman and Schwartz 1963b,
185).15
Mitchell also stressed that banking panics could disrupt economic activity, and he
included (1959 [1913], 74-122) a detailed comparison of the panic of 1907 in the United States
with the crisis – it never degenerated to the point where it could be called a panic – in Britain.16
A banking panic, Mitchell argued, produced disarray in the normal means of settlement, and
discouraged banks from making loans available in the normal way. Both developments produced
the contraction in economic activity.
The close association of banking panics with severe economic declines was also
important to Friedman and Schwartz. In the concluding chapter to the Monetary History they
noted that there had been six severe economic contractions in the period they examined: 1873-79,
1893-94, 1907-08, 1920-21, 1929-1933, and 1937-38. Each was marked by a decline in the stock
of money, and four – 1873-79, 1893-94, 1907-08, and 1929-33 – "by major banking and
monetary disturbances." (Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 677-78).
(3) History provides persuasive evidence that the direction of causation can run from
money to economic activity: History proves that money matters. This conclusion follows from
proposition (1), that some monetary changes are independent of current or future changes in the
economy, and proposition (2) that significant changes in economic activity are associated in a
predictable way with changes in money.
Mitchell, as far as I am aware, never developed this point explicitly. However, it is
implicit in his description of the business cycle. His treatment of the supply of gold in the 1890s

15

is a good example. As we saw above, Mitchell (1941 [1913], 138-39) concluded “that an increase
in the world’s production of gold as has been going on in recent years tends to cut short and to
mitigate depressions as well as to prolong and to intensify prosperity.” Mitchell also noted that
the increase in the gold supply was independent of the increase in prosperity. Mitchell (1941
[1913], 50-51) listed a number of ways that an economic expansion would decrease gold
production, for example by raising costs of production while the final product price remained
fixed, and a number of ways that an expansion would increase gold production, for example by
encouraging people to buy risky stocks in gold mines. He concluded, however, that “in recent
times” the net effect of cycle-related factors had
certainly been overshadowed by the influence of other factors not directly dependent
upon the condition of business – the progress of the mining and metallurgical
technique, the discovery of new gold deposits, and the maintenance of order in the
chief producing districts.
Clearly it followed that causation had run from the independent increase in the supply of gold to
the mitigation of depressions.
Mitchell’s contrast between the United States in 1907 and Britain in 1907 also points to a
causative role for money. The United States suffered a severe banking panic and a severe
contraction in economic activity. Britain suffered a milder monetary stringency and a milder
decline in economic activity, mainly because of timely actions by the Bank of England. The Bank
owed its commanding presence to a long historical process that was largely independent of
business conditions in 1907. It followed that monetary policy was an independent influence on
the economy.
In his concluding chapter Mitchell (1959 [1913], 159) gave forceful expression to the
importance of a lender of last resort, and the need for one in the United States.

16

That occasionally crises still degenerate into panics in America, but not in Great Britain,
France, or Germany, arises primarily from differences in banking organization and
practice. In each of the three European countries the prevalence of branch banking and
existence of a central bank so organizes the banking system as a whole that reserves can
be applied when and where needed although they constitute only a small percentage of
aggregate demand liabilities of all the branches. In marked contrast to the policy of
American banks, the central bank not only carries a reserve far in excess of immediate
requirements in ordinary times, but also uses it boldly in times of stress.17
Friedman and Schwartz further developed the argument that historical details about
monetary institutions and the origin of monetary changes would illuminate the direction of
causation between money and economic activity. What is needed to show persuasively that
money matters are natural experiments, crucial experiments as Friedman and Schwartz style
them, occasions when the stock of money changed for reasons that were clearly independent of
contemporaneous or future economic changes in real income or prices.
The gold-based inflation from 1897 to 1914, stressed by Mitchell, also appears as a major
case study in the Monetary History. In fact, Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, 686) argue that this
episode provides the best evidence from their array of episodes on the direction of causation.
The clearest example [that the direction of causation may run from money to income;
my italics] is perhaps the monetary expansion from 1897 to 1914, which was
worldwide and reflected an increased output of gold. The increased output of gold
was partly a consequence of earlier decades of declining prices, which encouraged
gold production, and so speaks also for the mutual interaction between monetary and
economic changes. But clearly the monetary expansion cannot be attributed to the
contemporary rise in money income and prices. By itself, the rise in money income
and prices made for a reduced output of gold in the world at large and for an outflow
of gold from any single country in a gold standard world. If the common movement
of money and income was not purely coincidental, the direction of influence must
run from money to income.
Although natural experiments are the best evidence that history can provide, it is not the
only evidence. Even in the absence of a natural experiment, historical episodes can be compared
and contrasted, as Mitchell did when comparing the United States and Britain in 1907. In the

17

Monetary History Friedman and Schwartz confined themselves to the United States so for the
most part this kind of comparison could not be made.18 However, they could and did make
comparisons across time as when they compared the contraction of 1907-08 with the contraction
of 1929-1933.19 They were also able to compare experiences during major wars, something
Mitchell writing in 1913 could not do. Here Friedman and Schwartz (2963b, chapter 10, passim)
noted that prices rose more in World War I than in World War II, a fact consistent with the
degree of monetary expansion in the two wars, but not consistent with the degree of mobilization.
Although Friedman and Schwartz pressed the case for using history to prove causality
running from money to income, it was Philip Cagan who developed the argument in greatest
detail in Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money, 1875-1960, especially in
the penultimate chapter, “The Cause-and-Effect Relations Between Money, Prices, and Output.”
In his forward to Cagan’s book Friedman (1965) summarizes Cagan’s conclusions about the
causal role of money, and reports (1965, xxvii-xxviii) that “originally, we did not expect the
examination of the supply of money to provide evidence on such general issues as the causal
relation between money and prices.” Perhaps because Cagan’s monograph was published two
years after the Monetary History, Cagan’s detailed development of the case for using history to
prove that money influences the business cycle was frequently missed by the critics of Friedman
and Schwartz. Friedman's remark in the introduction to the Cagan volume also suggests that
Mitchell's recognition that some apparently important monetary changes were the result of forces
independent of the business cycle was not the direct inspiration for Cagan's analysis, although
Cagan (1965, 143-145) does discuss some of Mitchell's ideas about the money supply.
(4) The business cycle is the result of both monetary and non-monetary forces.20 Money
matters, but so do many other things.

18

Mitchell's list of important influences on the business cycle was long. Money was merely
one actor on a crowded stage. Friedman and Schwartz also assumed that there were many factors
affecting the business cycle. This statement may seem to contradict a commonly accepted view
that Friedman and Schwartz claimed that money explains everything. The common wisdom,
however, is simply mistaken. Like Mitchell, Friedman and Schwartz assumed that even in the
absence of mistakes in monetary policy that there would be a business cycle, sometimes a very
volatile business cycle, caused by other factors.
Friedman and Schwartz frequently describe the non-monetary forces influencing the
business cycle explicitly. Agriculture provides one example. Mitchell (1959 [1913], 2), noted
that in 1891 "Unusually large American crops of grain, sold at exceptionally high prices, cut
short what was promising to be an extended period of liquidation after the crisis of 1890, and
suddenly set the tide of business rising."21 And Friedman and Schwartz noted three cases in
which a "fortuitous combination" of favorable harvests in the United States and unfavorable
harvests in Europe boosted economic activity in the United States: 1879-1882, 1891, and 1896.22,
23

(Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 97-98, 107, 140).
The stock market is another source of non-monetary forces addressed by both Mitchell

and by Friedman and Schwartz. Mitchell (1957 [1913], 69-70) argued that a decline in stock
prices during the last phase of an economic expansion would set in motion forces that
contributed to the following recession. Costs would rise more rapidly than prices during the
expansion, squeezing profits, and putting downward pressure on stock prices. Reduced
valuations for firms, especially smaller firms, in turn would reduce the availability of credit, and
force cutbacks in production. Similarly, Friedman and Schwartz argued that the Crash of 1929
had depressed economic activity by reducing the willingness of consumers and business

19

enterprises to spend because the Crash "spread uncertainty where dazzling hopes of a new era
had prevailed." (Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 306-07).
In most cases, however, Friedman and Schwartz simplified their task by assuming a nonmonetary cycle that would continue even in the absence of monetary disturbances. The nonmonetary disturbances that often drove the economy off its full employment trend, and the
underlying tendency of a market economy to fight its way back to full employment, in other
words, were often assumed rather than described in detail. The decision to abstract from nonmonetary forces was justified by the division of labor at the Bureau. Friedman and Schwartz’s
assignment was to clarify the role of money in the business cycle; other forces were the province
of other investigators. Friedman and Schwartz's basic formula then was to describe how
monetary forces pushed or pulled a cycle determined by non-monetary forces.
In their discussion of the 1920-21 recession, for example, they write as follows.
(Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 237.)
The extraordinary disturbances of the World War I period certainly induced national and
international adjustments in the use of real resources on a far larger scale than is usual,
and were unquestionably a source of uncertainty. Those disturbances might well have
made it impossible to avoid a more than usually severe cyclical movement in this country,
though our experience after World War II demonstrated that this result need not follow.
But there can be little doubt that Federal Reserve policy [very large increases in the
discount rate] was a further and not unimportant factor contributing to the severity of the
movement.
In their discussion of the effects of monetary contraction in the early 1930s they write as
follows. (Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 313)
All in all, the figures for the first four or five months of 1931, if examined without
reference to what actually followed, have many of the earmarks of the bottom of a cycle
and the beginning of revival.
Perhaps if those tentative stirrings of revival had been reinforced by a vigorous
expansion on the stock of money, they could have been converted into sustained recovery.
But that was not to be.

20

The obvious implication is that there are other forces that make for recovery besides money, but
those forces are abstracted from the discussion. Part of the story was simply the inherent
tendency of a free market economy to right itself after a recession.
Another example of their treatment of the non-monetary cycle occurs in the discussion of
the 1937-1938 recession. Friedman and Schwartz attributed a great deal of damage to the
decision made by the Federal Reserve prior to the recession to double the required reserve ratios
of banks and to sterilize the inflow of gold. Nevertheless, they do not claim that there would have
been continued expansion in the absence of the change in monetary policy. Their statement
(Friedman and Schwartz, 1963b, 544) is far more circumspect, and assumes a business cycle that
is independent of monetary policy.
Consideration of the effects of monetary policy on the stock of money certainly
strengthens the case for attributing an important role to monetary changes as a factor
that significantly intensified the severity of the decline and also probably caused it to
occur earlier than otherwise.
And in discussing the recovery from this recession, Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, 545) write as
follows.
Recovery came after the money stock had started to rise. … Munich and the outbreak
of war in Europe were the main factors determining the U.S. money stock in those
years, as Hitler and the gold miners had been in 1934 to 1936. Doubtless, other
factors helped to account for the onset of recovery and for its pace, but the rapid
increase in the money stock certainly at the very least facilitated their operation.
Again, Friedman and Schwartz assume that “other factors,” left unnamed, influenced the
business cycle. Indeed, in this quotation the possibility that money was merely “facilitating”
other forces, Mitchell’s way of putting things, is acknowledged.
The continuity with Mitchell’s views cannot be allowed, of course, to obscure the
difference in emphasis. It is probably a fair conjecture that if Friedman and Schwartz and

21

Mitchell had been asked for a summary figures indicating the amount of business fluctuations
accounted for by independent changes in money Friedman and Schwartz would have produced a
higher figure than Mitchell.24 Mitchell, moreover, was not directly concerned in his work at the
Bureau with focusing on policy variables because in his day adherence to the gold standard and
the absence of a central bank eliminated the potential for short-term monetary policies. Much of
Friedman’s later writings focus on money, not because other factors don’t affect the business
cycle, but rather because of his belief that of the policy instruments available to the government,
money is by far the most important.
(5) Bank lending plays a central role in the transmission mechanism. When banks are
flush with reserves they extend loans, lowering interest rates and encouraging economic activity.
Recall again the statement quoted from Mitchell above about the impact of gold during
the period after 1897. In it Mitchell claimed that the way that an abundant supply of gold had
ameliorated fluctuations was “by giving the banks liberal reserves and thereby increasing their
ability to lend credit at moderate rates of interest.” Friedman and Schwartz ignored the banklending channel emphasized by Mitchell. Instead, Friedman and Schwartz emphasized a direct
channel running from a temporary excess of money holdings to increased spending.
Friedman and Schwartz do not explain why they rejected the bank-lending channel
stressed by Mitchell and other early theorists. Part of the explanation may be that concurrent
work on investment suggested that interest rate changes had little effect on investment spending.
Another part of the explanation may be that Friedman and Schwartz had already begun to work
out a description of the transmission mechanism from money to economic activity that relied on
a more direct channel connecting changes in money with changes in income. Their report on their
statistical findings published in the Review of Economics and Statistics (1963a) contained a

22

description of how an increase in money produced by an open market purchase would gradually
produce changes in portfolio holdings and affect economic activity. Interest rates would be
affected, but only as part of a larger process.
Friedman’s famous essay “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” published in 1969,
(although circulating some time before) carried this sketch a step further. Here he began with a
simple, and now famous, thought experiment: a helicopter flies over an economy that relies on
fiat paper money and drops more. Friedman concludes that in this simplified economy spending
will increase producing an increase in nominal income. If the economy is at full employment, the
result will be higher prices. He argues, moreover, that this conclusion holds even as more
sophisticated institutional arrangements are added to the model.25
Another reason that Friedman and Schwartz may have deemphasized the bank-lending
channel was empirical. In 1893 and 1907, the banking crises that most concerned Mitchell, the
crises were associated with high nominal interest rates, but in the early 1930s, a crisis of major
importance to Friedman and Schwartz, the crisis was associated with low nominal rates. In 1893
the stock market crash came in May 1893 and the banking panic in June. (Friedman and
Schwartz 1893, 108). The monthly commercial paper rate also reached its peak of 15 percent in
June, after averaging about four per cent in 1892.26 In 1907 the stock market slide began in
March and the first major bank failure occurred in October. The monthly commercial paper rate
hit its peak of 10 percent, nearly twice the 1906 rate, in November and December. In the 1930s,
however, events unfolded differently. The stock market crash occurred in October 1929 when the
commercial paper rate also peaked at a little over 6 percent. The onset of the first banking panic,
however, did not occur until a year later. And the commercial paper rate, which then stood at
about three percent, was in the midst of a long decline, that seemed to be unaffected by the

23

banking crisis.
To account for events in the early 1930s, therefore, Friedman and Schwartz were forced
to broaden their interpretation of the determinants of nominal interest rates. First of all, the rate
of interest was determined in the market for credit and therefore influenced by factors outside the
banking sector. The recession that began in the late twenties (and was perhaps intensified by the
stock market crash) reduced the demand for loanable funds and the rate of interest. The channels
running from changes in the stock of money to interest rates, moreover, were complex. The
supply of bank loans declined because of the runs on the banks and the associated increase in
bank reserve ratios, but the decline in economic activity produced by the decline in the stock of
money working directly on spending, reduced the demand for loans even more, and contributed
to the fall in economic activity.
For Friedman and Schwartz the complexity of the relationships between money and
interest rates argued against seeing interest rates as a simple indicator of the lending capacity of
the banks and against using interest rates as a guide to monetary policy. In the crucial period
1929 to 1932 nominal rates had given the misleading signal that monetary policy was "easy."
Avoiding the worst-case scenario, a repeat of the Great Depression, was a good reason for
focusing on the stock of money rather than nominal interest rates.
There were, it is true, other ways that interest rates could have been used as indicators of
monetary policy. Although not stressed in the Monetary History, the decline in the price level,
the result in part of the decline in the stock of money, lowered nominal rates while disguising the
increase in real rates. This argument suggests that real interest rates would have worked better
than nominal rates as an indicator of monetary policy in the Depression. Anna J. Schwartz (1981)
later drew attention to the rise in real rates, as Allan Meltzer (Meltzer 2003, 730) did more

24

recently. Meltzer also pointed to the rising spread between high risk and low risk assets, a
development that was also noted by Friedman and Schwartz (1963, 312), as an indication of the
need for monetary expansion.
Mitchell was not breaking new ground in emphasizing the bank-lending channel. The
debate between monetary economists who emphasized the bank-lending channel and those who
emphasized the quantity theory and a direct connection between increases in money and
increases in economic activity was heated throughout the nineteenth century. (Laidler 1004
[1999]). Mitchell, of course, was well aware of this debate. Laughlin, his thesis advisor at
Chicago, supported the banking school, and Mitchell had, as Friedman pointed out, an
unprecedented command of the economic literature as a whole.
The neglect of the bank-lending channel proved to be one of the many controversial
aspects of the Monetary History. Alan Meltzer and Karl Brunner, the most formidable allies of
Friedman and Schwartz when it came to monetary policy – it was Karl Brunner who coined the
term "monetarism" – consistently argued that the credit channel had to be included in models of
how monetary policy influenced the economy. (Brunner and Meltzer 1988).27
One of the few modifications of the Friedman-Schwartz view of the Great Depression
that has become widely accepted by economic historians, moreover, is the argument developed
by Ben Bernanke (1983) that the banking crises in the early 1930s produced changes in the
lending practices of banks that made the depression deeper and longer than it otherwise would
have been. Bernanke did not reject the possibility of the direct channel from money to income
stressed by Friedman and Schwartz, but he argued that the failure of banks and the destruction of
the value of collateral raised the cost of credit intermediation and depressed economic activity.
Bernanke (1983, 5) could find no “exact antecedents” for his work. While he is undoubtedly right

25

that there are no exact antecedents, one can point to a strong family resemblance between
Bernanke’s bank-centric description of the causes of the Great Contraction and Mitchell’s bankcentric descriptions of earlier panics such as 1907. Of course, by the time Bernanke wrote,
Mitchell’s work had ceased to have any direct influence on the profession.

4. The Chicago Connection
The Monetary History was an NBER book, but also a Chicago book. Friedman had
studied at Chicago, although his Ph.D. was awarded by Columbia, and he was a professor at
Chicago during the time he was working on the Monetary History. In Friedman's time as a
student at Chicago there were four professors whose work appears to have influenced the
Monetary History: (1) Henry Simons and (2) Lloyd Mints, both monetary theorists; (3) Jacob
Viner, an expert on international trade, history of economic thought, and other areas including
money; and (4) Henry Schultz, a pioneer in the estimation of demand curves.
In his NBER interview (Friedman 2002) remembered that he had taken courses with both
Mints and Viner, but not with Simons, although Friedman recalled that he knew Simons and had
read his work. All three were quantity theorists and in that sense, Friedman remembered, their
ideas provided the framework for the Monetary History. In Friedman's memory, the key figure
was Viner, whose one-quarter course opened Friedman's mind to the power of economic theory.
In the interview Friedman (2002) did not see much of a connection between his work with Shultz
and his work for the Bureau, although Friedman again emphasized his lack of introspection.
We can, however, conjecture influences of all four. One has to use the qualified phrase
"conjecture influences" because we do not have, for the most part, a trail of footnotes that leads
from the work of these scholars to the Monetary History, and because Friedman, who as noted
26

above describes himself as not very introspective, has not attempted to construct the links in
retrospect.
Simons's most important contribution to monetary economics was his famous distinction
between "rules" and "authority" in the conduct of monetary policy (Simons 1936). Simons argued
that it was better to bind the Federal Reserve with a specific rule, rather than follow the
undemocratic course of allowing it to use its discretion in setting monetary policy. Simons's
preferred rule was stabilizing the price level. He considered the rule of stabilizing the stock of
money or its growth rate, but thought that this rule would not work as long as close substitutes
for money were ubiquitous. Substantial institutional reforms would need to be undertaken, such
as his proposal for 100% reserve banking, before a monetary rule would be preferable to a price
rule. Friedman (1959), on the other hand, rejected a price rule, because it would be hard to hold
the Federal Reserve responsible for prices when they were influenced by so many non-monetary
variables, and preferred a monetary rule, discounting the problem posed by close substitutes for
money.
The Monetary History supported the case for a "Friedman Rule" by showing that a single,
consistently defined monetary aggregate, basically currency held by the public plus all deposits
held by the public in commercial banks, could explain over 90 years of monetary history in the
United States. The evidence, on this issue, was augmented in the companion volume, Monetary
Statistics of the United States (Friedman and Schwartz 1970). Over six hundred pages in length,
this volume not only described the methods by which Friedman and Schwartz estimated the stock
of money, fulfilling the Bureau mandate for a detailed report on how numbers were estimated,
but also presented detailed arguments and statistical evidence to show that their simple sum
monetary aggregate worked well throughout the period they examined. Thus, the Monetary

27

History and Monetary Statistics showed that Simons's concern that variations in the volume of
close substitutes for money, or variations in their degree of "moneyness," would undermine the
effectiveness of a rule based on a monetary aggregate was unwarranted.28
I am only aware, however, of one passage in the Monetary History that speaks explicitly
to the value of a monetary rule. In looking back at the Great Depression Friedman and Schwartz
note that the stock of money rose at an unusually rapid rate during the expansions from 1934 to
1936 and 1938 to 1941. Those unusually rapid increases, however, were justified by the
unusually rapid decline from 1929 to 1933. They conclude their analysis of the Great Depression
with the following passage. (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, 545).
How different the history of that fateful dozen years might have been if the money stock
had grown steadily at its average rate of 2½ per cent per year, let alone at the higher longterm historical rate, instead of first falling by one-third from 1929 to 1933 and then
doubling from 1933 to 1941.
A monetary rule whatever its failings, in other words, would avoid the worst-case scenario: a
repeat of the Great Depression.
Lloyd Mints, whom Friedman did study with at Chicago, is remembered mainly for his
analysis of the "real bills doctrine."29 (Mints 1938) This doctrine held that the goal of monetary
policy should be to increase or decrease the money supply in response to changes in the "needs of
trade." Moreover, the doctrine held that this goal could be realized by making sure that banks
confined their lending to the discounting of "real bills" – loans arising from the purchase of grain,
not loans arising from the purchase of land for speculation. One of the main problems with the
real bills doctrine, according to Mints, is that the nominal values of real bills will rise during
inflations and fall during deflations. Hence a monetary policy built on the real bills doctrine will
simply ratify inflation or deflation, rather than stabilizing the price level. Friedman and Schwartz

28

(1963b, 169) refer to Mint's critique of the real bills doctrine when they criticize the Federal
Reserve Act for partially incorporating ideas arising from the real bills doctrine. Overall,
Friedman and Schwartz cite Mint's book three times for various purposes.
Mints criticized the Federal Reserve for its handling of the Great Depression. (Mints et
al., 1946, 62-63, and Mints 1950). He pointed out that the Federal Reserve had permitted a
massive decline in the stock of money during 1929-1931 and argued that this decline had
contributed to the severity of the Depression. This point became a major conclusion in Friedman
and Schwartz's interpretation of the Great Depression, and one of the key points that generations
of economists have taken from the Monetary History. Mints's views on the role of Federal
Reserve in the Great Depression, it is possible, formed part of the background that shaped the
narrative in the Monetary History, but his views about the Federal Reserve’s behavior in the early
1930s are not cited explicitly.
Jacob Viner was also a sharp critic of the Federal Reserve's policy in the early 1930s. In a
symposium on Friedman’s work Friedman (1972, 939-40) expressed his admiration for Viner's
criticism of the Federal Reserve in the Depression and quoted extensively from Viner's public
lectures in the early years of the Depression. He notes, for example, that in a talk given in
Minneapolis on February 20, 1933 Viner strongly criticized the Federal Reserve.
It is often said that the federal government and the Federal Reserve system have practiced
inflation [an increase in monetary assets in Viner’s lexicon] during this Depression and
that no beneficial effects resulted from it. What in fact happened is that they made mild
motions in the direction of inflation, which did not succeed in achieving it, did not
succeed even in accomplishing 'reflation'; but which probably did slow up somewhat the
rate of price decline …At no time … since the beginning of the depression has there been
for so long as four months a net increase in the volume of bank credit outstanding. On the
contrary, the government and Federal Reserve bank operations have not nearly sufficed to
countervail the contraction of credit on the part of member and non-member [of the
Federal Reserve system] banks. (Viner quoted in Friedman 1972, 939-40)

29

Friedman (1972, 940) went on to point out the connection with the Monetary History.
Can anyone who knows my work read Viner's comments and not see the direct links
between them and Anna Schwartz's and my Monetary History (1963) or between them
and the empirical Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money (1956)? Indeed as I have read
Viner's talk for the purposes of this paper, I have myself been amazed to discover how
precisely it foreshadows the main thesis of our Monetary History for the depression
period, and have been embarrassed that we made no reference to it on that account.
Friedman's remarks it seems to me document the influence of Viner, and the other Chicago
monetarists, on the Monetary History. They also suggest that there may be links between other
works and the Monetary History, such as between Business Cycles and the Monetary History,
which cannot be established simply by reading footnotes, especially when the role of the earlier
work was not to provide specific facts but to set the stage for the latter work.
In addition to the monetary theorists at Chicago (Simons, Mints, and Viner) one can also
point to another figure as a possible influence on the Monetary History and the related work by
Friedman and Schwartz on money: Henry Schultz. To be sure, Schultz, whose magnum opus The
Theory and Measurement of Demand (1938) consisted of a series of studies of the demand for
agricultural products, may seem a strange choice as a major influence on monetary economics.
Nevertheless, Friedman did work closely with Schultz. Friedman served as Schultz's research
assistant in 1934, and at several points in The Theory and Measurement of Demand Schultz
acknowledges Friedman's contribution. More importantly, one can detect a number of parallels
between Friedman’s work and Schultz’s, especially in Friedman’s famous essay "The Quantity
Theory of Money – A Restatement.” (Friedman 1956).
Schultz took the theoretical ideas of Alfred Marshall and other theorists of demand and
restated them so that they could be tested using then current statistical tools. Friedman’s essay
can be read as a similar effort to take the ideas developed by Simons and Mints at Chicago, and

30

by Irving Fisher and other quantity theorists, and restate them so that they could be tested using
statistical methods.30
Perhaps the most important argument in Schultz's book was that ordinary least squares
could be used to identify the demand curve for an agricultural product. The supply of an
agricultural product, say corn, Schultz argued, varied a lot compared with demand because of the
weather, so an ordinary least squares regression of quantity of corn on the price of corn would
identify the demand curve.31 Friedman's strictly analogous argument was that the supply of
money varied a lot compared with demand, because, for example, governments frequently resort
to inflationary finance, and that therefore one can identify the demand for money with ordinary
least squares.
Schultz's decision to include only a the price of corn and the prices of a few close
substitutes in his demand function is strictly analogous to Friedman and Schwartz's decision to
include only a few variables including the own rate of return on money (for currency, the rate
inflation) and the rates of return on bonds and equities in the demand function for money.
When faced with plausible alternative estimates of the supply of corn, Schultz solved the
problem by choosing the estimate that was most highly correlated with the price of corn.
Friedman and Schwartz applied the same empirical approach to choosing the best estimate of
money. They constructed a series of plausible alternatives – M1 which included currency and
demand deposits, M2 which included currency and all deposits at commercial banks, M3 which
included additional money-like assets, and so on – and chose the estimate M that was most
highly correlated with income. This approached is spelled out in Monetary Statistics, and
provides the basis for using M2 in the Monetary History.

31

Finally, just as Schultz’s ultimate purpose was to use his estimates to evaluate the effects
of New Deal agricultural policies, such as output restrictions; Friedman and Schwartz's ultimate
purpose was to use his estimates to evaluate the effect of alternative monetary policies.
The issue of what influence non-Chicago economists, especially Keynes, had on
Friedman and Schwartz became extremely contentious. In the opening section Friedman claimed
in his1956 paper that he was merely developing Chicago's "oral tradition;" Keynes was not
mentioned. This contention was attacked by Don Patinkin (1969, 1972, and 1975) and Harry
Johnson (1971) who saw the reference to an oral tradition that apparently included interest rates
in the demand for money as a way of bringing in Keynesian ideas without mentioning Keynes. It
would take us too far afield to go in to the details of this debate. However, we should note that
Friedman had his defenders as well as detractors. Frank Steindl (1990) pointed out that Simons
had referred to the oral tradition at Chicago in a review published in 1935 of a book by Currie on
monetary conditions in the early 1930s. And George Tavlas (1998) showed that Friedman's
approach was anticipated in the work of Knight and Mints.
Further evidence of the Friedman's deep understanding of Mitchell, and of the way that
the Chicago emphasis on economic theory shaped that understanding, is to be found in
Friedman’s admiring (1950) essay “Wesley C. Mitchell as an Economic Theorist,” to which we
alluded above.

5. Friedman’s Mathematical Restatement of Mitchell’s Theory
In this essay Friedman provided a mathematical model of Mitchell’s theory of the
business cycle. If we look closely at this model, the starting point of the Monetary History is
clear. In what follows I have used the symbols that Friedman and Schwartz used in later work
32

because these symbols are likely to be more familiar, rather than the symbols Friedman used in
his original essay. I have also suppressed some of the nonmonetary equations in the MitchellFriedman model.32 Friedman, for example, modeled Mitchell’s conclusions about the important
role of final product prices and costs in determining profits and the level of investment spending.
Here, however, I will concentrate on Friedman’s attempt to model Mitchell’s conclusions about
the relationships between the monetary variables and other sectors of the economy. I will,
however, consider three equations Friedman included that describe a simple Keynesian multiplier
model. The inclusion of these equations was a precursor to Friedman’s (1970a) attempt to find a
simple “common model” that could be specialized as a Keynesian or Monetarist model.
Define the following terms.
Y = total national income
C = consumption (induced expenditures)
I = investment (autonomous expenditures)
H = high-powered money (gold or paper money issued by the government)
= Cp + R
Cp = currency in the hands of the public
D = deposits in the hands of the public
M = money = Cp + D
d

M = money demanded
s

M = money supplied
R = bank reserves = currency held by banks
b = the bank’s ratio of deposits to reserves = D/R

33

b* = the bank’s desired ratio of deposits to reserves
p = the public’s ratio of deposits to currency = D/ Cp
= a shift term for a financial panic
i = the rate of interest
Let us start with the banks. By definition the actual ratio of deposits to reserves is
(1)

b = D/R

Based on Mitchell’s empirical observations Friedman assumed the desired amount of deposits
created by banks per dollar of reserves, b*, to be a function of the current level of income, and
the presence or absence of a banking panic.
(2)

b* = f1(Y, )

The variable is my addition, a shift term introduced to clarify how a banking panic would affect
the economy. The partial derivative of b* with respect to income, f11, is assumed to be positive.
When income increases in a cyclical expansion, lending opportunities improve, and so banks
reduce the amount of reserves they wish to keep behind each dollar of deposits. The partial
derivative of b* with respect to a panic, f12, is assumed to be negative: in a panic banks want
higher reserves to protect themselves against runs, so they reduce lending.
The interest rate, i, is assumed to be dependent on the relationship between the actual and
desired ratios of the banking system.
(3)

i = f2(b* - b)

The derivative f21 is assumed to be negative. If the desired bank ratio exceeds the actual bank
ratio banks will increase lending, and increased lending will lower interest rates. Equation (3) is
part of the bank-lending channel that Mitchell stressed, Friedman and Schwartz downplayed, and

34

recent research has again brought forward.
There is also a demand for money equation. This relationship became central to Freidman
and Schwartz’s thinking about the role of money.
d

(4)

M = f3(Y, i)

Friedman adopts the standard assumptions that f31 is positive, because money is a normal good,
and f32 is negative, because the interest rate is the cost of holding money. In later work, for
example (Friedman 1956) and (Friedman and Schwartz 1982), Friedman and Schwartz
elaborated on this simple equation, and took into account wealth, the interest paid on deposits,
inflation, and other variables. The estimation of demand for money equations for a time was a
major cottage industry for economists.
The ratio of deposits to currency is a function of the level of income, and the panic shift
term.
(5)

p = f4(Y, )

The partial derivative of p with respect to income, f41, is assumed to be positive – as income
increases the demand for deposits grows relative to currency because deposits require more
sophistication, but are capable of handling larger and more complex transactions. And the partial
of derivative of b with respect to the panic shift, f42, is negative – in a panic people want highpowered money.
s

Finally if we combine the definitions of M , H, b, and p, from the initial list of variables
we can derive an equation explaining the stock of money in terms of its “determinants.”
s

(6) M = H*b(1+p)/(b+p)
This is, with some changes in symbols, is equation (12) of Appendix B of the Monetary History.
35

Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, 791).
On one level this equation is merely an identity derived by manipulating the definitions of
s

M , H, b, and p. 33 However, equation (6) can also be viewed as an equation that explains the
relationship between the stock of money and the business cycle. It elegantly separated the
determinants of the stock of money during Mitchell's era into elements Mitchell identified as
independent of the business cycle from elements he identified as dependent. H includes gold,
greenbacks, and national banknotes. The amount of gold, although influenced by economic
conditions, was also subject to important influences that were independent of the business cycle
such as the discovery of new gold fields and the discovery of new technologies for securing gold
from gold ore. The government determined the amount of greenbacks outstanding. The third
component of high-powered money, national banknotes, is a more complex case.
Mitchell, as we noted above, thought that bank issued currency was an intermediate case
because at the time he was writing national bank notes were backed by Federal government
bonds. Friedman and Schwartz wrestled with this issue as well. Ultimately they decided to
include bank-issued currency in their definition of high-powered money. They (1963b, 780-81)
pointed out that national bank notes had to be backed by Federal government bonds, were
guaranteed by the Federal government, and that after 1874 the Treasury had "control over the
amount outstanding, through its decisions that determined the volume of bonds bearing the
circulation privilege and the interest coupon on them."34 The last consideration echoes Mitchell's
emphasis on supply independence.
If we take the total derivative of (6) we get the following.
s

s

(6’) dM /M = dH/H + [p/(b+p)]db/b + [p(b-1)/(1+p)(b+p)]dp/p
This equation – equivalent to equation (22) in Appendix B of the Monetary History (Friedman
36

and Schwartz 1963b, 794) – shows that the stock of money will increase if the amount of highpowered money increases, the amount of deposits banks create with each dollar of reserves
increases, or the amount of deposits that the public wants to hold relative to each dollar of
currency it holds increases.35
Suppose that we also take the total derivatives of equations (4) and (5), and combine with
(6’). To keep things simple, suppose that we also assume that is zero (there is no panic), and
that the interest rate i, the bank money ratio b, and the public's money ratio p are fixed. Then we
have a quantity theory model specialized to show the effect of an increase in high-powered
money.
(7) dY/dH = [b(1+b)/(b+p)](1/f31)
A change in high-powered money, H, is multiplied by the money multiplier, [b(1+b)/(b+p)], to
become a change in the total stock of money, and that amount in turn is multiplied by velocity,
1/f31, to become a change in income. An influx of gold, for example, would increase H and raise
nominal incomes.
Similarly, we can derive the effect of a financial panic on the level of economic activity
through its effects on the stock of money. To keep things simple in this case we can hold H, the
amount of high-powered money, b, the bank ratio, and i, the interest rate constant. With those
assumptions we have a simple quantity theory simplified to show the effect of a financial panic.
2

(8) dY/d = f42 /{f31 - f41[H(b-1)b/(b+p) ]}
This expression is more complex. The sign of the numerator is negative because f42, the effect of
a banking panic on the demand for deposits relative to currency, is negative. The sign of the
denominator, however, is in principle ambiguous because the effect of income on the demand for

37

money f31 and the effect of the fall in income on the demand for bank money f41 are both positive.
If f31 is sufficiently large compared with f41, dY/d , the effect of the banking panic on income will
be negative. Equations (6), (7) and (8), are the workhorses of the Monetary History, although
only (6) is developed explicitly. Most of the discussions in the Monetary History are, in other
words, descriptions of why the stock of money changed, and of how the changes in the stock of
money produced changes in the economy.
To see the bank-lending channel that Mitchell stressed, we can combine equations (2) and
(3) with the “Keynesian” part of the Mitchell-Friedman model. First we have a simple definition
of income as a sum of consumption and investment.
(9) Y = C + I
Consumption is assumed to be a simple function of the level of income.
(10) C = f5(Y)
where, of course, f51 >0. And investment is assumed to be a function of the rate of interest.
(11) I = f6(i)
where, f61 <0.
Combining the equations (2) and (3) with (9), (10), and (11) yields a simple MitchellFriedman-Keynes model that emphasizes the bank lending channel. Perhaps the most interesting
case is a financial panic. Taking the total differentials of equations (2), (3), (9), (10), and (11) and
rearranging terms yields.
(12) dY/d = (f12 f21 f61)/(1- f51 – f11 f21 f61)
This expression, although somewhat complex, is clearly negative; a panic reduces income. The
numerator is negative because it is the product of the negative effect of the panic on the banking
38

system's desired ratio deposits to reserves (f12), the negative effect of lower desired depositreserve ratios on interest rates (f21), and the negative effect of higher interest rates on investment
(f61). All this is multiplied by 1/ (1- f51 - f61 f21 f11) which is simply an augmented form of the
simplest Keynesian multiplier 1/(1- f51).
The next step would be to derive the full impact of a financial panic on economic activity
by combining the direct channel, emphasized by Friedman and Schwartz, and modeled in
equation (8), and the bank-lending channel, emphasized by Mitchell, and modeled in equation
(12). The resulting equation, however, is quite complex and does not suggest new insights.
To sum up, the elements that Friedman included in his later efforts to develop a formal
model of the role of money – a supply of money function that distinguishes between highpowered and low-powered money, a set of general equations that can be specialized as a
Keynesian or Quantity Theory model, and the direct connection between money and income –
can be found in his 1950 model of Mitchell’s theory of the business cycle. Mitchell’s emphasis
on a bank-lending channel, although modeled in the 1950 paper, however, never played a role in
the Monetary History or related work.

6. The Critics of Monetarism
When looking at the early reception of the Monetary History it is hard to escape the
realization that much of the difference between Friedman and Schwartz and their critics resulted
from the willingness of Friedman and Schwartz to follow Mitchell in placing great weight on
historical evidence; while the critics were looking for mathematical models and statistical tests.
The critics were sure that Friedman and Schwartz had failed to understand that correlating

39

changes in money and changes in economic activity proved nothing about causation. Money
might be correlated with national income because changes in money caused changes in national
income, or because changes in national income caused changes in money, or because money and
changes in national income were produced by some third factor, say changes in fiscal policy. In
short, Friedman and Schwartz had confused correlation with causation. Their critics recognized
that at some points Friedman and Schwartz had noted the hazards involved in attempting to read
causation from charts of economic variables, but the critics insisted that Friedman and Schwartz
had nevertheless fallen into this trap.
Perhaps the best known attack on the work of Friedman and Schwartz along these lines
was James Tobin’s 1970 paper, “Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?” Tobin
presented an “ultra Keynesian” model, in which money didn’t matter, that fit Friedman and
Schwartz’s findings regarding the relationship between money and income better, according to
Tobin, than did a “Friedman model.” Tobin (1970, 301) mentioned the Monetary History as a
source of evidence, but focused his firepower on the timing evidence. In his reply Friedman
(1970b) stressed the important role that the historical evidence played in his conclusion that
money mattered.
Peter Temin in his book Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? (1976) made
a point similar to Tobin's. Temin’s criticism has been especially influential among economic
historians. Temin (1976, 3) argued that Chapter 7, “The Great Contraction, 1929-33,” of the
Monetary History could be discussed independently from other chapters. After a close reading
Temin found that the chapter was merely a detailed description of how the supply of money and
other variables had changed during the contraction. He then draws the following conclusion from
this finding. (1976, 30-31).

40

Friedman and Schwartz's main conclusions are that the level of income fell as
sharply as it did in the early 1930s because of a massive fall in the stock of money.
This stock in turn fell because of sustained effects of multiple banking crises, that is
because of a restriction in the supply of money. But an account of the supply of
money cannot be taken for an account of the stock of money unless it is known that
demand plays no role. The Monetary History appears to have been designed to show
just this – but it turns out to be a narrative based on such an assumption, not an
argument for it. Friedman and Schwartz referred elsewhere [in other articles and
books] to The Monetary History to show that the stock of money was historically
determined independently of income and that the correlation between money and
income therefore must be interpreted to mean that movements in the stock of money
determine movements of income. The Monetary History, however, does not provide
independent evidence for this proposition. It follows that the hypothesis about the
cause of the Depression must be regarded as unproven as well.
Temin’s preferred methodology for determining causative relationships is to look for the
contrasting predictions of different hypotheses. What he terms the money hypothesis (the
Friedman and Schwartz hypothesis), he argues, predicts a rise in short-term interest rates during
1929-33, and what he terms the spending hypothesis (the Keynesian hypothesis) predicts a fall in
short-term rates. Since short-term rates fell, he concludes that monetary forces did not cause the
Depression. The emptiness that Temin finds in the Friedman and Schwartz narrative of 1929-33
is the result, partly, I believe, of a decision to reject the Mitchell-Friedman-Schwartz method for
determining causation. Friedman and Schwartz's chapter 7 is indeed essentially a narrative
constructed on the assumption that money matters. It contributes to the case for believing that
money matters only to the extent that it provides another data point. For Friedman and Schwartz
the conclusion that the decline in the stock of money aggravated the contraction, and that it could
have been prevented by appropriate policy measures, follows from the whole body of evidence.36
The independence of monetary change from the cycle that Temin is looking for is clearly
useful for establishing that monetary change has an effect on the economy. Natural experiments
such as the increase in gold at the turn of the century are more informative than the more

41

endogenous movements in the stock of money in the great contraction. However, every case adds
or subtracts something from the persuasiveness of the overall generalization. The claim, to put it
somewhat differently, that the patient would have perked up if given “Buck-You-Up-O” cannot
be proven by looking at one case.37 This claim can only be demonstrated by looking at a “large”
number of cases.

7. Monetary Clinicians
Both Mitchell and Friedman and Schwartz can be likened, to push the analogy further, to
medical researchers undertaking a clinical study. Case histories are written up and compared, and
reasonable inferences are made. Patients who were treated with Buck-You-Up-O recovered more
quickly from the influenza than patients who were not treated. A natural experiment may
increase the persuasiveness of the argument. A pair of identical twins came down with the flu.
The twin who was given Buck-You-Up-O recovered more rapidly than the twin who was not
treated. Still, a clinical study cannot have the authority of a large-scale double-blind scientific
experiment. Even twins may differ because of life experiences, because they contracted different
versions of the flu, or for other reasons.
Each episode that Mitchell or Friedman and Schwartz investigate is a separate case study.
The Great Contraction taken as a whole, as we noted above, is essentially a single case history.38
By itself it proves little as Temin and others have noted. The patient was suffering from a severe
case of the flu, the doctor failed to give the patient Buck-You-Up-O, and the patient took a long
time to recover. This case is consistent with the idea that Buck-You-Up-O reduces the severity of
the flu, but not much evidence in itself.
The natural point at which to draw conclusions about causation from case studies is at the
42

point when cases can be compared and contrasted. This is what Friedman and Schwartz do in
their final chapter, “A Summing Up,” although comparisons that bear on causation are scattered
throughout their narrative. In the final chapter Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, 693-94) compare
the 1929-33 contraction with the 1907 crisis.
Comparison of the 1907 banking panic under the earlier system [before the Federal
Reserve] and the closely similar liquidity crisis which began in late 1930 offers
strong evidence for this judgment. [that the 1930 crisis was handled badly] If the
earlier system had been in operation, and if everything else had proceeded as it did up
to December 1930, the experience of 1907 strongly suggests the there would have
been a more severe initial reaction to the bank failures than there was in 1930,
probably involving concerted restriction by banks of the convertibility of deposits in
to currency. The restriction might have had more serve initial effects toward
deepening the economic contraction than the persistent pressure on the banking
system that characterized late 1930 and early 1931 had. But it would have cut short
the spread of the crisis, would have prevented cumulation of bank failures, and
would have made possible as it did in 1908 recovery after a few months.
This, it seems to me, is a reasonable way for a clinician to proceed. The two patients,
patient number 1907 and patient number 1930, appear to have been suffering from the same
condition, a severe case of the flu. Patient number 1907 was given Buck-You-Up-O; patient
number 1930 was not. Patient number 1907 suffered a sharp intensification of his condition, but
then recovered quickly; patient number 1930 suffered a prolonged decline and slow recovery.
Therefore, this comparison suggests that Buck-You-Up-O is effective. A reasonable argument, of
course, is not a foolproof argument. Another clinician might conclude that patient 1907 was
suffering from a less severe case of the flu. And the constitution of the two patients was not
identical: Patient number 1930 may have been weaker. When looking at the Great Depression we
can easily create reasons why the 1930 case may have been different from the 1907 case. For one
thing, the 1930 case occurred after World War I had shaken confidence in the gold standard and
other fundamental economic institutions.39

43

The next step in a clinical study is to summarize the weight of the evidence suggested by
the individual cases. It is interesting that here Friedman and Schwartz (1963b, 689-90) turn
explicitly to a medical analogy.
The strength of the evidence furnished by those three quasi-controlled experiments
[the adoption of restrictive monetary policies in 1920, 1931, and 1936] can be made
clearer by an analogy. Suppose we had the medical records of 42 married couples (to
match the 42 years of Federal Reserve history from 1919 to 1942 …) Suppose 3 men
and 4 women were found to have a specified illness; suppose 3 of the 4 women turn
out to be the wives of the 3 men with the same illness. The presumption that the
illness was contagious would certainly be very strong.…
In fact the probability of this result by chance, according to Friedman and Schwartz would be 1
in 2,870.40
Although Friedman and Schwartz were more systematic and self conscious than Mitchell
about using historical case studies as raw materials for drawing conclusions about the
effectiveness of monetary policy, their inductive methodology is clearly an extension of the
practices of Mitchell and the other business cycle researchers at the National Bureau.

8. Explaining the Continuity.
The institutional origins of the Monetary History explain the similarities in methodology,
the clinical methodology. Mitchell sketched the forces producing a typical business cycle in
Business Cycles (1913). At the Bureau researchers then explored in detail each area that Mitchell
had subjected to a preliminary investigation. These studies followed the "Bureau Methodology."
Long time series of monthly data (where possible) were constructed, the behavior of the time
series during the Bureau-defined cycles was computed, and an explanatory narrative was
constructed. Although the Monetary History is the best known of these studies, many became
classics. Friedman and Schwartz themselves made use of Frederic Macaulay's (1938) study of
44

interest rates, Burns's (1960) study of production, John Kendrick's (1961) study of productivity,
and of course, Simon Kuznets's studies of national income, such as Kuznets (1961).
The similarity in methodology between Business Cycles and the Monetary History,
however, does not explain the similarity in conclusions. What then explains it? Could the
similarity in conclusions have been the result of some sort of subtle pressure to reinforce the
founder's conclusions? This seems unlikely. The atmosphere at the Bureau was one in which
researchers were free to pursue their research wherever it led. Some of Friedman and Schwartz's
early decisions, moreover, went against Bureau tradition. Friedman and Schwartz, as we noted,
rejected Mitchell's bank-centric view of the transmission mechanism. Friedman and Schwartz,
moreover, emphasized the growth rate of the stock of money in some of their work, and linked
changes in the growth rate of money with turns in the business cycle. Anna Schwartz (2001)
recalled that this decision did not receive a warm reception from Burns, the President of the
Bureau, or Geoffrey Moore, the research director. Finally, in response to an earlier draft of this
paper that had suggested a direct influence Anna J. Schwartz wrote that any influence “… must
have been subliminal. I am unaware of any discussion I had with Milton linking Mitchell’s work
with ours.”41
Friedman and Schwartz, moreover, were familiar with many ideas besides those produced
by the National Bureau. Frank Steindl (2004) has shown, based on lecture notes from a course
that Friedman gave at the University of Wisconsin, that from his earliest days in academic life
Friedman was familiar with a remarkably wide range of literature on the business cycle. It seems
unlikely then that a lack of the awareness of alternatives to Mitchell’s vision prevented Friedman
and Schwartz from moving away from his positions. Indeed, as we showed above, Friedman and
Schwartz rejected Mitchell’s emphasis on the credit channel, and incorporated ideas drawn from

45

the Chicago economists of the 1930s.
It was probably simply the findings uncovered in the course of their research that in the
end reinforced the conclusions Mitchell had reached based on his exploration of the period 18901911. The underlying stability of monetary relations, in other words, explains the continuities
between Business Cycles and the Monetary History. If a small clinical study showed that taking
aspirin reduced the frequency of heart attacks, and if a larger longer study of the effects of taking
aspirin on the frequency of heart attacks confirmed the results of the earlier study, the
explanation for the similarity in findings would simply be that taking aspirin did in fact reduce
the frequency of heart attacks.

9. Conclusions
One of the best ways to understand what Friedman and Schwartz accomplished in the
Monetary History is to compare it with (what I argue) is its closest predecessor in methodology
and in many of its most important conclusions: Wesley Clair Mitchell's Business Cycles (1913).
Five propositions, I have argued, summarize the key similarities and differences.
(1) Like Mitchell, Friedman and Schwartz concluded that some changes in the stock of
money could occur for reasons independent of current and future changes in economic activity.
The increase in the supply of money beginning in the late 1890s that resulted from the discovery
of new gold fields in South Africa and other countries and new methods of extracting gold from
ore was cited both by Mitchell and by Friedman and Schwartz as a clear example of an
independent change in the stock of money.
(2) Like Mitchell, Friedman and Schwartz found that changes in the stock of money had
important effects on the economy. They agreed with Mitchell, for example, that the expansion of
46

the stock of gold from 1897 to 1914 had raised prices.
(3) Like Mitchell, Friedman and Schwartz argued that the combination of independent
changes in money, which could be observed by looking closely at the historical circumstances in
which changes in money occurred, and the resulting changes in the economy provided persuasive
evidence that money mattered. Friedman and Schwartz, building on important work by Philip
Cagan, however, were more systematic and self-conscious about this inference.
(4) Like Mitchell, Friedman and Schwartz worked on the assumption that money was
merely one of many factors producing business cycles. Although Friedman and Schwartz did not
attempt to provide a comprehensive discussion of the non-monetary factors that affected the
business cycle, they discussed non-monetary forces when they believed them to be important. For
example, they discussed the coincidence of good harvests in the United States with poor harvests
in Europe on a number of occasions in the nineteenth century, the stock market crash of 1929,
wartime mobilizations and demobilizations, and the rise of labor unions in the 1930s. Most
importantly, they assumed that there was an inherent tendency for the economy to recover from
recessions. In many cases, however, they simply assumed the existence of a nonmonetary cycle
and described how it was affected by changes in monetary policy. The role of monetary policy
during a recession, for example, might be described, as was the effect of the decrease in the stock
of money in the 1937-38 recession as “a factor that significantly intensified the severity of the
decline.” (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963b, 544).
(5) Unlike Mitchell, Friedman and Schwartz ignored the bank-lending (credit) channel.
Mitchell thought that changes in bank lending policies were the most important part of the
transmission mechanism linking changes in money with changes in economic activity. An
unexpected increase in bank reserves would produce an increase in bank lending, a fall in interest

47

rates, and an increase in investment that would generate increased economic activity. Friedman
and Schwartz, on the other hand, stressed a direct channel from increased money to increased
economic activity and downplayed the bank-lending channel. It is interesting to note that one of
the major developments in monetary economics in the decades after Friedman and Schwartz
wrote was a partial return to the bank-centric view of the role of money.
Both Mitchell in 1913 and Friedman and Schwartz in 1963, to sum up, can be described
as monetary clinicians. They summarized cases in which the economic patient was given more or
less money, and described the reasons for the change in the dosage and the consequences. They
understood that one case study taken separately – the increase in the gold supply after 1896, the
panic of 1907, or even the Great Contraction from 1929-1932 – could prove little by itself. They
argued, however, that taken together the case studies suggested persuasive generalizations about
the role of money in the business cycle.
The Monetary History, of course, was not simply an extension of Business Cycles (1913).
Friedman and Schwartz employed their own ideas, and those of other economists including
major figures at Chicago in the 1930s – Henry Schultz, Jacob Viner, Lloyd Mints, and Henry
Simons – to sharpen the analysis. The influence of Schultz can be seen mainly in the statistical
analysis that was not reported in the Monetary History, but rather in other places, such as
Monetary Statistics (1970) and Monetary Trends (1982). However, the other Chicago economists
left an imprint on the Monetary History itself. From Viner and Mints came, among other things,
the sharp criticism of the Federal Reserve for failing to stop the contraction of the stock of money
in the early 1930s – monetary policy had failed not because it was not effective, but because it
was not tried. From Simons came the important distinction between "rules versus authorities" in
the conduct of the monetary policy. Friedman and Schwartz did not follow Simons in opting for a

48

price-stability rule over a money supply rule. However, they addressed his concerns when they
considered alternative policies in the depression. "How different the history of that fateful dozen
years might have been if the money stock had grown steadily at its average rate of 2½ per cent
per year, let alone at the higher long-term historical rate, instead of first falling by one-third from
1929 to 1933 and then doubling from 1933 to 1941." (Friedman and Schwartz 1963b, 545).
Although the ideas came from many sources, the methodology of the Monetary History,
to reiterate, came from Mitchell and the NBER. As Bordo and Schwartz (2004) show, Friedman
usually summed up the methodological differences between himself and his many critics by
explaining that he was a Marshallian while his critics were Walrasians. He, like Marshall,
preferred using simple abstract theories to explain facts, rather than complex general equilibrium
models. The term Marshallian is undoubtedly the best simple description of the methodology
underlying his work as a whole. When it comes to characterizing the methodology of the
Monetary History taken separately, however, the best one-word term may be Mitchellian.

49

Table 1. Sources Cited in the Monetary History
Author

Book or Article

Citations

The top six authors
Friedman, Milton

Various articles and books

29

Mitchell, Wesley C.

On Civil War era (10), on business cycles (7)

17

Sprague, Oliver M.W.

14
12

Warburton, Clark

History of Crises under the National Banking
Act
Determinants and Effects (9) and “The Demand
for Currency” (3)
Various journal articles

Fisher, Irving

Various articles and books

4

Cagan, Phillip

11

Other
Hayek, Friedrich A.

Prices and Production, etc.

0

Keynes, John Maynard

The Treatise on Money, The General Theory,
etc.
Business Cycles, etc.

0

Schumpeter, Joseph A.

0

Note: I have excluded responses to criticisms or comments on earlier drafts. I have
also excluded references to the diaries of Charles S. Hamlin and George L. Harrison
that Friedman and Schwartz cited repeatedly in their analysis of monetary policy
making during the Great Depression.
Source. Friedman and Schwartz (1963b)

50

References
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propagation of the Great
Depression.” American Economic Review, Vol. 73 (3), (June): 257-76.
Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz. 2004. "IS-LM and Monetarism." In The IS-LM Model:
Its Rise, Fall, and Strange Persistence. Annual Supplement to Volume 36, History of Political
Economy, eds. Michel De Vroedy and Kevin D. Hoover, 217-239.
Brunner, Karl and Allan H. Meltzer. 1988. "Money and Credit in the Monetary Transmission
Process." The American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the OneHundredth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association (May): 446-451.
Burns, Arthur F. 1949 “Wesley Mitchell and the National Bureau.” In The Twenty-Ninth Annual
Report, National Bureau of Economic Research. New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 3-55.
Burns, Arthur F. and Wesley C. Mitchell. 1946. Measuring Business Cycles. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Cagan, Phillip. 1958. “The Demand for Currency Relative to the Total Money Supply.” The
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 66, No. 4. (Aug.), pp. 303-328. Reprinted as National Bureau
of Economic Research, Occasional paper 62, 1958.
__________. 1965. Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money, 1875-1960.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research; distributed by Columbia University Press.
Friedman, Milton. 1943. “The Spendings Tax as a Wartime Fiscal Measure.” The American
Economic Review, Vol. 33, No. 1, Part 1 (Mar.): 50-62.
__________. 1950. “Wesley C. Mitchell as an Economic Theorist.” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 58, No. 6. (Dec.): 465-493.
__________. 1956. “The Quantity Theory of Money – a Restatement.” In Studies in the Quantity
Theory of Money, edited by Milton Friedman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
_________. 1959. A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University Press.
_________. 1969 [1964]. "Monetary Studies of the National Bureau," in The National Bureau
Enters Its 45th Year, 44th Annual report, 7-25. Reprinted in The Optimum Quantity of Money and
Other Essays, ed. Milton Friedman, Chicago, Aldine Publishing Co., 261-84.
__________. 1965. “Forward.” In Phillip Cagan, Determinants and Effects of Changes in the
Stock of Money, 1875-1960. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research; distributed by
Columbia University Press, xxiii-xxviii.
51

__________. 1969. “The Optimum Quantity of Money.” In The Optimum Quantity of Money:
and Other Essays ed. Milton Friedman, Chicago, Aldine Publishing Co., 1-50.
__________. 1970a. "A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 78, No. 2. (Mar. - Apr.): 193-238.
__________. 1970b. “Comment on Tobin” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, No. 2.
(May): 318-327.
__________. 1972. "Comments on the Critics." The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 80, No.
5 (Sep. - Oct.): 906-950.
__________. 1993. "The 'Plucking Model' of Business Fluctuations Revisited." Economic
Inquiry, Vol. 31 (2): 171-77.
__________. 2002. [Interview with Claudia Goldin and Larry Katz for the NBER, NBER
Historical Archives, URL: www.nber.org.]
Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. 1963a. “Money and Business Cycles” (in Part I:
The State of Monetary Economics). The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 45, No. 1, Part
2, Supplement. (Feb.): 32-64.
__________. 1963b. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, for the NBER.
__________. 1965. The Great Contraction, 1929-1933. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.
__________. 1970. Monetary Statistics of the United States: Estimates, Sources, Methods. New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
__________. 1982. Monetary Trends in the United States and the United Kingdom, their
Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates, 1867-1975. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Goodhart, C. A. E. 1964. "Review: A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960."
Economica, Vol. 31, No. 123 (1964): 314-318.
Hammond, J. Daniel. 1996. Theory and Measurement: Causality Issues in Milton Friedman’s
Monetary Economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirsch, Abraham and Neil de Marchi. 1990. Milton Friedman: Economics in Theory and
Practice. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

52

Johnson, Harry G. 1965. “A Quantity Theorist's Monetary History of the United States."
The Economic Journal, Vol. 75, No. 298 (June): 388-396.
__________. 1971. "The Keynesian Revolution and the Monetarist Counter-Revolution." The
American Economic Review, Vol. 61, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty-Third Annual
Meeting of the American Economic Association (May): 1-14.
Johnston, Louis D. and Samuel H. Williamson. 2005. “The Annual Real and Nominal GDP for
the United States, 1790 - Present." Economic History Services, October, URL:
http://www.eh.net/hmit/gdp/.
Kendrick, John W. 1961. Productivity Trends in the United States. New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Koopmans, Tjalling C. 1947. “Measurement Without Theory.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 29, No. 3 (Aug.,): 161-172.
Kuznets, Simon. 1961. Capital in the American Economy; its Formation and Financing.
Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, for the NBER.
Laidler, David E. W. 1991. "Karl Brunner's Monetary Economics--An Appreciation." Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 23, No. 4 (Nov.): 633-658.
__________. 1993. "Hawtrey, Harvard, and the Origins of the Chicago Tradition." The Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 6. (Dec.): 1068-1103.
__________. 2004 [1999]. "Variations on a Two-Interest-Rate Theme." In Macroeconomics in
Retrospect: The Selected Essays of David Laidler. Cheltenham, U.K. and Northampton, Mass.:
Elgar, 161-79.
Laughlin, J. Laurence. 1911. "Causes of the Changes in Prices Since 1896." The American
Economic Review, Vol. 1, No. 2, Papers and Discussions of the Twenty-third Annual Meeting
(Apr.): 26-36.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1994. "Review of Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz's A Monetary
History of the United States, 1867-1960." Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 34 (1): 5-16.
Macaulay, Frederick Robertson. 1938. Some Theoretical Problems Suggested by the Movements
of Interest rates, Bond yields and Stock Prices in the United States. New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Meltzer, Allan H. 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1, 1913-1951. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Mints, Lloyd W. 1945. A History of Banking Theory in Great Britain and the United States.

53

Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.
__________. 1950. Monetary Policy for a Competitive Society. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Mints, Lloyd W., Alvin H. Hansen, Howard S. Ellis; Abba P. Lerner; and M. Kalecki. 1946. "A
Symposium on Fiscal and Monetary Policy." The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 28,
No. 2 (May): 60-69.
Miron, Jeffrey A. 1994. "Empirical Methodology in Macroeconomics: Explaining the Success of
Friedman and Schwartz's A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960." Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 34 (1): 17-25.
Mitchell, Wesley Clair. 1903. A History of the Greenbacks, with Special Reference to the
Economic Consequences of Their Issue: 1862-65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
__________. 1908. Gold, Prices, and Wages under the Greenback Standard. Berkeley: The
University Press.
__________. 1913. Business Cycles. Berkeley: University of California Press.
__________. 1927. Business Cycles, the Problem and its Setting. New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
__________. 1951. What Happens During Business Cycles, A Progress Report. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
__________. 1959 [1941, 1913]. Business Cycles and Their Causes. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Patinkin, Don. 1969. "The Chicago Tradition, The Quantity Theory, and Friedman." Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking Vol. 1, No. 1. (Feb.): 46-70.
__________. 1972. "Friedman on the Quantity Theory and Keynesian Economics." The Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 80, No. 5 (Sep.): 883-905
__________. 1979. "Keynes and Chicago." Journal of Law and Economics 22 (October): 213-32.
Rutherford Malcolm. 2001. “Walton Hamilton, Amherst, and the Brookings Graduate School:
Institutional Economics and Education.” Department of Economics, University of Victoria,
Discussion Papers, April. URL: http://web.uvic.ca/econ/ddp0104.pdf.
Shapiro, Harold T. 1965. "Review: A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960."
The Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Nov.): 606-608.
Schultz, Henry. 1938. The Theory and Measurement of Demand. Chicago, Ill.: The University of

54

Chicago press.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1939. Business Cycles: a Theoretical, Historical, and Statistical
Analysis of the Capitalist Process. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, inc.
Schwartz, Anna J. 1981. “Understanding 1929-1933,” in K. Brunner (ed.), The Great Depression
Revisited. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 5-48.
__________. 2001. [Interview with Claudia Goldin for the NBER, NBER Historical Archives,
URL: www.nber.org.]
__________. 2004. “Why A Monetary History Has Had a Long Life.” Cato Journal. Vol. 23 (3),
Winter, 353-55.
Sherman, Howard. 2001. “The Business Cycle Theory of Wesley Mitchell.” Journal of
Economic Issues, Vol. 35, No. 1, (March): 85-97.
Shoup, Carl, Milton Friedman, and Ruth P. Mack. 1943. Taxing to Prevent Inflation: Techniques
for Estimating Revenue Requirements. New York: Columbia University Press.
Simons, Henry C. 1936. "Rules versus Authorities in Monetary Policy." The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 44, No. 1 (Feb.): 1-30.
Steindl, Frank G. 1990. "The "Oral Tradition" at Chicago in the 1930s." The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 98, No. 2 (Apr.): 430-432.
__________. 1995. Monetary Interpretations of the Great Depression. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
__________. 2004. “Friedman and Money in the 1930s.” History of Political Economy, Vol. 36
(3), (Fall): 521-31.
Stigler, Stephen M. 1994. “Some Correspondence on Methodology between Milton Friedman
and Edwin B. Wilson; November-December 1946.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 32,
No. 3 (Sep.): 1197-1203.
Tavlas, George. 1998. “Was the Monetarist Tradition Invented?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. Vol. 12 (4) (Fall): 211-22.
Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York: Norton.
Tobin, James. 1970. “Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 84, No. 2. (May, 1970), pp. 301-317.

55

__________. 1970. “[Comment on Tobin]: Rejoinder.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 84, No. 2. (May), pp. 328-329.

56

Endnotes
1

I broached some of the ideas that I develop here in Rockoff (2000).

2

A JSTOR search over all journals and years for the combination of Friedman and "Monetary
History" produced 557 hits, while Keynes and "General Theory" produced 2,524. Since 1990 the
figures are 192 and 369. A search of the Social Science Citation Index for the period from 1997
forward revealed 349 citations to the Monetary History and 960 to the General Theory.
3

Robert E. Lucas (1994), Jeffrey Miron (1994), and Anna J. Schwartz (2004) discuss the
continuing influence of the Monetary History on monetary economics.
4

Although Friedman and Schwartz modestly styled their work A Monetary History, most
commentators, friend and foe alike, refer to The Monetary History, a usage I will follow.
5

Reviews by C. A. E. Goodhart (1964) and Harold T. Shapiro (1965) struck similar notes.

6

Burns had been an influential teacher of Friedman at Rutgers University where Friedman had
done his undergraduate work. It was Burns who initially brought Friedman into the Bureau.
(Friedman 2002.)
7

Stewart, an influential economist at the Federal Reserve Board and a director of the National
Bureau, had many connections to Mitchell. Before WWI he had taught a course at Amherst on
business cycles based on Mitchell's work, shortly afterwards he had worked with Mitchell on a
project on wartime prices, and in 1922 he became Director of the Division of Research and
Statistics at the Federal Reserve Board on Mitchell's recommendation. (Rutherford 2001).
8

My summary of Mitchell’s career is based on Burns (1949).

9

Its full title is A History of the Greenbacks, with Special Reference to the Economic
Consequences of Their Issue: 1862-65.
10

Friedman developed this idea further in his "plucking" model – the economy was like a string
on a musical that could be plucked but would return to its normal shape. (Friedman 1969 [1964],
1993).
11

Friedman took Mitchell's course on business cycles at Columbia but remembered it as dull
[Friedman 2002].

57

12

Letter to Arthur Burns, April 12, 1949, Milton Friedman Papers, uncatalogued. Daniel
Hammond located this important letter and shared it with me. It is suggestive that the term
"analytical description" that Friedman used here to describe Mitchell's work is similar to the term
"analytical narrative" that Friedman and Schwartz used to describe the suggestion made by
Walter Stewart that led to the Monetary History.
13

Friedman and Schwartz reserved the term “money supply" for the change in the stock of
money.
14

Here Mitchell was reaching a conclusion different from his advisor at Chicago, Laughlin, who
was a critic of the quantity theory, and firmly rejected (Laughlin 1911) the notion that the
increase in the stock of gold had produced the increase in prices. Laughlin preferred to attribute
the increase in prices to increases in costs and increases in monopoly.
15

A recent estimate of GDP preserves the contrast. Real GDP rose 3.6 percent per year from
1882 to 1892, but only 2.6 percent per year from 1903 to 1913. The GDP deflator fell .8 percent
per year from 1882 to 1892, but rose 1.7 percent per year from 1903 to 1913. (Johnston and
Williamson 2005).
16

In Mitchell's view the crisis in Britain never degenerated into a panic.

17

Mitchell’s claim that the Bank of England carried reserves far in excess of its immediate
requirements was an exaggeration. In some cases, such as the Barings Crisis (1890), the Bank
had to rely on the cooperation of private British banks or foreign central banks to make adequate
reserves available.
18

In the Monetary Trends Friedman and Schwartz (1982) compared American and British
experiences, although in that volume the emphasis was more on statistical than historical
analysis. In the Monetary History Friedman and Schwartz did not systematically examine events
in other countries although they did, occasionally, refer to experiences in other countries. For
example, they (1963b, 352) used a comparison of the U.S. and Canada in the Great Contraction
to analyze the effects of bank failures. (There were many in the U.S. and none in Canada.)
19

The conclusions in this case are somewhat different. Comparing the mildness of 1907-08 in
England, which had a central bank, with the severity of 1907-08 in the United States, which
lacked a central bank, supports the case for central banking. Comparing 1907-08 in the United
States with 1929-33 in the United States raises doubts about central banking.
20

One is tempted to write "real and monetary forces" and to describe a "real cycle" that would
exist even in the presence of an optimal monetary policy. The term real business cycle, however,
has come to identify a line of thinking that would exclude some of the mechanisms that Mitchell
included in his list of non-monetary forces.

58

21

Mitchell (1959 [1913], 115) also thought that a large harvest sold at high prices had mitigated
the effects of the 1907 crisis in England.
22

Although the combination may have been fortuitous from the point of view of the economy,
there may be, of course, an underlying meteorological explanation.
23

In the last case Friedman and Schwartz were looking at the balance of payments, so the effect
on the economy they had in mind may have run from exports to the balance of payments to the
supply of gold to economic activity; in other words, a monetary channel.
24

Howard Sherman (2001) discusses many of the non-monetary components of Mitchell’s
analysis of the business cycle.
25

Students from my generation at Chicago – I started in 1967 – may remember Professor
Friedman asking his class in monetary economics, where the “optimum quantity” was a basic
text, why people who collected the cash dropped from the helicopter would immediately spend it
rather than hoard it. The answer that I was contemplating: “that’s what I would do,” although not
completely irrelevant, was not the correct answer. The correct answer was that since by
assumption the economy had already reached its long-run equilibrium, each person separately
had already achieved their desired ratio of money to income and therefore would feel free to
spend the additional cash.
26

There was a run-up in the fall of 1892, with the monthly rate peaking at 10 per cent in
December. The rate is the end-of-month 3-year commercial paper rate, available at
http://www.globalfinancialdata.com.
27

This paper sums up their views and contains references to some of their earlier writing on this
issue. Laidler (1991) provides a good retrospective account of Brunner's work.
28

In the postwar era there were changes in the banking system – the introduction of deposit
insurance, and the heavy investment by commercial banks in government bonds during the war –
that moved the system in the direction that Simons thought was necessary to make a money rule
workable.
29

In my time at Chicago, as I remember, the doctrine was always referred to as the "Fallacious
Real Bills Doctrine."
30

While working with Schultz, Friedman evidently read widely in the literature on the
measurement of demand curves. It was this literature, I believe, that is brought to bear in the
1956 paper. I am grateful to Dan Hammond for making the need to be careful at this point clear
to me.
31

Alternatively, one could regress price on quantity. Schultz paid close attention to measurement

59

error, and how measurement error would affect the elasticity estimates derived from regressions
of quantity on price compared with regressions of price on quantity. Friedman and Schwartz also
paid close attention to this distinction in their subsequent empirical research.
32

Five of the eleven equations in Friedman’s model concern the monetary sector.

33

By definition M=Cp+D and H = S+R. Dividing M by H, rearranging terms, and substituting b
for D/R and p for D/Cp yields equation (6).
34

Most of the bonds carrying the circulation privilege were held by banks.

35

Normally b will exceed 1 because normally banks lend out part of their deposits and hold only
fractional reserves.
36

Friedman and Schwartz, as David Laidler pointed out to me, may have encouraged the idea
that their discussion was intended as proof by itself that monetary forces had caused the Great
Depression by publishing Chapter 7 as a separate book, The Great Contraction, 1929-1933
(1965).
37

From P.G. Wodehouse.

38

In monetary history one can have cases within cases. In 1932 there was a brief time in which
the Federal Reserve deliberately switched to an expansionary policy of open market purchases of
bonds. Friedman and Schwartz drew attention to this case as a natural experiment on the
effectiveness of an expansionary policy within the confines of the Great Contraction.
39

This point was developed by Abraham Hirsch and Neil de Marchi (1990, 236-37).

40

The probability of the first sick husband being paired with a sick wife if the pairing is random
is 4/42. The probability of the second sick husband being paired with a sick wife if the pairing is
random and if the first sick husband was paired with a sick wife is 3/41. The probability for the
third sick husband being paired is 2/40. The probability of all three sick husbands being paired
with sick wives is therefore (4/42)*(3/41)*(2/40) = 1/2870.
41

Personal Email from Anna J. Schwartz, March 6, 2006.

60

