                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MINIMUM WAGES AND EMPLOYMENT:
       A REVIEW OF EVIDENCE FROM THE NEW MINIMUM WAGE RESEARCH

                                         David Neumark
                                         William Wascher

                                       Working Paper 12663
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12663


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2006




*Neumark is Professor of Economics at the University of California at Irvine, a Research Associate
at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and a Research Fellow at IZA. Wascher is Deputy
Associate Director in the Division of Research and Statistics at the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System. We thank Jennifer Graves for research assistance, and Dan Aaronson, Dale Belman,
Jared Bernstein, Mike Campolieti, Ana Rute Cardoso, Kenneth Couch, Wendy Cunningham, Harry
Holzer, Lazaros Karageorgiou, Andrew Leigh, William Maloney, Tom Michl, Pedro Portugal, Nicholas
Potter, Michael Reich, Joseph Sabia, Bradley Schiller, Per Skedinger, Walter Wessels, David Wise,
and an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments. The views expressed are the authors' and do not
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by David Neumark and William Wascher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Minimum Wages and Employment: A Review of Evidence from the New Minimum Wage
Research
David Neumark and William Wascher
NBER Working Paper No. 12663
November 2006, revised January2007
JEL No. J23,J38

                                             ABSTRACT

We review the burgeoning literature on the employment effects of minimum wages - in the United
States and other countries - that was spurred by the new minimum wage research beginning in the
early 1990s. Our review indicates that there is a wide range of existing estimates and, accordingly,
a lack of consensus about the overall effects on low-wage employment of an increase in the minimum
wage. However, the oft-stated assertion that recent research fails to support the traditional view that
the minimum wage reduces the employment of low-wage workers is clearly incorrect. A sizable majority
of the studies surveyed in this monograph give a relatively consistent (although not always statistically
significant) indication of negative employment effects of minimum wages. In addition, among the
papers we view as providing the most credible evidence, almost all point to negative employment
effects, both for the United States as well as for many other countries. Two other important conclusions
emerge from our review. First, we see very few - if any - studies that provide convincing evidence
of positive employment effects of minimum wages, especially from those studies that focus on the
broader groups (rather than a narrow industry) for which the competitive model predicts disemployment
effects. Second, the studies that focus on the least-skilled groups provide relatively overwhelming
evidence of stronger disemployment effects for these groups.

David Neumark
Department of Economics
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

William Wascher
Federal Reserve Board
Stop 80
Washington, DC 20551
william.l.wascher@frb.gov
                                                  -1-

I. Introduction

        For much of the past century, the minimum wage has been a controversial subject among

policymakers and economists in the United States. From even before its inception as a major element of

the 1938 Fair Labor Standards Act (1938), the minimum wage was a politically contentious issue, with

early attempts by the states to establish a wage floor declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court and

President Franklin Roosevelt’s first attempt to legislate a federal minimum wage in 1933 similarly struck

down. Eventually, however, Roosevelt prevailed and Congress passed the FLSA, setting the minimum

wage at 25 cents per hour.

        For economists, the new minimum wage represented a means of testing alternative models of the

labor market. Indeed, during the period immediately following passage of the FLSA, a fierce debate

raged between economists who claimed that the low-wage labor market at the time was best characterized

as a competitive market (the “marginalists”) and those who claimed that it was not (the

“institutionalists”), in which the implications of the minimum wage were a central focus (Leonard, 2000).

For example, Stigler (1946), while acknowledging that a higher minimum wage could theoretically raise

employment in a labor market characterized by monopsony, argued that the competitive nature of low-

wage industries suggested that the displacement of low-wage labor was a more likely outcome. In reply,

Lester (1947) dismissed Stigler’s model of competitive wage determination as inconsistent with existing

business practices and argued that “reasoning about labor markets as though they were commodity

markets seems to be an important explanation for erroneous conclusions on such matters as the minimum

wage” (p. 146). In the aftermath of this exchange, other economists began to accumulate empirical

evidence on the effects of the minimum wage, with much of this research suggesting that increases in the

wage floor were having adverse effects on the employment opportunities of low-skilled workers

(Goldfarb, 1974).

        Despite the unsettled debate within the economics profession, the Congress expanded coverage of

the minimum wage significantly during the 1960s and 1970s, and by 1975, more than 90 percent of the

workforce was effectively covered by the federal minimum wage, up from 63 percent in 1961 (Brown,
                                                     -2-


1999). Similarly, Congress steadily increased the minimum wage over this period from $1.00 per hour in

1960 to $2.30 by 1979, with the 1977 FLSA amendments further raising the minimum to $3.35 by 1981.

However, these changes were enacted in an environment of considerable discord among policymakers

about the appropriateness of raising the minimum wage, and the ongoing political debate about the costs

and benefits of a wage floor led the Congress in 1977 to create the Minimum Wage Study Commission to

“help it resolve the many controversial issues that have surrounded the federal minimum wage and

overtime requirement since their origin in the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938” (Minimum Wage Study

Commission, vol. 1, p. xiii).

        The Commission published its report in May 1981, calling it “the most exhaustive inquiry ever

undertaken into the issues surrounding the Act since its inception” (Minimum Wage Study Commission,

Vol. 1, Letter of Transmittal). Although not its only focus, the report included a lengthy chapter

summarizing the existing research on the employment effects of the minimum wage. This chapter was

based on a review of the literature by Charles Brown, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen (BGK), three of

the senior economists on the Commission staff. These authors subsequently published a revised version

of their review in the June 1982 issue of the Journal of Economic Literature, in which they summarized

the existing research as suggesting that “time-series studies typically find that a 10 percent increase in the

minimum wage reduces teenage employment by one to three percent” (p. 524). This range subsequently

came to be thought of as the consensus view of economists on the employment effects of the minimum

wage.

        Given this apparent consensus, economic research on the effects of the minimum wage came

virtually to a halt following the report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission and the publication of

BGK’s survey. However, by the end of the 1980s interest in this topic began to return. Two related

circumstances, in particular, seem to have stimulated renewed attention to the effects of the minimum

wage. First, the absence of any increase in the federal minimum wage from January 1981 until April

1990 resulted in more than a 30 percent decline in its value in real terms and led to a growing political

debate toward the end of the 1980s about the merits of raising the nominal minimum. Second, an
                                                    -3-


increasing number of state legislatures began to raise state-specific minimum wages above the federal

level in response to the lack of action by the Congress. These state-specific increases added to the

political debates about the merits of a mandated wage floor. Moreover, these developments also

increased the statistical variation in the policy variables traditionally used in minimum wage research,

offering a means of reexamining the evidence on which the existing consensus had been based.

        As a result of both the renewed prominence of the minimum wage in public policy debates and

the additional evidence that could potentially be used to study the economic effects of wage floors,

researchers in the early 1990s began to reexamine the effects of the minimum wage on employment. One

line of this research simply extended the earlier studies by adding more recent time-series data to the

sample period, employing, in some cases, new techniques developed by time-series econometricians to

take account of criticisms leveled at the specifications used in the earlier literature. However, a second,

and arguably more important, line of research attempted to use state-level variation in minimum wages

and economic conditions to estimate the employment effects of the minimum wage. Indeed, despite

improvements to the specifications of time-series models, the dearth of variation in the federal minimum

wage and the use of aggregate U.S. data to look for its effects continued to be viewed as shortcomings of

the existing body of research on the economics of the minimum wage (for example, Kennan, 1995), while

other economists raised concerns about the lack of a well-defined counterfactual in the aggregate time-

series studies, the potential endogeneity of changes in the federal minimum wage with respect to

aggregate labor market conditions, and the difficulty in choosing an appropriate set of control variables in

such studies (Card and Krueger, 1995a). Moreover, even aside from the problems with the aggregate

time-series studies discussed in the existing literature, the proliferation of state minimum wages set above

the federal minimum wage was rendering the aggregate time-series approach increasingly obsolete, both

from the perspective of correctly measuring the effective minimum wage and from the perspective of the

relevant question facing policymakers, which had shifted toward the advisability of raising minimum

wages at the state (or even local) level. This is even more true currently, when a record number of states

have minimum wages above the federal level.
                                                           -4-


           We focus our attention on this more recent literature, which has become known as the “new

minimum wage research.” Because the earlier literature on the employment effects of the minimum wage

was carefully and extensively summarized by BGK, it seems unnecessary to repeat that review in this

monograph. In contrast, there is no comprehensive review of the extensive literature that has developed

over the past fifteen years.1 We thus begin our review with the set of four papers that comprised the

initial round of the new minimum wage research on the employment effects of the minimum wage. We

follow that review with a discussion of the major conceptual and empirical issues that arose out of that

initial research, and extend our summary of the U.S. literature with a review of the extensive research that

examines more recent increases in minimum wage laws or otherwise extends the literature. We then

complete our review with a discussion of the empirical research on the employment effects of the

minimum wage in other countries, an area of inquiry that has also grown markedly over the past decade.

           Our intent in reviewing this literature is three-fold. First, much of the political debate

surrounding proposed changes in the minimum wage concerns the potential effects on employment.

Although we do not view that focus as entirely appropriate, the fact that the employment question takes

on such importance means that the answers ought to be based on a comprehensive survey of the literature,

recognizing that minimum wage effects may differ across different segments of the population and in

different economic circumstances and contexts. We therefore attempt to draw general conclusions about

the effects of the minimum wage on employment that are relevant to policymakers, pointing out, in

particular, in what context and for which workers the minimum wage will have consequences.

           Second, we hope that our review will help readers assess alternative models of the labor market.

The recent literature has reopened the debate about the appropriate theoretical model of the low-wage

labor market, with some of the empirical research characterized as rejecting the competitive model in

favor of other formulations. As we note throughout the monograph, economic theory often fails to make

an unambiguous prediction about the employment effects of minimum wages. Even in the neoclassical


1
    There are, however, papers offering critical summaries of some of the first wave of this literature. See, for
     example, Card and Krueger (1995), Kennan (1995), and Brown (1999).
                                                           -5-


model, the effect of the minimum wage on any given set of workers will depend on, among other things,

the elasticities of substitution across different types of workers and cross-elasticities of demand across

different types of goods. However, some empirical tendencies tend to match up better with one model or

the other, and we try to provide a sense of what these tendencies are.

           Third, many economists or policymakers perusing the existing literature may find it quite difficult

to decide what the evidence on minimum wages now says. More than 100 studies have been published on

the effects of minimum wage increases on employment since the 1990s. And, in addition to discordant

results, the findings from the newer research on minimum wages are summarized differently in different

places. In some cases, the new minimum wage research is described as failing to find evidence of

disemployment effects. For example, Bazen (2000) states that “(t)he latest studies of the experience of

the USA and the UK in general find no evidence of negative effects on youth employment” (p. 64).

Somewhat more cautiously, Flinn (2006) writes that “these recent studies have been particularly useful in

indicating that the “textbook” competitive model of the labor market ... may have serious deficiencies in

accounting for minimum wage effects on labor market outcomes ...” (pp. 1013-4). In contrast, others

summarize the findings as more ambiguous, suggesting that no conclusions can be drawn, and that

positive effects may be as likely as negative effects. Lemos (2004), for example, asserts that “there is no

consensus on the direction and size of the effect on employment” (p. 219), while Stewart (2002) notes

that some studies find employment effects to be “absent or positive” and that others find “significant

negative effects” (p. 585).2 In contrast, much of our own work tends to find negative employment effects

for the lowest-skilled groups. Given the differences in the conclusions one might draw depending on

what one reads, and the difficulties of wading through the mass of recent studies, we thought it would be

2
    In our view, groups advocating for minimum wage increases have—perhaps not surprisingly—made stronger
     statements. For example, Chapman, in an Economic Policy Institute report, asserts that “[T]here is no valid,
     research-based rationale for believing that state minimum wages cause measurable job losses” (p. 2). This claim
     appears to be based on a highly selective reading of the minimum wage literature based mainly on the New
     Jersey-Pennsylvania fast-food study (Card and Krueger, 1994). However, the literature on minimum wage effects
     in the United States is far broader than this one study, and clearly much of it does point to disemployment effects.
     Moreover, as discussed later, evidence on employment effects from a single sector is not necessarily informative
     about the employment effects of minimum wages more generally. Of course, advocacy groups opposing
     minimum wage increases also cite the research literature selectively, although we have not come across the same
     kind of misleading summary statements about the literature as a whole.
                                                      -6-


useful to present a comprehensive review of the more recent minimum wage literature that provides an

accurate accounting of the range of estimates in existing studies, and attempts to understand some of the

sources of differences in results across studies, in addition to determining what conclusions can be drawn.

          In putting together this review, we have intentionally foregone a formal meta-analysis in favor of

a traditional narrative review that attempts to provide a sense of the quality of the research and tries to

highlight and synthesize the findings that we regard as more credible. Given the many different types of

employment effects estimated in the literature, and the considerable variation in approaches and in the

quality of the research, lumping the studies into one meta-analysis does not seem the best way to make

sense of the literature. And meta-analysis is even less useful when the underlying theory does not provide

uniform predictions about the effects of the minimum wage in every study. Thus, while we recognize that

a narrative review introduces an element of subjectivity into the discussion, we felt that it would be more

useful to present our arguments and assessments of the evidence, and invite readers to form their own

opinions based on them. To assist in digesting what is a very lengthy review of the evidence, we have

collected nearly all of the studies we summarize into a set of four tables covering different types of

studies, including a brief summary of the minimum wage change variation and the group studied, the data

used, the results, and what we regard as the most important criticisms. In these tables, we highlight the

studies that we regard as providing the most convincing evidence on the employment effects of minimum

wages.

II. Origins of the New Minimum Wage Research

          The origins of the new minimum wage research date to November 1991, when the ILR-Cornell

Institute for Labor Market Polices and Princeton University’s Industrial Relations Section sponsored the

“New Minimum Wage Research Conference,” at which a new and innovative set of studies on the

economic effects of the minimum wage were presented and discussed.3 Subsequently, these papers, along

with an additional paper contributed after the conference, were published together in a symposium in the

October 1992 issue of the Industrial and Labor Relations Review.

3
    The conference was organized by Ronald Ehrenberg and Alan Krueger.
                                                       -7-


           Even fifteen years later, the papers included in this symposium provide a good representation of

both the range of analyses that have characterized the new minimum wage research and the mix of

empirical estimates generated by this research. In particular, the studies in the symposium included the

use of both state and time-series variation over relatively long sample periods (Neumark and Wascher,

1992), the use of regional variation in employment and wages surrounding a particular increase in the

federal minimum wage (Card, 1992a), an analysis of an increase in a particular state’s minimum wage

(Card, 1992b), and a survey of fast-food restaurants before and after an increase in the minimum wage

(Katz and Krueger, 1992).4 The findings from this research ranged from disemployment effects similar to

those comprising the earlier consensus (Neumark and Wascher) to no effect on employment (Card,

1992a) to a positive effect of the minimum wage on employment (Card, 1992b; Katz and Krueger).

Given the relative newness of the methods employed in the papers, all of the contributors to the

symposium were appropriately cautious about interpreting their results. But Ron Ehrenberg correctly

predicted that these papers would be “cited often in future policy debates over minimum wage

legislation” (Ehrenberg, 1992; p. 5).

III. Findings on Employment Effects on Less-Skilled U.S. Workers from the First Wave of the New

Minimum Wage Research

           We begin our review by summarizing the studies included in the ILRR symposium and a related

series of follow-on studies that appeared soon afterwards and that employed methods similar to this initial

round of studies. To help set the stage for our subsequent discussion of the literature, we find it useful to

separate these papers into two broad categories: (1) panel data studies that employed state-specific data

over time for the United States as a whole, and (2) case studies that focused on the effects of minimum

wage changes in specific states.




4
    The symposium also included a paper by Smith and Vavrichek (1992). However, this paper focused on the wage
     mobility of minimum wage workers rather than on employment effects and so is not included in our review.
                                                      -8-


Panel Data Studies

        In response to the increasing willingness of state legislatures to raise state-specific minimum

wages above the federal wage floor, two papers in the ILRR symposium—as well as a number of

subsequent studies—attempted to exploit both time and state variation in minimum wages to identify the

effects of the minimum wage on employment. In a broad sense, this approach applies the traditional

empirical specification used in the earlier time-series literature:

(1)     Yit = αMWit + Rit β + ε it

to a data set consisting of state-year observations on employment (Y); a minimum wage variable (MW);

and a vector of control variables (R) that may include state (i) and time (t) effects. The specification of

the minimum wage variable differs across studies, as does the set of control variables included in the

model and the method of estimation, issues to which we will return later. However, so long as changes in

the minimum wage are viewed as exogenous to the model, α can be interpreted as the effect of the

minimum wage on employment. This model is typically estimated using data for workers in demographic

groups or industries for which the minimum wage is more likely to be binding. In addition, this

framework has sometimes been applied to time-series/cross-section or longitudinal data on individuals.

        The first paper we consider is Card’s (1992a) study of the employment effects of the April 1990

increase in the federal minimum wage. Card recognized that differences in the distribution of wages

across states (in part due to differences in state minimum wage laws) meant that the effects of the federal

increase should be more apparent in low-wage states than in high-wage states. Taking advantage of this

variation, Card first regressed the change in the mean log wage of teenagers between the final three

quarters of 1989 and the final three quarters of 1990 on the fraction of teenagers in each state who earned

between $3.35 per hour and $3.79 per hour in 1989 and thus were more likely to be directly affected by

the federal minimum wage increase in 1990. The results indicated that mean teen wages rose more in

states where a greater fraction of teenagers were affected by the minimum wage increase, with the size of

the wage increases similar to what would be expected if the affected workers’ wages moved up to the new
                                                      -9-


minimum wage of $3.80 per hour; moreover, these results were robust to the inclusion of a control for

overall labor market conditions. In contrast, when Card regressed the change in state employment-to-

population ratios on the fraction affected variable (and a control for aggregate labor market conditions),

the results indicated no effect of the 1990 minimum wage increase on teen employment.

        The second such paper in the ILRR symposium is Neumark and Wascher (1992), in which we

used specification (1) to estimate the effects of changes in the minimum wage on the employment-to-

population ratio of teenagers (16-19 year olds) and the broader youth population (16-24), using a

relatively long sample period. Specifically, we used an annual panel of state-specific observations from

1973 to 1989 for large states and from 1977 to 1989 for smaller states. The minimum wage variable used

in this study was similar to the Kaitz index used in the earlier time-series literature, except that it

incorporated state-specific minimum wages when they were above the federal level. In particular, we

constructed a coverage-adjusted minimum wage for each state-year observation as the higher of the

federal or state minimum wage level, multiplied by federal coverage for the state, and divided by the

average wage in the state. In addition to state and year effects, the control variables included the

unemployment rate for men aged 25-64, the proportion of the population in the relevant age group, and, in

some specifications, a school enrollment rate for the age group.

        In contrast to Card’s paper, the results in our paper generally supported the earlier consensus that

increases in the minimum wage reduce employment among youths. In particular, employment elasticities

with respect to the minimum wage ranged from about −.1 to −.2 for teenagers and from −.15 to −.2 for the

youth population as a whole. In addition, we found that the presence of a youth subminimum in

particular states tended to reduce the impact of the minimum wage in those states, as the standard model

would predict.

The Case Study Approach

        The other major line of inquiry that emerged as part of the new minimum wage research consisted

of studies that focused on minimum wage increases in particular states. Two papers in the ILRR

symposium took this approach: Katz and Krueger’s study of the effects of the 1991 increase in the federal
                                                     - 10 -


minimum wage on fast-food restaurants in Texas, and Card’s study of the 1989 increase in California’s

minimum wage. The details of the empirical approach in this subset of the literature have varied. But a

unifying theme was the authors’ views that limiting the analysis to a particular state afforded the

opportunity to devise a natural experiment for studying the minimum wage increase because of the

availability of valid control groups with which to compare the group directly affected by the minimum

wage increase being studied. Although we disagree with that characterization—we would instead argue

that these studies are similar in principle to the panel data studies discussed above and differ primarily in

the construction of the control group rather than in the overall experimental design—this strand of the

literature has received considerable attention both within the economics profession and in the public

discussion about the merits of raising the minimum wage.

        We start by summarizing Katz and Krueger’s (1992) study of the effects of the 1991 increase in

the federal minimum wage on employment in the fast-food industry in Texas. These authors conducted

telephone surveys of fast-food establishments in both December 1990 and August 1991 and asked the

manager or assistant manager of each restaurant a series of questions about wages and employment.

Exactly 100 restaurants provided sufficient information for the employment analysis—the number of full-

time employees, the number of part-time employees, and the average starting wage for non-management

employees. Katz and Krueger defined the effective change in the minimum wage at each restaurant as the

log difference between the firm’s average starting wage in December 1990 and the new federal minimum

wage of $4.25 per hour in April 1991. In this setup, the difference in employment changes between

restaurants initially paying relatively higher wages and those paying relatively lower wages identifies the

effect of the minimum wage on employment. Estimating a regression that includes controls for city size,

chain, and whether or not the restaurant was company owned (as opposed to a franchise), Katz and

Krueger found a large positive and statistically significant effect of the minimum wage on employment,

with the estimated elasticities ranging from 1.70 to 2.65. They noted that “a model in which the

employers of low-wage workers are assumed to have market power and act as monopsonistic buyers of

labor is potentially consistent with [their] findings” (p. 17), although they also write that “a potential
                                                     - 11 -


problem with this monopsony interpretation of our employment findings is that a large degree of

monopsony power seems somewhat implausible in the high-turnover labor market of the fast-food

industry” (p. 18).

        Card (1992b) took a different approach, using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) to

assess the effects on low-skilled employment of California’s increase in the minimum wage to $4.25 per

hour in July 1988. In particular, he compared employment changes from 1987 to 1989 in California with

employment changes in a group of comparison locations in which the minimum wage did not change; the

comparison sample included Arizona, Florida, Georgia, New Mexico, and Dallas-Fort Worth, which were

chosen because they had similar labor force participation rates, employment-to-population ratios, and

unemployment rates to California in 1987. Using a difference-in-difference estimator, Card found that

teen employment in California increased more rapidly than teen employment in the set of control areas

and that this difference was statistically significant; the implied elasticity from the estimates is about .35.

Card also finds a relative increase in employment in retail trade in California between 1987 and 1989, and

although he does find a small relative decline in the eating and drinking industry in California, he

interprets it as more likely stemming from differences in longer-run trends than the effect of the minimum

wage increase. As did Katz and Krueger, Card raises the possibility that these results might indicate the

presence of monopsony power in the low-wage labor market.

        Given these provocative findings and the interest in using the natural experiment approach to

studying the effects of policy changes, similar studies of the minimum wage quickly followed. For

example, Spriggs and Klein (1994) took an approach similar to that of Katz and Krueger and conducted

telephone surveys of fast-food restaurants in Jackson, Mississippi and Greensboro, North Carolina

roughly one month before and one month after the April 1, 1991 increase in the federal minimum wage.

More specifically, they asked respondents for information on employment levels, starting and average

wages, prices, turnover rates, and their use of the subminimum wage. Defining the wage gap as the

average wage increase needed to raise the wages of workers earning below $4.25 per hour in March to the

new minimum wage in April, estimates of the employment response were negative but not statistically
                                                         - 12 -


significant. Defining the minimum wage variable as the implicit change in the overall average wage

associated with boosting the wage of those initially paid below $4.25 per hour, the estimated employment

effects were positive, although, again, the coefficients were not statistically significant. The authors

interpreted these results as inconsistent with the conventional view of minimum wage effects.5

         Of course, by far the best known and most influential study of a specific minimum wage increase

is Card and Krueger’s (1994) investigation of the effects of the 1992 increase in New Jersey’s minimum

wage. These authors followed Katz and Krueger’s approach and conducted surveys of fast-food

restaurants in February 1992, roughly two months before the April 1992 increase in the New Jersey

minimum wage to $5.15 per hour, and then again in November of that year, about seven months after the

minimum wage increase. For stores in New Jersey, they constructed a wage gap variable equivalent to

that used by Katz and Krueger in their study of fast-food restaurants in Texas. But they also attempted to

improve on the identification in this earlier research by including in the sample a control group of

restaurants in eastern Pennsylvania, where the minimum wage did not change. This allowed them to test

for the effect of the increase in New Jersey’s minimum wage using three statistical experiments: a

comparison of employment changes between New Jersey restaurants initially paying different starting

wages; a comparison of employment changes between stores located in New Jersey and stores located in

Pennsylvania; and a comparison that makes use of both types of information.

         Their results consistently implied that the increase in New Jersey’s minimum wage raised

employment (as measured by full-time equivalents, or FTEs) in that state.6 For example, stores that

initially paid low starting wages showed significantly more employment growth between February and

November than did stores that paid higher starting wages. Similarly, employment in the New Jersey

sample rose over this period, while employment in the Pennsylvania sample fell. Putting this information



5
  The authors also concluded that employers did not change their employment policies or practices. The summary
   statistics they report indicate that 9 percent changed either the timing or amount of the first wage increase granted
   to new employees, 2 percent reduced the number of employees per shift or changed the number of shifts per day,
   and 2 percent reduced fringe benefits. However, none of these effects were statistically significant.
6
  Full-time equivalent employment is calculated as the number of full-time employees plus one-half the number of
   part-time employees.
                                                          - 13 -


together, Card and Krueger constructed a wage gap measure equal to the difference between the initial

starting wage and $5.25 per hour for stores in New Jersey and zero for stores in Pennsylvania. Again, the

results showed a positive and statistically significant effect of the minimum wage increase on

employment growth, with an estimated elasticity of .73. Various specification tests resulted in a wider

range of estimates (both in magnitude and statistical significance), but none that were negative. They

interpreted their empirical results as “inconsistent with the predictions of a conventional competitive

model of the fast-food industry” (p. 790).7

IV. Issues Raised in Subsequent Research

            The divergent findings of this initial round of research stimulated a number of lines of inquiry

based on these methods. In particular, the differences between the conclusions in our paper and those

reported by Card and others involved in the symposium suggested that some important questions had

remained unanswered. Thus, much of the ensuing empirical literature attempted to uncover some of the

reasons for the contrasting results reported in the first wave of the new minimum wage research, with an

eye toward developing a more consistent view of the effects of minimum wages on employment. More

specifically, this literature focused heavily on issues related to the appropriate specification of the

underlying model, measurement of the appropriate variables, and the relevance of the comparison groups

used in the studies. We next summarize some of the key issues discussed in these follow-on papers.

The Appropriate Measure of the Minimum Wage

           In their comment on our original paper, Card et al. (1994) raised important questions about the

appropriate measure of the minimum wage. As indicated earlier, we had followed the earlier literature in

using a variant of the Kaitz index that included state minimum wages as our measure of the effective

minimum wage, while Card (1992a) had used the percentage of teenagers earning between the old and

new minimum wage just prior to the implementation of the new minimum (the fraction affected variable).

Card et al. argued against our (and others’) use of the Kaitz index for two reasons. First, they asserted


7
    Because they find no evidence that prices fell in response to the minimum wage increase, they also note that their
     results are inconsistent with monopsony or equilibrium search models.
                                                         - 14 -


that if the minimum wage is intended to be a measure of the relative price of teen labor, the Kaitz index

should be positively correlated with teen wages. They then showed that this correlation is negative

because the denominator of the index (the average wage of adults in the state) is positively correlated with

teen wages (presumably due to general changes in wage levels associated with inflation, productivity

growth, or changes in economic activity). Second, they noted that measuring coverage of teenagers is

difficult and imprecise, especially at the state level. Instead, they seem to prefer to use the nominal

minimum wage in their regressions, which they showed is positively correlated with both teen wages and

employment.

           The concern about measuring the coverage of state minimum wages is difficult to address given

the lack of available data. Information on coverage at the state level is quite sparse, and it would no doubt

be difficult to compile accurate measures of teen coverage.8 That said, given the absence of any major

changes to coverage at the federal level since the early 1970s, and given that the combined coverage of

federal and state laws has been very high for some time, changes in coverage are not likely to offer much

in the way of identification for samples limited to the 1980s and 1990s, suggesting that it may not be

unreasonable for more recent studies to ignore coverage altogether. Indeed, much of the literature in the

past decade or so has followed this approach.

           In contrast, Card et al.’s argument against the relative nature of the Kaitz index seems misguided

to us. First, it is not the case that the Kaitz index should always be positively correlated with teen wages.

As we showed in our reply, the Kaitz index should be (and is) positively correlated with changes in the

relative teen wage, indicating that the Kaitz index is correctly classifying an increase in the nominal

minimum wage as an increase in the relative price of teen labor. Moreover, in the absence of an increase

in the nominal minimum wage, the negative correlation described by Card et al. is, in fact, correctly

picking up an erosion in the effective minimum wage associated with an increase in the general wage

8
    Schiller (1994) attempted to measure state coverage in 1980 by classifying state minimum wage laws into those
     that exempted youths, those that exempted students, those that exempted both students and youths, and those with
     no broad exemptions, and in a cross-state regression of youth employment rates on state-specific minimum wage
     levels and coverage dummies (and other controls) in 1980, founds that youth employment rates are significantly
     lower in states without any exemption than in other states.
                                                          - 15 -


level; in particular, nominal wage increases will tend to reduce the proportion of the labor force whose

wages are directly determined by the minimum wage and thus the bite of the minimum wage. In addition,

the use of a relative minimum wage measure provides a means of comparing the nominal value of the

minimum wage with the market-determined wage for above-minimum wage workers who may be

substitutes for minimum wage workers in the production function. Because the principal response to a

minimum wage is likely substitution away from lower-skilled minimum wage workers toward higher-

skilled, higher-wage workers, it seems particularly important to consider including a relative minimum

wage variable to capture this effect.9 Finally, in the absence of state-level data on prices, using the

average wage in the denominator provides a way to measure differences in the real minimum wage in

different parts of the country.

           The fraction affected variable used by Card (1992a), which is defined as the proportion of the

teen population earning between the previous year’s and current year’s minimum wage, does adequately

capture regional variation that is of use in identifying the effect of a minimum wage increase. However,

that variable is not well equipped to capture the effects on employment associated with a gradual erosion

of the real minimum wage. In this sense, such a variable is a reasonable proxy for effective changes in

the minimum wage in studies of specific minimum wage increases, such as the 1990 federal increase

studied by Card. But it is less informative in studies that use longer time periods because it excludes the

variation in real minimum wages that results from inflation and other aggregate factors. 10




9
    See Grant and Hamermesh (1981).
10
     Wessels (forthcoming) argues that the fraction-affected specification used by Card (1992a) is an inappropriate
     measure of the minimum wage because it ignores some of the cross-state variation in the effective size of federal
     minimum wage increases. In particular, if the distribution of wages differs across states, two states could have a
     different sized increase in the minimum wage but a similar fraction of workers affected by the change in the
     minimum. To address this concern, he includes a control for the relative size of the low-wage population (the
     proportion paid between the minimum wage and 20 percent more than the minimum wage) along with the
     magnitude of each minimum wage increase and finds that employment fell relatively more in states with larger
     effective minimum wage increases in both 1990-91 and 1996-97 (although the results for the latter period are not
     significant). However, by focusing on the minimum wage increase and not the fraction near the minimum, this
     approach may also fail to fully capture the increased cost of low-wage labor generated by a minimum wage
     increase. That is, a given minimum wage increase should have greater impact when there are more affected
     workers.
                                                            - 16 -


            Although it seems important to specify the minimum wage variable in real or relative terms in

studies that use longer samples, a valid question that arises from the discussion of the appropriate choice

of the minimum wage variable is whether the constraint embedded in the relative minimum wage

variable—that changes in the adult wage should have the same size, but opposite-signed, effect on

employment as changes in the nominal minimum wage11—is appropriate. From the standpoint of the

effect of the minimum wage itself, this seems like a reasonable constraint—there is probably no reason to

expect a decline in the relative value of the minimum wage to have a different effect on employment than

would an increase in the relative minimum wage (although with the opposite sign). In Neumark and

Wascher (1994), we showed that, with the data we used in our original paper, we could not reject the

constraint implicit in specifications that included only the relative minimum wage and thus that the

exclusion of the average adult wage as a separate variable in the equations did not bias the results.

However, as Card and Krueger (1995a) pointed out, a theoretical specification of the labor demand

function for youths would include prices of other factor inputs (including the adult wage) as well as the

price of output. And, in this context, implementing the standard homogeneity assumption would lead to a

model that includes both the relative minimum wage and the real adult wage (and perhaps the real interest

rate or relative energy costs as well).

            Subsequent research has frequently relaxed the constraint implied by including a relative

minimum wage measure. For example, Burkhauser et al. (2000a, 2000b) rewrite the relative minimum

wage effect in an equation for log employment rates as:

(2)         β ln( MW / W ) = β1 ln MW + β 2 ln W ,

where W is the average wage for adults and β1 is interpreted as the minimum wage elasticity. For the

reasons noted above, we are uncomfortable with including the wage variables in nominal terms in studies

that use longer sample periods, both because such a specification would seem to violate standard

homogeneity assumptions and because it does not allow for the possibility that an erosion in the real value


11
     This constraint is imposed in a log specification. In levels, the constraint is simply that the two variables enter
     only as a ratio.
                                                          - 17 -


of the minimum wage will reduce its effect on employment.12 In contrast, Keil et al. (2001) include both

the relative minimum wage variable and a real wage:

(3)       β1 ln( MW / W ) + β 2 (ln W / P ) .

Again, the authors interpret β1 as the minimum wage elasticity and generally report negative estimates of

that coefficient.13

          Finally, a couple of studies have attempted to reduce the parameterization of the minimum wage

effects even further by allowing the effects to be freely estimated for each change in the minimum wage.

For example, Deere et al. (1995) introduce indicator variables for each level of the federal minimum wage

in their sample period (1985-92), while Burkhauser et al. (2000a) extend this approach to also include a

separate dummy variable for every value of a state minimum wage that exceeded the federal level.

Strictly interpreted, the results in both studies tend to show that increases in the minimum wage

significantly reduced teenage employment rates. In general, however, these specifications seem

problematic because the coefficients on the indicator variables may be capturing other influences as

well.14

Lagged Effects of the Minimum Wage

          The new minimum wage literature also resurrected questions about the how long it should take

for minimum wages to have their full effect on employment. Many economists believed that any effects

from changes in the minimum wage should be felt relatively quickly. For example, Brown et al. (1982)

argued that, from a theoretical standpoint, “lagged adjustments to minimum wage increases are probably


12
   The inclusion of state and year effects in the model would mitigate this concern to some extent (although not
   completely in the case of monthly data). However, as we will discuss later, a central argument in the Burkhauser
   et al. study is that year effects should not be included in the employment equation, for the sample period they
   study.
13
   We should note that, in an appendix table, Burkhauser et al. (2000b) report estimates of minimum wage effects
   using a specification that includes the minimum wage and adult wage in real terms. The estimated elasticities in
   these specifications are smaller than in specification (2) (−.25 vs. −.30 in the equation for teenagers), albeit still
   statistically significant.
14
   Williams (1993) takes a somewhat different approach by allowing the coefficient on the minimum wage variable
   to differ across Census regions. For the United States as a whole, he estimates an employment elasticity of −.18
   using data from 1977-1989. However, he also reports considerable variation across the country in the effects of
   the minimum wage on teenage employment, with region-specific elasticities ranging from .09 in New England to
   −.62 in the Pacific region.
                                                     - 18 -


less plausible than in most other contexts where such lags are routinely assumed” (p. 496), and offered

two reasons for this view. First, minimum wage workers tend to have high turnover rates, suggesting that

the desired adjustments in employment levels could be accomplished quite quickly through normal

turnover. Second, increases in minimum wages are typically announced several months in advance of

when they become effective, so that employers should be well prepared to adjust quickly when (or even

before) the new law takes effect. Card and Krueger (1995a) also argue that the industries that typically

employ minimum wage workers (for example, the fast-food industry) can “easily vary their staffing levels

by cutting back on off-peak or store hours, and by allowing longer queues” (p. 67), so that any

disemployment effects should be evident shortly after the minimum wage is raised.

        However, these considerations do not negate the possibility that the full adjustment to a higher

minimum wage may take some time. Although factors such as hiring, firing, or training costs may be less

important for workers with normally high quit rates, Hamermesh (1995) points out that firms may adjust

non-labor inputs (for example, capital) slowly, which will tend to slow the adjustment of other inputs,

including labor. Thus, the omission of lagged effects may inappropriately exclude the possibility of

longer-run substitution between labor and capital, as well as the potential for scale effects associated with

changes in expansion plans and establishment births and deaths.

        As a result, the importance of lagged effects seems to us to be primarily an empirical question. In

their survey of the earlier literature, Brown et al. (1982) found little difference in the overall estimated

employment elasticities between time-series studies that included lagged minimum wage variables and

those that did not. However, the potential for lagged effects did seem to matter in interpreting the results

from the papers in the 1992 ILRR symposium. For example, in Neumark and Wascher (1992), we found

statistically significant employment effects from lagged values of the minimum wage with our time-series

panel of state-level data. Moreover, we hypothesized that the discrepancy between our results and those

reported in Card’s (1992a) study of the 1991 federal increase was due to the importance of allowing for

the possibility of a lag in the effects of the minimum wage. We noted, in particular, that using our

sample, a one-year first-difference estimator equivalent to that used by Card (1992a) produced minimum
                                                        - 19 -


wage effects close to zero, similar to what was reported in his paper. But adding a lagged minimum wage

effect to the model resulted in a negative and statistically significant employment effect in both the levels

and first-differenced versions of the basic model.15

         Baker et al. (1999) take this analysis a step further in a study of the effects of the minimum wage

on employment in Canada.16 The authors begin by replicating some of the U.S. panel data estimates for

teenagers with Canadian data.17 They report that first-difference estimates of minimum wage effects in

Canada are positive, whereas longer differences (from using the within-group estimate over a longer

period) and specifications with lags of the minimum wage tend to show negative employment effects that

are statistically significant—similar to what we found for the United States. For example, in their

preferred specification, the first-difference elasticity is .07, while the within-group elasticity is −.27. With

lagged minimum wages, the estimates are more similar (−.23 and −.47, respectively).

         Baker et al. investigate more formally how the elasticity of employment with respect to the

minimum wage differs depending on whether one looks at high-frequency or low-frequency variation in

the data, explaining how the alternative differencing operators, as well as the inclusion of lagged

minimum wages, can be interpreted as applying different filters to the data, with the longer differences or

inclusion of lags amounting to filters that emphasize more of the low-frequency variation in the data.

After filtering the variables to separate their high-frequency and low-frequency movements, the authors

estimate the minimum wage elasticities separately at high and low frequencies.18 The results show a

positive effect of the minimum wage on employment at high frequencies and a negative effect of the
15
   In response to our finding, Card et al. (1994) re-estimated Card’s specification using a two-year difference (from
   1989 to 1991) rather than a one-year difference and still found positive effects of the 1991 minimum wage
   increase on employment. As we showed in our reply, however, estimating a two-year difference is not the same
   as including a lagged minimum wage variable in the model because the two-year difference still omits a lagged
   effect of minimum wages.
16
   Although we assess most of the international evidence later in the paper, we include several papers from Canada
   in our discussion of the U.S. literature, both because of its relevance for the discussion of the U.S. results and
   because of the similarity of U.S. and Canadian labor markets.
17
   As the authors explain, data from Canada offer the possibility of using approaches similar to the panel data studies
   across states and years in the United States because the minimum wage varies across provinces. However, an
   important advantage of the Canadian setting is the far greater frequency (until more recently in the United States)
   of minimum wage changes.
18
   The simplest filter they use is MWit = ½(MWit − MWit-1) + ½(MWit + MWit-1), where the first term captures high
   frequency changes in the minimum wage variable and the second term captures low-frequency changes. They
   also employ a more precise finite Fourier transform with similar results.
                                                        - 20 -


minimum wage on employment at low frequencies. Overall, the authors report an employment elasticity

of −.25 in Canada, noting that “this result is driven by low-frequency variation in the data” (p. 345). In

addition, although they do not analyze U.S. data directly, they use the U.S. literature to demonstrate—

through equations that relate estimated coefficients for alternative estimators to the implied elasticities at

different frequencies—that their conclusions explain the different findings for the United States equally

well.

           The Baker et al. results indicate that the disemployment effects of minimum wages show up as

longer-run responses to more evolutionary changes in the level of the minimum wage, rather than as a

short-term response to a particular change in the minimum wage. Consistent with our earlier discussion,

the authors suggest that this longer-run response can be understood in the context of capital adjustment

and interfirm (rather than intrafirm) adjustment rather than as labor adjustment in and of itself, which

should be relatively quick in the low-skill labor market. In any event, their analysis clearly suggests that

studies that claim to find no minimum wage effect on employment should perhaps be discounted unless

the evidence points to no effect at both high and low frequencies.

           Although the issue of lagged minimum wage effects was not the primary focus of subsequent

studies, later research using state panels of time-series observations have also tended to find evidence of

lags in the effects of the minimum wage on employment. For example, Burkhauser et al. (2000a) re-

estimated their specifications including lags and found that the coefficient on the lagged minimum wage

variable was typically statistically significant, in some cases when the contemporaneous coefficient was

not. Moreover, estimates of the elasticities including lagged effects were considerably larger than those

calculated from specifications that included only contemporaneous terms.19 Keil et al. (2001) also allow

for lagged minimum wage effects, although they accomplish this by estimating a dynamic version of the

employment equation that includes a lag of the dependent variable rather than by entering a lagged

minimum wage term directly. In their preferred specification, which they estimate using a Factor-GLS


19
     Similarly, Partridge and Partridge (1999) found that the effects of minimum wages on employment occur with a
     lag, both in the retail sector and for employment more generally.
                                                     - 21 -


procedure with instrumental variables, they report a short-run employment elasticity of −.37 for youths

and a long-run elasticity of −.69.

        Thus, the overall conclusion from the panel data literature on minimum wage effects seems to be

that lags do matter. Firms evidently continue to adjust their employment levels well after an increase in

the minimum wage, and studies that focus only on contemporaneous effects will miss some of this

adjustment; as noted above, the existence of lags likely accounts for at least part of the variation in the

results reported in the first wave of the new minimum wage research. More broadly, it seems to us that

estimates of the elasticities relevant both to the testing of alternative theories of the labor market and to

the public policy debate should always at least consider both contemporaneous and lagged responses to a

change in the minimum wage.

Interactions between Employment and School Enrollment

        In their subsequent comment on our original ILRR paper, Card et al. (1994) also criticized both

the inclusion of the school enrollment rate in the model and the specific measure of school enrollment that

we used in the regressions. From a measurement standpoint, they pointed out that the school enrollment

variable we used included only individuals who were enrolled in school and not employed, which they

argued would lead to a negative bias in the estimated employment effects from the specification we used.

More broadly, they argued that it was inappropriate to include school enrollment in the employment

equation because that equation is essentially a labor demand function. These criticisms are significant

because a statistically significant disemployment effect for teenagers was only evident in our

specifications that included the school enrollment rate.

        Turning first to the question of whether the enrollment rate should be in the regression at all, it is

important to remember that the aggregate employment equation consists of observations for which the

minimum wage is binding and observations for which it is not binding (or averages over such

observations). Although employment for the first group is determined solely by the labor demand curve

in the standard competitive model, employment for the second group of observations is influenced by

both demand and supply factors. As a result, the specification of a model for the employment of all
                                                         - 22 -


teenagers should also include variables that capture exogenous shifts in the labor supply curve, including

exogenous changes in the school enrollment rate.

           Regarding the measurement of school enrollment, the definition of schooling used in our original

paper was indeed too narrow. However, substituting broader measures of enrollment that do not exclude

employed teenagers led to only minor differences in the results. For example, when we re-estimated the

model using an alternative measure of the enrollment rate that counts individuals as enrolled if they report

schooling as their major activity (Neumark and Wascher, 1994), the resulting employment elasticity for

teenagers fell to −.11, toward the low end of the range we reported originally. Using an even broader

definition of enrollment that is calculated independently of employment, we found a statistically

significant employment elasticity of −.22 (Neumark and Wascher, 1996a).20

           Despite our reanalysis, there is still a potential problem with including the school enrollment rate

in the standard employment regression. Because the decision to enroll in school is likely not independent

from the decision to work, the estimates from a version of equation (1) that includes the enrollment rate

may be subject to endogeneity bias. In particular, changes in minimum wages may influence the choice

between school enrollment and employment for some youths, which may, in turn, have implications for

the opportunities available to other teenagers.

           In other research, we approached this issue in two ways. First, in Neumark and Wascher (1994)

we computed instrumental variable estimates of equation (1), using school expenditures, student-teacher

ratios, and compulsory schooling laws as instruments. The resulting estimates, which should be largely

free from endogeneity bias, showed employment elasticities for teenagers ranging from −.17 to −.39.

Thus, although the point estimates of the effects were sensitive to which enrollment measure we used, in

general the IV estimates supported the view that minimum wages reduced employment among teenagers.



20
     This finding was in response to a comment on our paper by Evans and Turner (1995), who argued that using this
     broader definition of school enrollment caused the estimated employment elasticity for teenagers to become small
     and insignificant. However, this measure of enrollment is available only in the October CPS and Evans and
     Turner’s results were based on a specification that combined school enrollment data for October of each year with
     minimum wage information for May. The results reported in the text are from Neumark and Wascher (1996a),
     which uses October observations for all of the variables in the model.
                                                        - 23 -


           Second, in Neumark and Wascher (1995a) we extended equation (1) to include enrollment as an

activity that is potentially influenced by changes in the minimum wage. In particular, we respecified the

model to relate four possible states of employment/enrollment status (j) to the minimum wage and other

controls (X):

(4)        U kj = α j MW + Xβ j + ε k , j=1,...,4.

The assumption that εk follows an extreme value distribution gives rise to a conditional logit model, with

four mutually exclusive categories of activities: enrolled and employed, enrolled and not employed, not

enrolled and employed, and not enrolled and not employed (or idle).21

           Estimating the model using state-year data from 1977-1989, we found that a higher minimum

wage is associated with a net decline in employment, with the employment elasticity similar in size to our

previous studies of employment alone. However, we also found that a higher minimum wage leads to a

significant decline in the proportion of teenagers who are both in school and employed and a significant

increase in the proportion of teenagers who are neither in school nor employed. Moreover, the

magnitudes of the estimates indicated that the effects of minimum wages on teenagers are more important

and more complicated than is suggested by the employment elasticities alone.

           These results are consistent with a higher minimum wage causing employers to substitute away

from lower-skilled teenagers (who are less likely to be in school) toward higher-skilled teenagers (who

are more likely to be in school), with the resulting increase in the relative wages of higher-skilled

teenagers inducing some of them to leave school for employment. However, this hypothesis cannot be

explicitly tested without information on the flows of teenagers across enrollment/employment states.

Thus, in Neumark and Wascher (1995b and 1996b), we turned to individual panel-level data from

matched CPS surveys. We applied the same basic modeling approach to the individual data as in the

state-level analysis, but included in the model indicators for each individual’s school/work activity in the




21
     This approach was based on an earlier time-series study by Wachter and Kim (1982).
                                                    - 24 -


previous year in order to calculate the effect of the minimum wage on transitions between the four distinct

enrollment/employment states.

        Consistent with the hypothesis above, the results suggested that the employment effects of the

minimum wage fall largely on the least-skilled teenagers. In particular, we found that a higher minimum

wage increases the probability that a teenager leaves school, presumably to look for a job or to work.

Moreover, the estimates indicated that increases in the minimum wage tend to raise the probability that

non-enrolled teenage workers become both non-enrolled and non-employed and reduce the probability

that already non-enrolled/non-employed teenagers find a job; these results were especially pronounced for

blacks and Hispanics and for individuals who had a lower wage prior to the increase in the minimum

wage. In sum, the evidence from this analysis suggested that the teenage employment elasticities

typically reported in the literature likely understate the size of the disemployment effects on the lowest-

skilled workers, instead capturing net employment changes among a broader group of teenagers that mask

labor-labor substitution.

        Only a handful of papers in recent years have focused on the joint effects of the minimum wage

on teenage employment/enrollment outcomes. In Neumark and Wascher (2003), we updated our state-

level analysis through 1998 and found positive and significant effects of the minimum wage on the

proportions on teenagers employed but not enrolled and on the proportion of teenagers neither employed

nor in school; these results are similar in nature to our earlier analysis, albeit a bit more muted. Turner

and Demiralp (2001) use an approach similar to Neumark and Wascher (1995b) but focus, as in Card

(1992a), on the early 1990s increases in the federal minimum wage. In particular, they examine

employment-enrollment transitions between January-April 1991 and January-April 1992 in order to

isolate the effects of the April 1991 increase in the federal minimum wage. Their results suggested that,

overall, the higher minimum wage induced some teenagers to leave school for employment, but that

teenagers initially neither employed nor in school also were more likely to find jobs. However, this result

was driven entirely by movements among non-minority teenagers living outside of central cities. In

contrast, Turner and Demiralp found that black and Hispanic teenagers were more likely to become idle
                                                    - 25 -


following the minimum wage increase, as were teens who live in a central city. This evidence also points

to labor-labor substitution as an important consequence of a higher minimum wage and suggests that the

elasticities typically reported in the literature understate the effects of the minimum wage on the lowest-

skilled subgroups. Finally, Campolieti et al. (2005a) examined longitudinal data for Canada from 1993 to

1999 using a similar approach. In contrast to the results for the United States, these authors found little

evidence of an effect of the minimum wage on school enrollment. Instead, the net disemployment effect

they report appears to reflect decreased employment opportunities for both the student and nonstudent

populations in Canada.

Other Specification Issues Relevant to the State-Level Panel Data Approach

        Researchers also raised several other concerns about model specification in state-level panel data

analyses in reaction to the first round of the new minimum wage research. For example, in reviewing

Card’s (1992a) analysis of the 1991 federal minimum wage increase, Deere et al. (1995) highlighted the

possibility that differences in underlying trends in employment growth across states might bias estimates

of the effects in short state-year panels like that used by Card. In the case of the 1991 increase in the

federal minimum wage, they noted that the low-wage states where Card’s fraction affected variable was

large also tended to be states where trend employment growth was faster, creating a positive bias in the

estimated employment effect. In particular, they showed that rates of employment growth for well-

educated adult men were also higher in low-wage states than in high-wage states between 1989 and 1992,

and that controlling for the 1985-1992 trend in employment and for business cycle developments resulted

in statistically significant negative effects of the 1990 and 1991 minimum wage increases on the

employment rates of teenagers and high-school dropouts. The implied elasticities from these regressions

were relatively large—ranging from −.27 to −.36 for teenage men and from −.42 to −.49 for teenage
                                                         - 26 -


women. As noted above, however, the minimum wage effect is taken from year dummies for the 1990

and 1991 minimum wage increases and thus should be interpreted somewhat cautiously.22

         In a different vein, Burkhauser et al. (2000a) pointed out that the tendency for researchers to

include year effects in empirical specifications based on time series of state-level observations effectively

eliminates the identification associated with variation in the federal minimum wage. As a result, they

assert that “the minimum wage effects can be identified only by using the relatively small number of

observations in which the state minimum wage is higher than the federal minimum wage” (p. 655). They

then show that equations estimated without year effects consistently produce negative and statistically

significant coefficients on the minimum wage variable across a variety of specifications, with elasticities

in the range of −.3 to −.35 when the models are estimated with data from 1979 to 1997, while

specifications that include year effects consistently produce small and insignificant coefficients.23

Burkhauser et al. (2000b) apply the same methods to other demographic/education groups and find

especially large negative effects for black youths and high-school dropouts aged 20-24. In a broader

sense, they interpret the results from these two studies as suggesting that the exclusion of federal variation

in the minimum wage in empirical analyses tends to lead to an understatement of the disemployment

effects of the minimum wage and that this factor, rather than alternative formulations of the minimum

wage variable, largely explains the difference in results reported by Card and Krueger (1995a) as

compared to those in Neumark and Wascher (1992) and Deere et al. (1995).

         Burkhauser et al. raise an important question—how to balance the loss of identification associated

with including year effects with the potential bias associated with omitted macroeconomic effects that


22
   More broadly, in a review of the natural experiment methodology, Meyer (1995) notes that “a[n] …
   underemphasized advantage of a long time series for outcome measures is that they may allow the researcher to
   examine if the treatment and control groups tend to move in parallel” (p. 158).
23
   The paper also presents results through 1992. For this shorter sample period, the authors report a negative and
   significant minimum wage effect (with an elasticity of −.22) when year effects as well as a lagged minimum wage
   effect are included and larger negative effects (with elasticities up to −.6) when year effects are excluded. The use
   of panels of differing lengths is meant to address the question of how minimum wage effects vary with the
   business cycle, and the authors interpret the smaller elasticities they find with the longer sample period as
   consistent with the hypothesis that minimum wage effects are likely to be smaller during the period of robust
   economic growth (as in the mid- to late-1990s).
                                                     - 27 -


would be captured by the year dummies. They recognize that the possibility of omitted macroeconomic

or other aggregate effects is a potential criticism of their specification. But, in response, they note that the

model already includes the unemployment rate and the average adult wage, which they believe should

effectively capture the influences of the business cycle, inflation, and aggregate productivity growth. In

addition, when they add dummy variables corresponding to recessions to the specification, they find little

difference in the estimated minimum wage elasticity.

        Our own approach has been to include year effects in specifications using time-series panels of

state observations, for several reasons. First, including a relative minimum wage measure in the

specification will permit some identification from variation in the federal minimum wage because of

differential movements in state wages. Second, we believe that it is difficult to include all relevant

macroeconomic or other aggregate-level variables and thus perhaps are more concerned than Burkhauser

et al. that elasticities estimated without year effects will suffer from omitted variable bias. Third, it is not

as obvious to us that the diminution of federal variation in the minimum wage is as much of a problem

today than it might have been a decade ago. Samples that include more recent data have significantly

more variation in state minimum wages than did the samples that ended in the early 1990s, thus making

the presence of federal variation relatively less important for identification of the minimum wage effect;

moreover, with the additional variation in state minimum wages, even increases in the federal minimum

will generate state variation in the effective minimum wage (the higher of the state and federal minimum

wage levels for each state) typically used in minimum wage research.

        Indeed, when Sabia (2006) reestimates the Burkhauser et al. specifications using data through

2004, he finds a negative and statistically significant effect of the minimum wage on employment

regardless of whether year effects are included in the regressions, with estimated elasticities of −.18

without year dummies and −.30 when year dummies are included. These results clearly indicate that the

greater variation in minimum wages associated with recent state increases has helped to better identify the

effects of the minimum wage on teenage employment, making the potentially problematic choice to

exclude year effects unnecessary. In addition, with the policy question often focused on whether a
                                                     - 28 -


particular state should raise the minimum wage, the greater reliance on state variation may, in many

circumstances, be entirely appropriate.

        A recent paper by Bazen and Le Gallo (2006) takes this approach a step further by attempting to

separate the employment effects of federal increases in the minimum wage from those enacted at the state

level. Using the specification proposed by Burkhauser et al., they first use quarterly state-level data from

1984-1989, when the federal minimum wage was unchanged, and estimate the effect on teenage

employment of changes in state-specific minimum wage increases over that period. The coefficient on

the minimum wage variable in these specifications is close to zero and insignificant, whether or not year

effects are included. They then re-estimate the model through 1992 and find a negative and statistically

significant effect, with an elasticity of −.42; as in Burkhauser et al., however, the negative effect is only

evident in specifications that exclude year dummies. The authors perform a similar analysis for the 1992-

96 period, when the federal minimum was again unchanged, and also find no negative effects of state

minimum wage increases (although there were only four state increases during this period). Again,

however, adding in observations through 1997 leads to an estimated negative effect in models that

exclude year dummies (although the effect disappears when 1998 is added as well).

        The authors then specify a more general model that includes three separate minimum wage

variables: the change in the federal minimum wage, the change in a state’s effective minimum wage due

to an increase in the federal minimum wage (if the state’s minimum wage was originally higher than the

federal level), and the change in a state’s own minimum wage (provided that the change results in a state

minimum wage level that exceeds the federal level). Consistent with their earlier results, for both time

periods the only negative and significant increases are for the federal minimum wage increases. Although

the coefficients on the state-specific increases are also negative in both periods, they are imprecisely

estimated and thus usually indistinguishable from both zero and the coefficient on the federal minimum

wage. The coefficient on the third component (the change in a state’s effective minimum due to an

increase in the federal wage floor) varies considerably across minimum wage increases (both in

magnitude and sign), although it is never statistically significant. The authors interpret their results as
                                                   - 29 -


suggesting that small state-level increases may not have significant disemployment effects, although they

admit that their tests are relatively weak.

Reactions to the Initial Round of State Case Studies

        The case studies that comprised the other strand of the new minimum wage literature were quite

controversial within the economics profession. Some labor economists embraced the studies as

praiseworthy examples of the usefulness of the natural experiment approach to studying the economic

effects of policy changes. For example, in a review piece on Card and Krueger’s book Myth and

Measurement, Richard Freeman (1995) wrote that “their analysis is a model of how to do empirical

economics” (p. 831). Similarly, Paul Osterman (1995) asserted that Card and Krueger “make a powerful

case that what they term ‘natural experiments’ are a more appropriate way to conduct policy analysis than

cruder research based on time-series or broad cross-sections” (p. 839).

        However, other labor economists were more critical of these studies. In particular, Finis Welch

(1995)—again referring to Myth and Measurement—states that: “I am convinced that the book’s long-run

impact will instead be to spur, by negative example, a much-needed consideration of standards we should

institute for the collection, analysis, and release of primary data” (p. 842). Likewise, Hamermesh (1995)

concludes that “even on its own grounds, CK’s strongest evidence is fatally flawed” (p. 838).

        In general, the criticisms of the case study approach focused on three main issues. The first is the

question of adequacy of the control groups used in the studies, a concern emphasized by both Hamermesh

and Welch. On its face, for example, it seems reasonable to question the use of Georgia, Florida, and

Dallas/Ft. Worth as adequate control groups in Card’s (1992b) study of the California minimum wage

increase, given that these places are far from California and likely influenced by very different demand

conditions. But even for states with close geographic proximity, using one state as a control may be

problematic. For example, Deere et al. (1995) pointed out that teenage employment rates (as measured by

the CPS) in New Jersey diverged significantly from those in Pennsylvania beginning in 1988, casting

doubt on Card and Krueger’s claim that Pennsylvania represents a sensible control group with which to

compare New Jersey. More broadly, Hamermesh questioned the practicality of this entire approach for
                                                          - 30 -


studying the effects of minimum wages, noting that the variance in employment seems to be dominated

by demand shocks, which suggests that “any changes in the relative demand shocks” affecting two

geographic areas will easily “swamp the effect of a higher minimum wage” (p. 837).

           Second, in each of the fast-food case studies from the first round of the new minimum wage

research, the post-treatment observation comes less than a year after the relevant minimum wage increase

(and sometimes much less so). As we noted earlier, there is substantial empirical evidence that the

disemployment effect of an increase in the minimum wage may occur with a lag of one year or more,

suggesting that these case studies may understate the effect of a minimum wage hike and even fail to

detect a negative effect. For the same reason, both Brown and Freeman, in their reviews of Myth and

Measurement, speculate that these studies are more appropriate for examining the short-run effects of

minimum wage changes than for estimating their long-run effects, a point made more significant by the

findings of Baker et al. (1999).

           Third, some observers have questioned the reliability of the data used in these case studies. This

obviously is less of a concern for Card (1992b), who used publicly available data from the CPS. But Katz

and Krueger (1992), Spriggs and Klein (1994), and Card and Krueger (1994) all conducted their own

telephone surveys of fast-food restaurants, which were not subject to the same rigorous standards as those

used to develop the surveys used in government statistical programs. Indeed, Welch (1995) notes that

these authors provide little documentation about the survey methodology or data collection process, and

he expresses significant doubts about the quality of the data, noting in particular some puzzling features

of the sample collected by Card and Krueger (1994). Likewise, in Neumark and Wascher (2000), we

document what seems to us to be an unusually high degree of volatility in the employment changes

measured with Card and Krueger’s data.24




24
     Hamermesh also questions whether the initial observation in these studies was sufficiently prior to the effective
     date of the minimum wage change so as to avoid the possibility that some employers had already begun to adjust
     to the higher minimum wage, which would lead difference-in-difference estimates to understate any employment
     effects. However, this cannot explain the large positive effects found in two of the fast-food studies (Katz and
     Krueger, 1992; Card and Krueger, 1994).
                                                          - 31 -


           In light of these concerns, a number of researchers subsequently reexamined the results reported

in the initial round of state-specific case studies. Among the first of these reassessments was a paper by

Taeil Kim and Lowell Taylor (1995), which revisited Card’s study of the effects of California’s 1988

minimum wage increase on employment in the low-wage retail sector. Using data for the retail trade

sector as a whole, Kim and Taylor first replicated Card’s finding that employment growth in California

around the time of the minimum wage increase was not statistically different from retail employment

growth for the United States as a whole. However, they also pointed out that the volume of retail sales in

California rose much more rapidly during that period than in the United States, raising questions about the

validity of this experiment. In response, Kim and Taylor turned to more detailed industry data within the

retail sector and examined whether differences across industries in wage growth in California relative to

the United States as a whole were negatively correlated with differences across industries in California-

U.S. employment growth in various years. The results showed a statistically significant and negative

correlation for the changes from March 1988 to March 1989, the period that included the minimum wage

increase, but not for the changes in earlier years. The authors argued that because the relative wage

changes over the 1988-89 period were more likely to be driven by the exogenous minimum wage increase

in California in July 1988, the coefficient on the wage variable can be interpreted as a labor demand

elasticity, which they estimated to −.9. The authors conduct a similar analysis that relates county-level

employment growth to county-level wage growth and again find a negative and statistically significant

coefficient on wage changes only for the 1988-89 period, with an estimated demand elasticity of −.7.25

           As Card and Krueger (1995)—and later Kennan (1995)—pointed out, an important shortcoming

of the Kim and Taylor analysis is the absence of a direct wage measure in the County Business Pattern

data they used. In particular, wage rates have to be computed by dividing total payrolls for the first

quarter of each year by total employment for a single pay period in March, which may induce


25
     As the authors point out, because they use the change in average wages as the explanatory variable in their
     specification, the comparable elasticity of employment with respect to the minimum wage is considerably smaller.
     Given the information provided in their paper, we calculate that the −.7 to −.9 demand elasticities they report are
     roughly equivalent to minimum wage elasticities of −.15 to −.2.
                                                     - 32 -


measurement errors associated with differences in the timing of the numerator and denominator and with

variation in the average number of hours included in the pay period. Kim and Taylor were well aware of

this data problem, but they argued that any associated biases were likely to be relatively unimportant; as

evidence, they noted that there is no indication of a negative correlation in years in which the minimum

wage was constant, and that IV estimates that use lagged wages and average firm size in the industry

produce similar results. Card and Krueger address the first point by showing that there is a negative

correlation as well in the 1989-90 change (although this could reflect a lagged effect from the 1988

increase in the minimum wage). In addition, they point out that the significant negative coefficient in the

IV estimates relies on the inclusion of average firm size as an instrument, which they argue is

inappropriate.

        In Neumark and Wascher (2000), we revisited Card and Krueger’s analysis of the effects of New

Jersey’s increase in the minimum wage. In particular, we collected administrative payroll records from

fast-food establishments in the universe from which they drew their sample, and compared the properties

of these administrative records with Card and Krueger’s survey data. The Card-Krueger data were

elicited from a survey that asked managers or assistant managers “How many full-time and part-time

workers are employed in your restaurant, excluding managers and assistant managers?” This question is

highly ambiguous, as it could refer to the current shift, the day, or perhaps the payroll period. In contrast,

the payroll data referred unambiguously to the payroll period. Reflecting this problem, the data collected

by Card and Krueger indicated far greater variability across the two observations than did the payroll

data, with changes that were sometimes implausible.

        We then replicated Card and Krueger’s difference-in-differences test after replacing their survey-

based data with observations based on the payroll records. In contrast to Card and Krueger’s results, the

results from our replication indicated that the minimum wage increase in New Jersey led to a decline in

employment (FTEs) in the New Jersey sample of restaurants relative to that in Pennsylvania sample. The

elasticities from our direct replication analysis were a little larger than −.2, while additional sensitivity
                                                    - 33 -


analyses suggested a range of elasticities from −.1 to −.25, with many (but not all) of the estimates

statistically significant at conventional levels.

        In their reply, Card and Krueger (2000) presented several additional analyses of the effects of

New Jersey’s minimum wage increase using both their original data and our payroll records. In addition,

they reported results from a separate longitudinal sample of fast-food restaurants obtained from BLS

records. In contrast both to their original study and to our replication, their reanalysis generally found

small and statistically insignificant effects of the increase in New Jersey’s minimum wage on

employment, and they concluded that “The increase in New Jersey’s minimum wage probably had no

effect on total employment in New Jersey’s fast-food industry, and possibly had a small positive effect”

(p. 1419). Our own conclusion from this array of statistical results is that:

        the data presented in CK’s Reply … raise some questions about the validity of the assumptions
        needed to interpret the difference-in-differences estimates as a natural experiment. Nonetheless,
        even under the premise that the geographic proximity of the samples renders all other things
        equal, we believe that, in the final analysis, the payroll data raise serious doubts about the
        conclusions CK drew from their data, and provide a reasonable basis for concluding that New
        Jersey’s minimum-wage increase reduced fast-food employment in these chains in New Jersey
        relative to the Pennsylvania control group. Combined with the new evidence from the ES-202
        data that CK present in their Reply, we think we can be more decisive in concluding that New
        Jersey’s minimum-wage increase did not raise fast-food employment in that state (p. 1391).

        An important point that has often been ignored in interpreting the evidence from case studies of a

specific industry is that the neoclassical model of the labor market does not predict that employment in a

particular sub-sector of the economy will decline in response to a general minimum wage increase. As a

consequence, the absence of an employment decline for a narrow sample of establishments should not be

viewed as a contradiction of that model. As Welch (1995) emphasizes, the effect on employment for any

particular sub-sector depends on relative factor intensities. For example, if fast-food restaurant chains are

less intensive in low-wage labor than are their competitors (for example, sandwich shops or other small

privately-owned restaurants), the effect of the higher wage floor on prices at the low-wage intensive
                                                       - 34 -


establishments could induce greater consumer demand for fast-food output—and thus an increase in fast-

food employment.26

Hours versus Employment Effects

         Some authors have pointed out that the basic predictions of the various theoretical models of the

minimum wage refer to labor input rather than to employment specifically, and have suggested that one

potential reason for a small employment effect is that employers can also adjust the number of hours

worked by their employees.27 Michl (1996, 2000) speculated that the difference between our results and

Card and Krueger’s with respect to New Jersey’s minimum increase reflects the fact that Card and

Krueger essentially measure employment, while we measure total hours.28 To test this hypothesis, he

compares the changes in employment and total hours in a subset of 52 observations from our payroll data

set in which the respondent reported both total hours and employment. For this subset of observations,

the difference-in-differences estimates indicate a negative effect of the minimum wage increase on both

total and average hours and a small positive effect on employment, although only the coefficient on

average hours per worker is statistically significant. Michl also examines the ratio of full-time workers to

total employment in Card and Krueger’s data, which should be positively correlated with average hours.

In this case, the results are suggestive of a positive effect of the minimum wage on the fraction of workers

who work a full-time schedule. However, Michl effectively dismisses this result as irrelevant on the

grounds that most fast-food workers are part-time employees and that reductions in their average hours

worked could more than offset an increase in the number of full-time employees.

         Both we and Card and Krueger (2000) also considered the possibility that the difference in our

results might be associated with changes in average hours. For example, we reported both that Card and

26
   To be clear, we are not asserting that this does occur, but rather that it is a potentially important criticism of
   industry-specific studies. Additional evidence on the importance of this type of effect, as well as additional
   reduced-form employment estimates for more low-wage industries (see the discussion of work by Wolfson and
   Belman below) can enhance our understanding of industry-specific studies.
27
   As Couch and Wittenburg (2001) note, the use of employment rather than total hours could either understate or
   overstate the effect of the minimum wage of labor input, depending on whether employers increase average hours
   per worker to partially offset the reduction in employment or reduce both employment and average hours.
28
   As noted above, Card and Krueger attempt to transform their data into full-time equivalent employment by
   weighting the number of part-time workers by one half. However, this is obviously an imperfect measure of total
   hours.
                                                         - 35 -


Krueger’s data showed a shift toward full-time workers in response to New Jersey’s minimum wage

increase and that the 52-restaurant subset of the payroll data showed a positive effect on employment and

a negative effect on total hours, effectively the results cited by Michl.29 However, because of the small

number of restaurants reporting both employment and hours, both we and Card and Krueger cautioned

against making much out of the estimates from the subsample. Moreover, we are less inclined to ignore

the above-mentioned increase in the ratio of full-time workers to part-time workers in New Jersey as

evidence against the hypothesis that this difference in data definitions (employment vs. total hours) was

the primary source of difference in the results. In any case, it seems to us that the effect of minimum

wages on total hours is most relevant for testing the validity of the competitive model of labor demand.

           The effect of the minimum wage on hours has also been examined using longer sample periods

for the United States as a whole. In particular, both Zavodny (2000) and Couch and Wittenburg (2001)

investigate the effects of minimum wage changes on average hours in the state-level panel data

framework described earlier. Zavodny uses the standard specification described in equation (1) above

and includes both state and year effects in her analysis, which uses data from 1979-1993. When the

minimum wage variable is specified in relative terms, her results show a negative effect of the minimum

wage on teen employment, with an elasticity of −.12, similar to that reported in Neumark and Wascher

(1992). However, using the real minimum wage, she finds a small and insignificant effect of the

minimum wage on employment. Moreover, the estimated effects of the minimum wage on average hours

per worker (conditional on employment) are either positive (with the real minimum wage) or close to zero

(with the relative minimum wage), suggesting that firms did not adjust average hours of teenagers

downward in response to the higher minimum wage. The elasticity for total hours worked (for example,

unconditional on employment) for all teenagers is .24 (and statistically significant) using the real

minimum wage and −.11 using the relative minimum wage.

           Zavodny augments these state-level results with an analysis of matched CPS individual-level data

from 1979-80 to 1992-93. In this analysis, she identifies affected teenagers as those with an initial wage

29
     The latter finding was also reported by Card and Krueger (2000).
                                                   - 36 -


between the old and new minimum wage (in real terms), and calculates the implicit wage gap as the

amount needed to raise their wage to the new minimum (with the gap for those with higher wages set to

zero). Zavodny then regresses year t+1 employment status and weekly hours on the wage gap variable

and other controls to estimate the effect of the minimum wage. In this case, the results indicate that an

increase in the minimum wage reduces the probability that an affected worker will remain employed.

However, for those that do keep their jobs, the effect of the minimum wage is to increase their average

hours. On balance, the results suggest that total hours of initially employed teenagers do not fall in

response to an increase in the minimum wage, a result that is confirmed by a positive and statistically

insignificant effect of the minimum wage on hours using the entire sample (so that the hours effect is not

conditional on employment). Zavodny cautions that these estimates do not incorporate the effects of the

minimum wage on transitions from nonemployment to employment. Similarly, they do not capture

whether the minimum wage affects the likelihood that those who make this transition work part-time or

full-time.

        In sharp contrast to Zavodny, Couch and Wittenburg (2001) find that minimum wages reduce

both employment and total hours worked by teenagers. These authors follow the model put forth by

Burkhauser et al. (2000a), using monthly data from January 1979 through December 1992 and excluding

year effects from the analysis. The estimated elasticity for hours ranges from −.48 to −.77 depending on

the exact specification used. Moreover, the estimated elasticities are 25 percent to 30 percent larger than

those estimated for employment based on identical specifications. The authors interpret these results as

suggesting that employers respond to a minimum wage increase by reducing both teen employment and

average hours of those teenagers who remain employed. As we cautioned earlier, we are reluctant to

place too much weight on estimates from specifications that exclude year effects. Nevertheless, the

differences in the results reported by Zavodny and by Couch and Wittenburg indicate that the question of

how employers adjust average hours in response to a minimum wage increase is not yet resolved.
                                                           - 37 -


V. More Recent Evidence on Employment Effects

           Most of the papers discussed thus far include minimum wage increases up to and including the

1990 and 1991 increases in the federal minimum wage and a selected number of state minimum wage

increases that were enacted in the late 1980s or early 1990s. With the federal minimum wage boosted

again in 1996 and 1997 and with a number of other states having raised their minimum wages above the

federal level, research on the effects of minimum wage increases on employment in the United States has

continued to be of considerable interest to economists and policymakers. Much of this more recent

literature on minimum wage effects has looked for ways to more effectively identify the economic

consequences of minimum wage changes by sharpening the focus on those individuals most likely to be

affected by a change in the minimum wage, while another segment has examined new approaches for

estimating minimum wage effects.

           In this section, we review the literature that has moved beyond the issues that arose out of the first

round of the new minimum wage research; because this research has not been discussed much elsewhere,

we also provide somewhat more detail on the procedures and results for these studies than we did for

those discussed in the previous section.

Studies Limited to the Most Recent (1996 and 1997) Federal Minimum Wage Increases

           We first review research that has focused on the most recent federal minimum wage increases in

1996 and 1997. Some of this literature has been produced by researchers at advocacy organizations and

often concludes that these minimum wage increases did not reduce employment. For example, a recent

study by Bernstein and Schmitt (2000) computes changes in average employment rates for teenagers and

adults with less than a high school education over three overlapping periods: 1995-1996, 1995-1997, and

1995-1998.30 Following Card (1992a), they then regress these changes on the fraction of each group



30
     These researchers are from the Economic Policy Institute, which supports minimum wage increases. Despite the
     potential lack of objectivity from organizations that are funded by interest groups that publicly support or oppose
     minimum wage increases, we discuss this research because it has sometimes been influential in the policy debate.
     For papers that are either circulating or published based on work that appeared earlier under the cover of advocacy
     organizations, we refer to the later papers, as these are the versions that either underwent or are likely to undergo
     peer review. Ultimately, research that undergoes peer review should be regarded as the most credible.
                                                         - 38 -


affected by the federal minimum wage increases.31 The increasingly longer differences are intended to

capture more of the effects of the two federal increases. Bernstein and Schmitt also report results

beginning in 1994, arguing that these estimates should be free of any effects of future anticipated

minimum wage increases.

         For teenagers, a negative and significant disemployment effect is only evident for the 1995-1996

period, which provides an estimate of the contemporaneous effect of the first minimum wage increase.

When the sample period is extended to 1997 or 1998, or when it is extended back to 1994 (or both), the

estimates are mostly negative, but not significant. Nevertheless, some of the estimated elasticities are

quite large. For example, the estimated elasticity for teenagers is −1 (and statistically significant) for the

1995-1996 period, and for the others it ranges from −.1 to −.4; these estimates fall by about half when the

sample begins in 1994.32 Of course one might ask why these authors did not pool the results over more

observations, such as the four one-year changes that can be constructed using data from 1994-1998.

Indeed, it seems likely that their variable and insignificant estimates may result from this shortcoming,

and hence we are unconvinced by their conclusion that the research does not uncover significant

disemployment effects of the minimum wage.

         As noted above, this study also examines evidence on adults aged 20-54 with less than a high

school education. Here, although the estimates for the 1995-1996 change are positive, those computed

through 1997 or 1998 are negative, small (in terms of the elasticity), and insignificant. The authors also

present results for different periods—for example, beginning in 1996—and find further evidence of non-

robustness, with strong negative employment effects for low-skilled adults but the opposite for teens.



31
   Although not specified, we assume that this fraction is computed from the 1995 wage distribution and is measured
   as the fraction of workers below the new minimum wage, as of either 1996 or 1997.
32
   These results are consistent with those reported by Wessels (forthcoming). In particular, Wessels regresses the
   log change in teenage employment in each state from the twelve-month period just prior to the October 1996
   increase to the twelve-month period immediately following the September 1997 increase on the fraction of
   workers in each state that were affected by these increases. The results indicate that states with a greater fraction
   of affected workers had relatively larger employment declines. Although Wessels does not report minimum wage
   elasticities or estimates for wages that could be used to compute such elasticities, the estimated coefficient on the
   fraction affected variable is −.30 (significant at the ten-percent level), somewhat larger than that reported by
   Bernstein and Schmitt.
                                                         - 39 -


One contributing factor to the lack of robustness of the results may be that limiting the estimation to this

period results in a sample that is too small to reliably detect employment effects of minimum wages.

             In an earlier paper, Bernstein and Schmitt (1998) also report results from two other analyses.

The first is a difference-in-differences analysis of changes in employment rates for various groups of

teens and young adult high school dropouts relative to changes from the period prior to the minimum

wage increase; this study also controls for aggregate employment changes by including employment rates

for men and women aged 25-54 (separately) in the regression. However, neither this analysis nor the

previous one accounts for state-level variation in minimum wages. This is a problem because many states

had higher minimums prior to the 1996 and 1997 federal increases, so that the federal increases induced

different minimum wage changes in different states. Moreover, while the estimates across many groups

are centered on zero, the point estimates are often extremely large. For example, the minimum wage

increases are estimated to have induced a 4.8 percentage point drop in the employment rate for black men

and a 7.8 percentage point increase for Hispanic women. Although these estimates are not statistically

significant, they imply huge elasticities and make us reluctant to put a great deal of store in these

estimates, especially given the problem of omitted variation in state minimum wages.

           Bernstein and Schmitt also present results from an analysis covering a longer period (1991-1998).

This specification, which follows Deere et al. (1995), regresses age-sex-specific employment changes on

an aggregate employment measure and dummy variables for federal minimum wage increases. These

models reveal disemployment effects for teenage males that are statistically significant in some

specifications, but the estimated employment effects are positive and not significant for teenage females

and teenage blacks. Again, paralleling the earlier estimates, some of the implied elasticities are fairly

large. For example, for teenage males, the regression estimates for the 1996-1997 federal minimum wage

increases imply an elasticity of approximately −.45.33 For females, the estimated positive employment

effect is nearly twice as large (in absolute value). Again, this approach does not use information on state

33
     This is computed from the summed effects in Table 7, column 1 (which are individually insignificant although
     their joint significance is not reported), and the approximate 44% employment rate for teenage males reported in
     Table 4.
                                                          - 40 -


minimum wages, and the large estimates (both positive and negative) are troublesome. Moreover, these

results are largely inconsistent with those reported in Deere et al. (1995) for the earlier federal increases,

which indicated negative and significant effects for teenage males, teenage females, and teenage blacks

(although those estimates were also quite large). Given this, it is not entirely clear what to conclude,

other than that tests of the effects of isolated minimum wage increases may not be very reliable. This

problem is compounded by the disaggregation of results across demographic groups and years, which

may produce estimated minimum wage effects that appear non-robust and statistically insignificant even

when estimates from pooled models are stable and significant.

           A related paper is Neumark’s (2001) “pre-specified research design” study of the effects of the

federal increases in 1996 and 1997. This study resulted from an effort by David Levine, as editor of

Industrial Relations, to get various researchers who had studied minimum wages to pre-specify a research

design for studying this set of federal minimum wage increases. The journal would review the design and

accept it (with revisions) or not, after which the authors, when the data were released, would simply

follow their recipe and report the results. The motivation for this project was to try to cut through an

apparent relationship between who had written previous minimum wage studies and the answers they

found (or “author effects”). As documented in Table 1 of that paper, perhaps the most pronounced

tendency was for research by us to find negative employment effects and for research by Card and

Krueger to find positive (or zero) effects. Such a pattern could be an indication that prior biases had

affected the reported results, an issue discussed in greater detail below. The journal’s project would have

been more valuable had more researchers involved in the minimum wage debate decided to participate,

but only this one pre-specified research design was submitted and published.34, 35




34
     Despite his submission of a paper, Neumark expressed initial reservations about the usefulness of this approach
     because it requires throwing away lots of information on previous minimum wage increases (2001, p. 124),
     paralleling some of the concerns we have about the Bernstein and Schmitt studies.
                                                         - 41 -


           In this analysis, standard panel data models are estimated with two different minimum wage

variables—the minimum wage relative to the average wage in the state, and the fraction below variable

described earlier. These variables are entered both contemporaneously and lagged, and the models

include state and year fixed effects and a control for the employment rate of adults with more than a high-

school education. The data set spans the period from October 1995 to December 1998, roughly one year

before the first federal minimum wage increase in October 1997 to one year after the second increase in

September 1997. The minimum wage variables account for the variation in state minimum wages, so that

the identifying information is the state-specific change in the effective minimum wage associated with the

federal increases. Even so, a general lack of variation during this period makes it less than ideal for

studying the effects of minimum wages.

           The estimates of the employment effects for teenagers are generally imprecise, but near zero. For

example, in a specification that includes current and lagged relative minimum wages, the estimated

elasticity is .06. For young adults (aged 16-24) the estimates are frequently negative, although they are

again insignificant. In this case, the estimates are sometimes larger in absolute value, with elasticities of

approximately −.15. However, similar to what Bernstein and Schmitt found, the results are not

particularly robust for either teenagers or 16-24 year olds as a whole. For example, for 16-24 year olds,

the estimates change sign when the data are restricted to observations from the CPS Outgoing Rotation

Group (ORG) files. In contrast, evidence of disemployment effects is stronger when the sample is

restricted to the less-skilled workers in these age groups. For non-enrolled 16-24 year-olds with no more

than a high school education, the estimated elasticities are around −.3, and for non-enrolled 20-24 year-

olds with no more than a high school education the elasticities are around −.15; these estimates are often

significant, but not always. Negative employment effects for these groups are also evident in


35
     A recent paper for Canada (Campolieti et al., 2006) has a similar flavor. These authors did not pre-commit to a
     research design before obtaining and studying data on minimum wage increases in Canada, and hence avoided
     discarding much useful data. Instead, they simply apply the specifications proposed in the Neumark (2001) paper,
     as well as other modifications proposed by others, to the Canadian data, in this manner avoiding specification
     search that could introduce biases. They find quite uniform evidence of disemployment effects of minimum
     wages from standard reduced-form specifications, with elasticities ranging from about −.14 to −.44, and centered
     on about −.3.
                                                        - 42 -


specifications that use the fraction below minimum wage variable, and they are often statistically

significant as well. The point estimates in these specifications are somewhat variable, but for the main

ones, the elasticities range from −.11 to −.21. Thus, we read the evidence in this paper as pointing to

disemployment effects of minimum wages for young, unskilled workers, and as suggesting that the

absence of an overall effect (or a relatively weak effect) may nonetheless mask compositional shifts.

           Finally, although Burkhauser et al. (2000a) focus most of their attention on the 1979-1992 period

used in the first round of the new minimum wage research, they also present results that isolate the effects

of the 1996 and 1997 increases by using indicator variables to identify the effects of each of these

minimum wage increases. In these specifications, the estimated elasticities are −.27 for the 1996

minimum wage increase and −.17 or the 1997 increase (in specifications excluding year dummies),

roughly half the size of the estimated elasticities for the 1990 and 1991 minimum wage hikes. As noted

in the previous section, however, we have reservations about estimates based on this type of specification.

Studies Focused on Recent State Minimum Wage Increases

           The last decade has witnessed an unprecedented number of states raising their minimum wages,

generating substantial variation in state minimum wages. Although the federal minimum wage has

remained at $5.15 per hour since 1997, as of August 2006, eighteen states and the District of Columbia

had minimum wages that exceeded the federal wage floor, and more than a half dozen additional states

will implement them in 2007. Moreover, state minimum wages have recently been raised above the

federal level in some large states (such as Wisconsin, Florida, Illinois, and New York), whereas—with the

exception of California—the states with high minimum wages in previous years had typically been

relatively small.36 As a result, the share of the population aged 16-64 residing in states with a minimum

wage higher than the federal level rose from 15.6 percent in 1998 to 38.4 percent in 2005, and will climb

above 50 percent with additional minimum wages set to take effect by January 2007 (based on CPS




36
     For details on state minimum wages, see http://www.epinet.org/issueguides/minwage/table5.pdf.
                                                      - 43 -


data).37 Finally, many state minimum wages are currently quite high—11 states and the District of

Columbia have minimum wages of at least $7. From a research perspective, this proliferation of state

minimum wages provides an unparalleled opportunity to study their effects.

        One paper that examines the employment effects of the recent state increases in minimum wages

is an Economic Policy Institute study by Chapman (2004). He estimates a cross-section regression of

state-level employment growth between 2000 and 2003 on the share of each state’s workforce earning

between 100 and 120 percent of the state’s minimum wage in 2003.38 The results suggest no relationship,

but it is unclear to us why the correlation between the proportion of the workforce earning near the

minimum wage in 2003 and aggregate employment growth from an earlier year to 2003 is informative

about minimum wage effects. For example, if the overall gains in employment disproportionately

reflected growth in low-wage employment, or if the rise in employment was due in part to an increase in

labor supply among less-skilled workers, we might find a positive relationship between the low-wage

share in 2003 and employment growth from 2000 to 2003, even if minimum wages reduce employment.

Moreover, most economists have focused on the effects of the minimum wage on the employment

opportunities of the low-skilled workers who are most affected by minimum wages, rather than on its

effects on aggregate employment. On the other hand, as Chapman points out, some organizations

opposing minimum wages, such as the Employment Policies Institute, have suggested a link between

minimum wages and state unemployment rates.39

        A study of state minimum wages by the Fiscal Policy Institute (2004)—another group advocating

minimum wage increases—shows that employment rose faster between 1998 and 2001 in states with a

minimum wage higher than the federal level than in states where the federal minimum was binding. For

overall employment, the authors report that the states with a relatively high minimum wage (11 states plus



37
   In addition, although we ignore them here, living wages, which typically set a higher minimum wage for a subset
   of workers in an area, have spread to scores of cities, while city-wide minimum wages have recently been enacted
   in San Francisco and Santa Fe. For an up-to-date review of living wages and research on their effects, see Adams
   and Neumark (2005).
38
   This paper also discusses trends in specific states; we focus only on the regression analysis.
39
   See, for example, www.epionline.org/oped_detail.cfm?oid=18.
                                                         - 44 -


the District of Columbia) had faster employment growth from 1998 to 2001 than did other states and

about the same employment growth from 2001 to 2004. In retail trade, employment also rose more in the

high minimum wage states, but this difference was most evident in the latter period. This study also

examines growth in employment at small businesses (fewer than 50 employees) and at small retail

businesses. This analysis, which can only be done with County Business Patterns data through 2001,

showed greater employment growth in the high minimum wage states both at small businesses and among

small retail businesses.

           However, this study suffers from two serious shortcomings. First, it makes no effort to exploit

differences in the timing of state minimum wage increases. Although many of these states raised their

minimum wage in 1999 or later, so that the minimum wage variable captures increases in the effective

wage floor in a general sense, differentiating the timing of those increases would improve the

identification of the estimates. Second, the analysis does not control for other factors that might have

influenced employment growth. A better strategy might have been to compare the difference between

retail employment growth and overall employment growth in the two sets of states, on the assumption that

minimum wage effects would be more evident in the retail sector, while other state-specific factors had a

similar effect on both aggregate and retail employment. Thus, we are skeptical that much can be learned

from this study despite the authors’ claims of relatively large positive effects.40

           Partly in response to the Fiscal Policy Institute study, Sabia (2006) reestimated the model

controlling for other potential influences on employment, including the demographic characteristics of

state populations, aggregate state-level economic activity, and other factors; in addition, he used a longer

sample period (1979-2004). More specifically, Sabia uses a relatively standard panel data analysis along

the lines of Burkhauser et al. (2000a and 2000b). Following the specifications in these papers, he

includes contemporaneous and lagged values of the minimum wage variable, which is the log of the


40
     An updated version of this study was released in 2006 and included data through January 2006 for the analysis of
     total and retail employment. However, even though five additional large states had increased their minimum
     wages by 2004 (Florida, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, and Wisconsin), the treatment group of states is still
     the 11 states that had raised their minimum by 2003. We therefore focus on the earlier study.
                                                    - 45 -


higher of the federal or state minimum wage. Sabia focuses on employment in retail trade and at small

businesses, and aggregates the data to the state-by-month cell for each of these sectors. For the sample

period he studies, the results are not sensitive to including or excluding year fixed effects (as was also the

case for his results for teenagers, discussed above).

        For overall employment (as a share of the population) in retail trade, the results indicate

statistically significant employment declines, with estimated elasticities of about −.10. Sabia reports a

larger range, up to −.29, but this larger elasticity only results when the year effects are omitted. For

overall employment in small businesses (defined as firms with 100 or fewer employees), the evidence

also consistently points to significant negative effects of minimum wages, and in this case the results are

less sensitive to whether year effects are included; the elasticities range from −.08 to −.12.

        In addition to reporting results for total employment in these sectors, Sabia also presents results

for teen employment in retail trade and in small businesses as a share of the teen population, arguing that

the use of overall employment in these sectors may understate the effects of the minimum wage on low-

skilled labor. This is a reasonable criticism, although one reason for focusing on low-wage sectors to

begin with is that conventional theory predicts that employment in such sectors will decline in response to

a minimum wage increase (keeping in mind the reservations we noted earlier about focusing on too

narrow a sector).

        The estimated disemployment effects for teens in retail trade are large and statistically significant,

with elasticities in the range of −.27 to −.43. The elasticities for hours worked by teenagers in this sector

are a bit above the upper end of this range, and lower when computed only for working teenagers. For

teen employment and hours in small business, the elasticities are uniformly negative and about twice as

large. However, it is not entirely clear what to make of the findings that the minimum wage reduces the

share of teens employed in retail businesses or small businesses. These results neither imply employment

declines in the retail sector (as firms could substitute towards other workers) nor employment declines for

teenagers overall (as teens could shift to other sectors), although it seems unlikely that either of these

other channels could fully absorb the teens displaced from the retail and small business sectors. As a
                                                          - 46 -


result, Sabia’s estimated effects of minimum wages on overall employment in the retail and small

business sector seem more relevant to the traditional policy question.41

           A few additional studies have adopted the case study approach to estimate the effects of specific

state minimum wage increases on employment. For example, Orazem and Mattila (2002) examined the

effects of a series of minimum wage increases that took place in Iowa beginning in 1990, when the Iowa

minimum wage rose faster than the federal minimum. The authors begin with a county-level analysis of

low-wage industries in the state using data from the QCEW program, the same data source used by Kim

and Taylor in their study of California’s minimum wage increase. However, in order to circumvent the

lack of hourly wage information in this data set, the authors supplement these data with information on

average hourly earnings by industry from the BLS’s Current Employment Survey. The minimum wage

variable is the level of the minimum wage relative to the lagged average wage for each county-industry

cell; the authors also include controls for changes in national employment and wages, county per capita

income, the proportion of firms in each cell that are covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act, and whether

a county is urban or rural. The results indicate a negative effect of the minimum wage on employment,

with an estimated elasticity of between −.06 and −.12. The estimates are mostly statistically significant,

with the larger estimates evident for four-quarter changes in employment (as opposed to one-quarter

changes).

           Recognizing that these estimates are based on aggregates that include both workers directly

affected by the minimum wage increases and other higher-paid employees, the authors supplement these

results by collecting unemployment insurance tax filings for a subset of the firms. These records include

quarterly information on employment and earnings for individual employees, which were then merged

with driver license records to obtain the gender and age of each worker. Using this information, Orazem



41
     Of course, we are sometimes more interested in whether minimum wages reduce employment of the least-skilled
     workers. However, in this case, we might learn more about the implications of an increase in the minimum wage
     on their employment prospects by focusing on their overall employment rates. Indeed, there is no reason to
     necessarily expect that teenagers in these sectors will be more adversely affected by minimum wage increases
     than teenagers in other sectors, because the production technology that leads to the greater use of teen labor in
     these sectors may also entail few substitution possibilities.
                                                      - 47 -


and Mattila estimate predicted wages by age and sex and, using the demographic profile of the workforce

for each firm, calculate the predicted proportion of workers at each firm who were initially paid less than

the new minimum wage. The authors then regress this percentage on the level of the minimum wage

relative to the predicted average wage of the subminimum wage group to obtain an estimate of the

employment elasticity for affected workers. They emphasize that because they do not use actual wage

data in this regression, the minimum wage effect is effectively identified by changes in the demographic

makeup of each firm’s employees. In particular, a shift away from employees in traditionally low-wage

demographic groups (for example, teenagers) would be evidence of a negative employment effect from

the minimum wage.

        Indeed, the estimates show exactly this result. For changes measured over four-quarter periods,

the estimated employment elasticities range from −.22 to −.54 when no industry controls are included and

from −.31 to −.85 when such controls are included; moreover, the estimates are statistically significant in

all cases. As the authors note, the larger elasticities relative to their county-level analysis likely reflect

their efforts to identify those individuals most likely affected by the minimum wage increases, an issue to

which we return below. However, the size of the elasticities is somewhat surprising given that the

demographic characteristics used to identify the minimum wage effects (age and sex) are the same groups

on which previous studies have focused.

        Reich and Hall (2001) analyze the effects of a set of increases in California’s minimum wage

from $4.25 in September 1996 to $5.75 in March 1998 and conclude that this increase did not reduce

employment. As one piece of evidence in support of their conclusion, they note that employment rates

increased for all age groups between 1995 and 1999. However, California’s economy was booming

during that period, and the fact that there was a general increase in employment at that time says little

about the effects of the minimum wage increase. Indeed, when we construct a difference-in-differences

comparison with their data, using older ages as a crude control group, we find the opposite result: the

employment rate for teenagers rose much less (.8 percentage point) than did employment rates for other

age groups (between 3 and 7.8 percentage points). Because teenagers are disproportionately more likely
                                                          - 48 -


to be affected by the minimum wage, this comparison suggests a negative employment effect of the

minimum wage.42 On the other hand, the employment rate for 19-22 year-olds, who were also more

likely than adults to be affected by this set of minimum wage increases, rose relatively faster than that for

other age groups. Of course, all of these comparisons are overly simplistic relative to the existing

literature because the absence of control groups from other states ignores the possibility of differential

trends in employment rates by age group.

           As another piece of evidence, Reich and Hall show that the change in the rate of employment

growth in the retail and restaurant sectors increased from 1996 to 1998, whereas it decreased in the

manufacturing and construction sector. Because manufacturing and construction jobs should have been

largely unaffected by the minimum wage, they interpret this difference-in-differences comparison as

suggesting that the minimum wage increases did not reduce employment. However, elsewhere in the text

they note that the manufacturing and construction sector experienced a “sharp fall ... in 1998, when the

Asian financial crisis particularly affected manufacturing.” This industry-specific demand shock raises

serious doubts about the validity of their difference-in-differences estimate.

           In addition, they offer no explanation as to why they use the difference in the change in

employment growth before and after the minimum wage increase as their estimate of the minimum wage

effect, rather than simply comparing growth rates before and after the policy change. When we compare

average growth rates for the period 13 months before the first minimum wage increase with the growth

rates for 12 months after the last increase (to minimize anticipatory effects, and to allow for longer-term

effects), we find that employment growth fell sharply in retail trade (2.13 percentage points) and in

restaurants (.82 percentage point), but fell only slightly in manufacturing and construction (.26 percentage

point), suggesting that the minimum wage increases had an adverse effect on employment in low-wage

industries. Regardless, by the authors’ own admission, this difference-in-differences experiment is of

modest value, and the combined evidence presented in this paper is unconvincing.


42
     According to their data, teenagers comprised just 2.9 percent of workers in 1999 but accounted for 13.1 percent of
     workers earning $6 or less.
                                                        - 49 -


           Singell and Terborg (2006) examine the effects of minimum wages on the eating and drinking

sector, and the hotel and lodging industry, in Oregon and Washington. They use data from 1994-2001, a

period that includes three increases in the minimum wage in Oregon (in 1997, 1998, and 1999) and three

increases in the minimum wage in Washington (in 1999, 2000, and 2001). Thus, this sample provides

two different experiments for evaluating the effects of minimum wage increases in distinct labor markets

that, according to the authors, faced similar economic conditions.

           Singell and Terborg first use BLS wage survey data to explore the extent to which minimum

wages are binding in these two sectors. For the eating and drinking sector, the 10th percentile of the wage

distribution tracks the minimum wage in each state quite closely, with the exception of 1997 and 1998,

when the minimum wage was only $4.90 in Washington; even so, the 10th percentile clearly increases to

the later minimum wages of $6.50 (in 2000) and $6.72 (in 2001). This pattern holds for three of the four

jobs in this sector—hosts and hostesses, waiters and waitresses, and fast food cooks—but is less evident

for restaurant cooks, whose wages tend to be somewhat higher. Indeed, for the first three jobs, even the

median wage rates seem to move closely with changes in the minimum wage. Wages are higher in the

hotel and lodging sector, and a systematic pattern relating minimum wages to the 10th percentile of the

wage distribution is harder to discern; the one exception is for maids and housekeeping, which is the

lowest-wage category.43 These wage distributions suggest that minimum wages are binding in the eating

and drinking sector, but less so in the hotel and lodging sector.

           The authors next turn to the monthly BLS employment data for these two sectors. They regress

the change in employment on a minimum wage variable, controls for which state the observation comes

from, population and per capita income growth, calendar month dummies and interactions between these

and a dummy variable for Oregon (to allow for different seasonal patterns in each state), and a cubic time

trend. They identify the minimum wage effect from the annual first difference in the log of the real

minimum wage, and in some specifications include the lag of this variable as well. The authors also make

a concerted effort to establish the robustness of their results. The results for the eating and drinking sector

43
     The other two jobs surveyed are desk clerks and managers.
                                                     - 50 -


consistently indicate that the minimum wage increases reduced employment. The estimates are

statistically significant whether or not lagged effects are included, although they are stronger in the latter

case. For the specification that includes both contemporaneous and lagged effects, the employment

elasticity is −.2.

         In contrast, the estimates for hotel and lodging are positive and significant, with elasticities of

about .15. The authors speculate that the absence of negative effects for this sector may be because

minimum wages are considerably less binding, although of course that fact does not explain a positive

employment effect. They also suggest that voters may pass minimum wage legislation when “times are

good”—the endogeneity problem we discussed earlier—but offer no explanation as to why this

endogeneity would be particularly relevant with regard to economic conditions in the hotel and lodging

sector, nor do they provide any evidence that the timing of minimum wage increases fits this explanation.

In any event, their analysis suggests that minimum wage effects may vary substantially across industries.

         Finally, Singell and Terborg report on an analysis of the number of help-wanted ads for the

different types of jobs in these two industries. The help-wanted data are a valuable addition to the study

because the BLS employment data do not provide the breakdown into the specific jobs for which the

wage results were reported. By classifying the help-wanted data by the jobs for which wage distributions

are reported, it is possible to focus on those jobs for which minimum wages were binding (most

importantly, maids and housekeepers in the hotel and lodging industry).

         The dependent variable in the want-ad regressions is the ratio of want-ads to industry

employment, because a given level of want-ads generates a particular flow of applicants. That is, the level

of want-ads and changes in employment should be affected in the same way by minimum wages.

However, by the same logic, it seems that the form of the minimum wage variable should be the same as

in the employment analysis, although the authors also switch to a levels specification for the minimum

wage variable. Their rationale for this specification is that, in equilibrium, different levels of want-ads

will be needed to maintain the desired level and quality of employment; for example, if the desired level

of employment is lower with a higher minimum wage, then fewer want-ads will be needed to maintain
                                                         - 51 -


that level.44 Nonetheless, given that the want-ad regressions are interpreted as complementary evidence,

it would have been useful to see the results for the same specifications used in the analysis of

employment, perhaps coupled with some more-detailed, independent analysis of how minimum wages

affect want-ads.

         The want-ad regressions are presented for five jobs in eating and drinking—wait staff, buss staff,

dishwasher staff, hosts, and cooks—and one job in hotels and lodging—housekeepers.45 In five out of six

cases—including housekeepers—the estimated effect of the minimum wage on the number of want-ads is

negative and significant, with a 10 percent increase in the minimum reducing the number of ads by 10 to

47 percent (the number of monthly ads ranges from about two to 48, depending on the period and job).

Among the restaurant jobs, the only insignificant result is for cooks, which is the highest-paying job in the

eating and drinking industry and thus less likely to be affected by minimum wage changes. Thus, the

general conclusion from this study is that the minimum wage increases in Oregon and Washington had an

adverse effect on employment in the low-wage eating and drinking sector and on low-wage workers in the

somewhat higher-wage hotel and lodging sector. 46

Studies of Recent City Minimum Wages

         With the introduction of minimum wages in Santa Fe and San Francisco in 2004, we now also

have a few studies of the effects of city-specific minimum wages.47 In particular, Dube et al.

(forthcoming) present an analysis of the impact of the San Francisco minimum wage on restaurant

employment in that city. Using survey data on restaurants employing 30 workers or less, they find that

restaurant employment in establishments more likely to be affected by the new minimum wage law

44
   Personal communication with Larry Singell, July 6, 2006.
45
   Of course, these jobs are not necessary specific to an industry. For example, we presume that a want-ad may be
   advertising for waitpersons in a hotel restaurant.
46
   In a similar vein, Skedinger (2006) uses firm-level survey data to study the effects of minimum wage changes on
   hotel and restaurant workers in Sweden. The evidence indicates that minimum wage increases led to higher
   separations of affected workers aged 20 and over, but there is only weak evidence of an effect on teenagers. This
   study also finds that minimum wage decreases raise the job accession rate of affected workers, although this
   evidence is not as robust as the evidence on separations. The context of this study is also quite different from the
   U.S. case studies, as the minimum wages used in the analysis consist of an extensive set of wage floors that vary
   by job, age, tenure, and location, and that are negotiated via centralized bargaining. Thus, the implications of the
   results for more traditional uniform minimum wage floors are not clear.
47
   A minimum wage of $6.75 took effect in Albuquerque on January 1, 2007.
                                                           - 52 -


increased more rapidly than in three control groups: small restaurants not covered by the minimum wage

in the first year; restaurants with 14-30 employees that were already paying all of their workers a wage

above the new minimum prior to its introduction; and restaurants with 14-30 employees in neighboring

jurisdictions not subject to the new minimum wage. The estimated elasticities for both employment and

FTE employment range between .01 and .12 (with most at the lower end), and never statistically

significant.

           The study is generally careful, and uses an appropriate research design. One nice feature is that

the authors document that their data do not suffer from the measurement error problems exhibited in the

Card-Krueger (1994) fast-food study, although they do not provide information on their survey that might

explain why they apparently do better. There are a few potential problems, however. First, the response

rate is low—only 38 percent for the first wave.48 Second, like many of the earlier case studies, this

analysis uses a relatively short window over which to estimate the employment effects, with the post-

minimum wage observation coming about nine months after the minimum wage was implemented; as a

result, the estimates will not capture any potential longer-term adjustments to minimum wage increases.

Third, we do not see a compelling reason to exclude restaurants with more than 30 employees. Although

the authors argue that larger restaurants “may be different types of enterprises operating in markets with

distinct dynamics” (p. 8), they offer no particular justification for that view, and it seems problematic to

exclude restaurants of a particular size from the study if the goal is to estimate the employment effects for

the industry most affected by the city’s minimum wage increase. That said, absent evidence that these

problems biased the results, this study has to be regarded as providing reasonably good evidence that the

minimum wage implemented in San Francisco did not reduce employment at established mid-size




48
     Although the authors use employment data from the Dun & Bradstreet file—their sample frame—to show that
     initial employment levels for the respondents to their survey were similar to those for all establishments, it also
     would have been useful to use the Dun & Bradstreet data from one year later to see whether the non-respondents
     were different in terms of employment changes, and, moreover, to see whether the empirical analysis of
     employment using the Dun & Bradstreet data led to the same conclusion.
                                                       - 53 -


restaurants. How well this generalizes to the rest of the industry and other industries, and how well the

results from this single episode generalize to other minimum wage increases, remain open questions.49

        In addition, two recent studies have examined the effects of the $8.50 hourly minimum wage that

was introduced in Santa Fe in June 2004.50 Yelowitz (2005), in a paper circulated by the Employment

Policies Institute, estimates standard difference-in-differences models using CPS data for Santa Fe and the

rest of New Mexico. His estimates indicate that the minimum wage had small and insignificant effects on

the employment-to-population rates of both more- and less-educated (12 or fewer years of education)

individuals, but that weekly hours worked by less-educated workers declined by a statistically significant

3.2 hours. This decline, which is conceptually equivalent to the effect of the minimum wage on FTE

employment, corresponds to an elasticity of −.12. The methodology used in this study is relatively

standard and is reasonably convincing, albeit subject to the concerns we raised earlier about studies of

single episodes of minimum wage increases.51 Moreover, the data extend from 17 months prior to the

minimum wage’s imposition to 17 months afterwards, which should allow longer-term effects to show

through to the estimates.

        Potter (2006) takes a somewhat different approach to estimating the effects of the Santa Fe

minimum wage. Using establishment-level data compiled by the New Mexico Department of Labor as


49
   Smets (2005) also attempts to provide some evidence of the effects of the city’s minimum wage on the San
   Francisco restaurant industry. His study, which was financed by the industry, reports that the minimum wage had
   an adverse effect on employment. This conclusion is based on a survey in which respondents predominantly
   indicated that they reduced employment in response to the minimum wage, although about two-thirds of
   respondents indicated that their response was small. However, this study suffers from two major problems. First,
   response rates for many parts of the survey were extremely low—below 4 percent. Second, the survey did not
   collect objective measures of employment from before and after the minimum wage increase, but instead simply
   asked respondents how they were affected by the new minimum wage. Some restaurant owners may have had an
   incentive to claim that the minimum wage affected them adversely, given that the minimum wage probably raised
   their labor costs (most respondents indicated that the minimum wage decreased profits); in addition, those owners
   who were more adversely affected by the minimum wage may have been more likely to respond to the survey.
50
   Although the city refers to this wage floor as a living wage, it is more comparable to a minimum wage because it
   has much broader coverage than the living wage laws in many other cities (see, for example, Adams and
   Neumark, 2005). In particular, the new minimum wage applies to all firms with 25 or more employees.
51
   One curious result in this study is the absence of an estimated positive effect from the new minimum wage on
   wages at the 10th or 25th percentile of the wage distribution in quantile regressions with controls for race,
   education, and marital status. Although this may cast doubt on the validity of the estimated negative effect on
   hours, Adams and Neumark (2005) point out that tests for the effects of a minimum wage on the wage distribution
   should not condition on skills because minimum wage laws are expected to affect the unconditional distribution
   of wages rather than the conditional distribution.
                                                        - 54 -


part of the BLS Quarterly Census of Wages and Employment program, he estimates the effects of the new

minimum wage on both total private employment and on employment in four low-wage industries—

construction, retail, health care, and accommodations and food. In particular, Potter uses firms in

Albuquerque with more than 25 employees as the control group and estimates difference-in-differences

models for the average level of employment in each city in the 12 months prior to the minimum wage’s

introduction and in the 12-month period that followed. The choice of Albuquerque as the control group is

problematic. The author indicates that Albuquerque was chosen as the control because the annual percent

changes in employment over the period from 1996 to 2005 most closely matched those for Santa Fe.

However, because that period includes the eighteen months that followed the introduction of the

minimum wage in Santa Fe, such a selection rule will bias the estimates of the minimum wage effects

toward zero. Instead, it would have been preferable either to choose the control region on the basis of the

similarity of changes prior to the introduction of the minimum wage or to include the rest of the state, as

Yelowitz did.

           The regression estimates for the proportionate change in employment at firms subject to the

minimum wage (that is, firms with 25 or more workers) are .012 for total employment, −.08 for

construction, −.007 for retail, −0.002 for health care, and .031 for accommodations and food; only the

negative estimate for construction is statistically significant. At first glance, the absence of a negative

effect for the accommodations and food industry seems at odds with the prediction of the competitive

model, given the relatively high number of low-wage workers employed in that industry. However, the

Santa Fe law includes a 100 percent tip credit for workers earning at least $100 a month in tips or

commissions,52 so the minimum wage may have been of little relevance for this industry.53 Moreover,

when Potter estimates difference-in-difference-in-differences models (by including smaller firms in both

Santa Fe and Albuquerque in the analysis), all five of the estimates are negative (although again

significant only for construction). Indeed, this last comparison arguably provides the strongest evidence


52
     See http://santafenm.gov/cityclerks/livingwageeng-span.pdf.
53
     Potter shows no results on wage effects.
                                                        - 55 -


because it controls for other differences in employment change in the two cities by differencing relative to

the change for smaller firms.54 In this regard, the evidence for Santa Fe’s minimum wage increase

generally points to negative effects, although the evidence is not strong and is potentially problematic.

         Finally, we reiterate our concerns about drawing broad inferences from case studies of the effects

of a particular minimum wage increase. Although case studies of a minimum wage increase in one state

that provide estimates for total employment or for a variety of industries do not suffer from the same

problems faced by studies that focus on one particular industry, they still are subject to biases associated

with demand shocks or sampling variation that might be correlated with the minimum wage increase. In

contrast, a larger panel data study that averages over many episodes of minimum wage increases is more

likely to produce reliable results because other unobserved shocks will tend to average out and because

sampling variation will be smaller.

Revisiting Aggregate Time-Series Estimates of the Effects of the Federal Minimum Wage

         Although most of the new minimum wage research has moved away from aggregate time-series

studies of the effects of the federal minimum wage, there is a small body of time-series research over the

past fifteen years that warrants a brief summary. This segment of the literature has its genesis with

Wellington (1991), who updated the basic time-series specification in Brown et al. (1983):

(5)      Yt = αMWt + Rt β + ε t .

In this specification, Y represents the employment-to-population ratio for a particular demographic group

(16-19 or 20-24 year olds), MW is the minimum wage variable, and R is a set of control variables that

includes a cyclical control, supply side variables, linear and quadratic time trends, and seasonal

dummies.55 The minimum wage variable is typically the Kaitz index, which was the most widely used


54
   Potter incorrectly interprets the evidence as indicating that, after the minimum wage was introduced, “either large
   Santa Fe businesses are increasing employment more than large Albuquerque businesses or small Albuquerque
   businesses are increasing employment more than small Santa Fe businesses” (p. 19). What the estimates actually
   show is that the difference in employment growth in large Santa Fe businesses relative to large Albuquerque
   businesses was less than the corresponding difference for small businesses, consistent with the minimum wage
   slowing employment growth in large business in Santa Fe.
55
   More precisely, Wellington updated the specification suggested by Solon (1985), which also includes interactions
   between the quarterly seasonal dummies and a linear and quadratic trend, along with a standard AR(1) correction.
                                                             - 56 -


measure in the earlier time-series literature. Brown et al. estimated the model with quarterly data from

1954 to 1979, while Wellington extended the data through 1986. Using the longer sample period,

Wellington’s results showed employment elasticities ranging from −.05 to −.09 for teenagers and from

zero to −.02 for 20-24 year olds, estimates that fall below the lower end of the range found in the BGK

survey. In addition, only a minority of the estimates for teenagers—and none of the estimates for young

adults—were statistically significant at conventional levels.

            Subsequent studies also found that estimating a standard time-series model with a data set that

included more recent observations produced a smaller elasticity of teen employment with respect to the

minimum wage. For example, Card and Krueger (1995a) estimated variants of the Solon model using

data through 1993 and reported elasticities for the Kaitz index that center on −.07 and that are generally

not statistically significant.56 Likewise, Bernstein and Schmitt (2000) report results from time-series

analyses that extend the data into 2000. These results provide additional evidence of a downward drift in

the disemployment effect of the minimum wage, with estimates for the full sample period indicating an

elasticity of −.06 and a t-statistic (1.63) just below the ten-percent level of significance. These authors

also report estimates that augment the earlier model by differencing the data to account for nonstationarity

and by treating seasonality differently than simply seasonal dummy variables; in addition, they report

results using annual data. The elasticities from these alternative analyses range from −.001 to −.05, with

four of the five estimates reported well below standard levels of significance.

            The likely reasons for a decline over time in the estimated minimum wage effect from such

models have been the subject of some debate. Card and Krueger (1995b) argued that this decline suggests

that the time-series studies published in the 1970s and early 1980s were contaminated by publication bias.

Using meta-analysis methods, Card and Krueger found that the reported t-ratios in such studies were

clustered around two, and that estimated effects declined (toward zero) over time. Because smaller


56
     However, Bazen and Marimoutou (2002) note that Wellington and Card and Krueger enter some variables in
     levels that BGK and Solon entered in logs. When they estimate the same specification as Solon with data through
     1993, they find an elasticity of −.08 that is significant at the five-percent level, although this estimate is still below
     those based on data through 1979.
                                                      - 57 -


estimated effects would become significant as the sample size grew longer, Card and Krueger argued that

the declining estimates constituted evidence that researchers were more likely to choose and report

specifications that produced statistically significant estimates corresponding to their theoretical priors,

that reviewers and editors were more likely to publish such studies, and thus that the earlier literature was

“biased in the direction of finding statistically significant results” (p. 194).

        However, in Neumark and Wascher (1998), we showed that successive estimates from a

benchmark specification that is arguably uncontaminated by publication bias produce a pattern of results

not materially different from those generated by the studies included in Card and Krueger’s meta-

analysis. This finding points to parameter instability rather than publication bias as the likely reason for

the decline in the estimated effects of minimum wages. We offered two possible reasons for the decline

in the coefficient on the Kaitz index. First, if changes in coverage, which dominate movements in the

Kaitz index early in the sample period, have a larger effect on employment than changes in the relative

value of the minimum wage, the fact that coverage has been essentially unchanged since the early 1970s

would lead to a lower estimated effect over time. Second, given the widening in the wage distribution

during the 1980s, the Kaitz index, which uses the average wage in the denominator, may overstate the

decline in the bite of the minimum wage that took place during the 1980s (if the close substitutes for

minimum wage workers earn below-average wages), leading to a growing downward bias in estimates of

the minimum wage effect on employment. One other possibility, which we highlighted earlier, is that

mismeasurement of the minimum wage variable in such studies has increased over time because of the

proliferation of state minimum wages.

        We should also note, however, that some of the most recent studies in this genre find no evidence

of a declining minimum wage effect in the aggregate time-series data. In particular, Williams and Mills

(2001) argue that previous time-series studies of the effects of the minimum wage on employment did not

adequately account for serial correlation and nonstationarity in the data. As evidence, they revisit the

Card and Krueger time-series analysis of minimum wage effects and note that, using the standard

specifications, the estimated minimum wage effects are quite sensitive to the method used to estimate the
                                                          - 58 -


AR(1) error process and that the AR(1) coefficient rises to close to unity as the sample length is

increased, suggesting the possibility of a unit root in the error term. They then use Augmented Dickey-

Fuller procedures to test for the presence of unit roots in the data and find that the teenage employment-

to-population ratio is I(0) but that the Kaitz index is I(1), suggesting that the estimates from the standard

specifications are not consistent.

           To address this issue, Williams and Mills estimate a vector autoregression model with separate

equations for employment, the change in the Kaitz index, and each of the control variables (transformed

as needed to ensure stationarity). The results indicate that changes in the minimum wage “Granger

cause” teenage employment and can account for between 7 and 10 percent of the variation in teen

employment rates over the 1954-93 sample period. In addition, impulse response functions from the

VAR suggest that raising the minimum wage has an immediate negative effect on employment and that

the employment elasticity rises to roughly −.4 over a two-year period.

           Bazen and Marimoutou (2002) present what we believe is the most recent time-series study of

minimum wage effects in the United States. They also argue that the specifications used in the earlier

time-series literature were dynamically misspecified, but they address this issue in a different manner than

did Williams and Mills. In particular, they extend the standard Solon model by implementing an

approach that specifies stochastic structures for the trend, seasonal, and cyclical components rather than

the deterministic components used in past time-series models, but that nests those models as well.57 In

addition, they include the minimum wage and average manufacturing earnings in the model along with

the Kaitz index to relax the constraint imposed by the Kaitz index that the effects of changes in the

minimum wage and the average wage are of equal but opposite sign. In general, the data reject the

deterministic specification in favor of the stochastic specification: the estimates indicate that many of the

unobserved components have stochastic elements (a key exception is the cyclical component) and that the

stochastic model exhibits greater parameter stability and better forecasting performance than does the


57
     Bernstein and Schmitt (2000) also report estimates from this structural time-series approach, although they give
     no details.
                                                         - 59 -


Solon model.58 In addition, although the coefficient on the Kaitz index is not statistically significant, the

coefficients on both the minimum wage and average manufacturing wage are significant, and the

restriction that the minimum wage and average wage enter with equal but opposite-signed effects is

rejected. They also find that the effect of the minimum wage on employment has been fairly constant

over time and, extending the sample through the second quarter of 1999, report statistically significant

negative effects of the minimum wage on teenage employment, with an elasticity of −.11 in the short-run

and −.27 in the long-run.

           We are not time-series econometricians, and thus we leave it to those with more expertise to fully

assess the contributions of Williams and Mills and Bazen and Marimoutou to the time-series literature on

minimum wage effects. And, we reiterate our earlier concern that time-series studies are less relevant to

the present context given the proliferation of state minimum wages. Nonetheless, these papers pose a

clear challenge to claims that the time-series evidence for the United States does not show a detectable

adverse effect of minimum wages on teenage employment.

           Finally, Wolfson and Belman (2001 and 2004) estimate the wage and employment effects of the

minimum wage using time-series data for 3-digit SIC industries that have either a relatively high fraction

of young workers or a relatively low average wage. In particular, they specify time-series models for

each industry and estimate the models as a system of equations; this set-up allows them to account for

common unobservable influences and to more easily test some cross-equation restrictions. The authors

estimate these models for a variety of panels—some shorter ones that include more industries, and some

longer ones that include fewer industries. Their study uses aggregate national data, which means that they

are identifying the effects of the federal minimum wage.

           Not surprisingly, this approach generates a large number of estimated minimum wage effects. To

summarize their results, the authors report the estimates in a graphical framework that displays the sign,

size, and significance of the estimates. The figure indicates that many of the employment estimates by

industry are statistically insignificant, although they are more often negative than positive. In addition,

58
     The authors show that the forecast performance of the other models, estimated through 1979, deteriorates badly.
                                                     - 60 -


when the authors focus on the effects of legislated minimum wage increases (rather than real declines), 14

of the 18 significant estimates, out of a total of 128 estimates, are negative. Finally, the authors also

present results that display the relationship between the estimated employment elasticity and the wage

elasticity, arguing that we should see a sharper employment reduction when the minimum wage has a

larger positive effect on the wage. However, the evidence does not support this conjecture.

        We have a couple of comments on these studies. First, we are not certain how much should be

made of the lack of significance of many of the estimates, since the models are so highly disaggregated.

It seems likely that pooling restrictions across many industries would not be rejected, in which case more

precise estimates would likely be obtained by aggregating them. On the other hand, there is some value

to providing estimates of employment effects for many low-wage industries. In our discussion of the

industry-specific studies, we noted that theory does not predict that employment in a narrow industry

should fall in response to a minimum wage increase, which makes it difficult to interpret the results of

such studies. In this sense, the absence of negative employment effects for a large number of low-wage

industries would be more compelling than evidence from a single industry.

        Second, we are not convinced that the absence of stronger disemployment effects for industries in

which the minimum wage has a larger effect on average industry wages should be viewed as necessarily

inconsistent with the standard model of the minimum wage. Absent any employment changes, the

average wage should go up the most in industries for which the gap between prevailing wages and the

new minimum is the largest, and in this case their filter would pick out the industries with the most

workers bound by the minimum wage. However, the authors only observe wage changes that accompany

employment changes. Thus, one alternative explanation for their result is that average wages rise the

most in industries in which there is the least possibility to substitute away from low-wage labor and

toward non-labor inputs. A second possible explanation is that average wages increase the most in

industries in which it is easiest to substitute higher-skilled for lower-skilled labor. In either of these cases,

the filter that Wolfson and Belman apply would tend pick out industries that should have smaller

disemployment effects rather than larger ones.
                                                     - 61 -


Efforts to Identify the Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Least Skilled

       Much of the literature discussed thus far has focused on the effects of the minimum wage on the

aggregate employment rates of teenagers. As noted earlier, the choice of teenagers in these studies

reflects the fact that they make up a disproportionate share of the minimum wage workforce, so that the

effects of minimum wages are more likely to be evident for this group than for other broad demographic

groups. However, from a policy perspective the effect of a minimum wage increase on teenagers is

arguably of less interest than the effect on low-wage adult workers, both because teenagers are less likely

than adults to be permanently low-wage workers and because many teenagers are secondary earners from

non-poor families. Moreover, even among teenagers many workers earn significantly more than the

minimum wage, and because the proportion not directly influenced by a change in the minimum wage can

be substantial, it is often quite difficult to distinguish minimum wage effects from the myriad of other

factors influencing the supply of and demand for teenage labor, as well as from noise in the data.

        For the same reason, the reported elasticities from studies of aggregate groups will tend to

understate both the effects of the minimum wage on the minimum wage workforce and the elasticity of

demand for such workers with respect to the minimum wage. For example, one can think of the

minimum wage elasticity for the teenage group as a whole as a weighted average of the elasticity for

workers directly affected by a change in the minimum wage and the elasticity for workers currently

earning above the minimum wage. If we assume that the latter elasticity is zero, then the minimum wage

elasticity for affected workers (eA) can be written as e A = e / p A , where e is the estimated elasticity for

the group as a whole and pA is the proportion of the group directly affected by the change in the minimum

wage. Moreover, it is incorrect to interpret the minimum wage effect as a demand elasticity in these

studies because the size of the average wage increase associated with a minimum wage increase will

typically be less than the minimum wage increase itself because some affected workers are already

earning more than the old minimum wage (but less than the new minimum wage). In this case, the

demand elasticity can be written as:
                                                          - 62 -


(6)         e A = ( e / p A ) ⋅ ( ΔMW / ΔW A ) ,

where ΔWA is the average wage change of those workers whose wages were directly affected by the

change in the minimum wage.

           As indicated by our summary thus far, one approach that researchers have used to estimate

minimum wage elasticities for individuals most likely to be affected by the minimum wage has been to

narrow the sample to groups more likely to work at minimum wage jobs.59 However, even samples of

narrow demographic groups or specific low-wage industries will include both minimum wage workers

and higher-wage workers. Thus, some researchers have attempted to identify observations for which the

minimum wage increase is binding and to estimate minimum wage employment effects for these

individuals. At the aggregate level, in Neumark and Wascher (2002) we attempted to classify state-year

observations (in a probability sense) into one of three categories: observations for which the minimum

wage was binding, so that teenage employment was determined by the labor demand curve; observations

for which the minimum wage was not binding, so that teenage employment was determined by both

supply and demand; and observations for which the monopsony model was relevant, so that employment

was determined by movements along the supply curve. To do this, we estimated a switching regression

model with the switch points defined as the intersection of the labor demand and labor supply curves (to

differentiate the binding and nonbinding regimes) and the point at which the labor demand curve

intersects the marginal cost of labor curve (to differentiate a monopsony regime). As might be expected,

this approach yields few observations in the monopsony regime. However, there are a substantial number

of observations in the nonbinding regime, allowing us to estimate minimum wage effects for those

observations for which the minimum wage is more likely to be binding. The model is estimated using

employment data on 16-24 year olds and points to negative and significant effects of the minimum wage

for observations in the binding regime. In particular, the estimated elasticities in the binding regime range

from about −.13 to −.21, somewhat larger than the estimates from reduced-form models of youth


59
     In addition to the research reviewed earlier, see also Pabilonia (2002), who focuses on the effects of minimum
     wages on employment of 14-16 year olds.
                                                         - 63 -


employment. Perhaps more importantly, the results suggest that minimum wage effects from single-

equation reduced-form regressions will be sensitive to the sample used for the estimation.

           Other researchers have turned to cross-sections or panels of individual-level data to identify

individuals likely to be directly affected by changes in the minimum wage. One of the first papers in the

new minimum wage literature to take this approach was Currie and Fallick (1996), who used longitudinal

data from the NLSY to study the employment effects of the increases in the federal minimum wage in

1980 and 1981.60 In particular, these authors calculate a wage gap for each employed individual as the

difference between the individual’s wage in year t−1 and the minimum wage in year t for workers whose

wage in year t−1 was between the old and new minimum wage, and zero otherwise. They then use a

fixed-effects linear probability model to compare subsequent employment rates for individuals who were

directly affected by the increases in the nominal minimum wage with individuals who were not directly

affected. The results show clear signs of a negative and statistically significant disemployment effect

even after controlling for other unobservable individual differences. Their preferred estimate suggests

that individuals directly affected by the minimum wage increases in 1980 and 1981 were 3 percent less

likely than other workers to be employed one year later. Given that the minimum wage rose about 15

percent over those two years, this estimate is consistent with an employment elasticity of about −.2,

although it does not take into account the possible decline in employment probabilities in year t for

individuals who were not employed prior to the minimum wage hikes.61

           Card and Krueger (1995a) criticize this study on a number of grounds. One of their primary

concerns seems to be Currie and Fallick’s estimate of a large negative minimum wage effect for workers

classified as not covered by the minimum wage. However, Currie and Fallick clearly believe that their

attempt to identify uncovered workers was unsuccessful because the wage distribution for uncovered




60
     An earlier paper by Linneman (1982) also used this general approach.
61
     The authors report that they attempted to identify nonemployed workers likely to be affected by the minimum
     wage by imputing their wage rates from a hedonic regression of wages on a set of observed demographic
     variables. Although they found sizable negative employment effects for this group, they expressed skepticism
     about their identification scheme and did not report any point estimates.
                                                    - 64 -


workers also exhibits a large spike at the nominal minimum wage in both 1980 and 1981.62 Another

concern, which seems more relevant to us, is Currie and Fallick’s use of above-minimum wage workers

as the control group in their study.

        In a series of papers, Abowd et al. (1999, 2000a, 2000b) attempt to improve on this approach by

respecifying the variable in real terms and identifying individuals who were “freed” by a decline in the

real minimum wage as well as those who were newly bound by a nominal increase in the wage floor. In

particular, when the nominal minimum wage rises, they count an observation as affected if the

individual’s real wage in year t is between the real value of the minimum wage in year t and the real value

of the minimum wage in year t+1. This variable is conceptually similar to the minimum wage variables

used by Currie and Fallick (as well as to Card’s fraction affected variable), except that it is expressed in

real terms. In contrast, when the nominal minimum wage is unchanged between year t and year t+1, they

count an observation as affected if the individual’s real wage in year t+1 is above the real value of the

minimum wage in year t+1 but below the real value of the minimum wage in year t. This concept

captures individuals who are no longer bound by the erosion of the minimum wage in real terms.

        Using longitudinal data for both France and the United States, Abowd et al. use this minimum

wage measure to examine transitions into and out of employment. For the United States, which exhibits

both increases and decreases in the real minimum wage, their results are mixed.63 Abowd et al. (1999,

2000a) use data from the 1980s, and find that the gradual decline in the real value of the minimum wage

raised transition rates from non-employment to employment, which is consistent with a negative elasticity

of employment with respect to increases in the minimum wage. However, Abowd et al. (2000b) use data

from 1981-1991, thus including both decreases and increases in the real value of the federal minimum

wage, and found little evidence of statistically significant effects of the minimum wage on either exit rates

from or entry rates into employment.



62
   Currie and Fallick identify uncovered workers as those with a wage between the old and new minimum wage but
   who work in a sector in which coverage by the federal minimum wage is low.
63
   The results for France are discussed in Section VI.
                                                         - 65 -


           In Neumark et al. (2004), we use individual-level matched observations from the CPS ORG files

for the years 1979-1997 and extend the analysis to include state-specific increases in minimum wages.

Our approach is similar to that used by Currie and Fallick, as well as by Abowd et al., but is more general

in that it estimates the effects of minimum wages at various points throughout the wage distribution. In

addition, our incorporation of state changes in minimum wages allows us to avoid using higher-wage

workers to construct a counterfactual for what would have happened to low-wage workers absent the

minimum wage change. For example, when we study transitions from employment to non-employment,

comparisons to higher-wage workers may not be picking up minimum wage effects if lower-wage

workers have less stable employment histories and are more likely to leave employment even in the

absence of a minimum wage increase.

           In particular, we specify a model that interacts the change in the effective minimum wage for

each state-month observation with a set of indicator variables that describe where each individual’s wage

stands in relation to the minimum wage. The model also includes interactions that capture differential

changes in the dependent variable at different points in the wage distribution that are unrelated to

minimum wage changes, as well as a set of demographic and skill-type variables and state-year

interactions; in this sense, the minimum wage effects are identified from differential changes in the

effective minimum wage for workers at similar points in the wage distribution. In addition, we adapt the

econometric procedure to capture any lagged effects of changes in the minimum wage and estimate the

equation for wages, employment, hours (conditional on employment), and weekly labor income.64 As in

Currie and Fallick, we restrict the analysis to individuals employed in year t because we do not have an

initial wage for those initially nonemployed.

           The results indicate that workers whose wages are initially close to the minimum wage are most

likely to be affected by changes in the wage floor. Wages rise for those who remain employed, but

employment and hours decline, resulting in a net negative overall effect of the minimum wage on labor


64
     Including lagged effects complicates the estimation procedure because each individual is observed for only two
     years in the CPS.
                                                   - 66 -


income among these individuals. For workers initially earning the minimum wage or slightly more, the

estimated employment elasticities range from about −.06 to −.15 and are often statistically significant.

The effect on hours is even more noticeable at the low end of the wage distribution, suggesting that

employers also respond to minimum wages by shortening the workweeks of their lowest-paid employees.

Our results, which are based on samples that include both teenagers and adults (but are similar for adults

only), are consistent with the findings for teenagers reported by Couch and Wittenburg (2001) discussed

above and contrary to those reported by Zavodny (2000).

        There has also been research along these lines using Canadian data. Yuen (2003) uses the

Canadian Labor Market Activity Survey, which contains weekly longitudinal labor market data.

However, since many important variables, such as the consumer price index and provincial

unemployment rates, are recorded less frequently, Yuen creates a quarterly panel and records individuals’

employment status as of mid-quarter. Yuen estimates employment effects for 16-24 year-olds over the

period 1988-1990. As Baker et al. noted, provincial variation in the minimum wage in Canada is

extensive. Reflecting this, in the three-year period Yuen studies, there were 19 minimum wage changes.

        The paper focuses on the definition of a control group for estimating minimum wage effects to try

to address some of the ambiguity regarding estimated employment effects in the recent literature. In

particular, Yuen estimates models for the employment effects of minimum wages in two ways—first, by

using high-wage workers from the same province as well as all workers in provinces without minimum

wage changes as a control group, and then again using only low-wage workers from other provinces with

no minimum wage change as a control group. In the second method, workers in a province where there is

no change in the minimum wage are considered a low-wage control if their wage rate falls between the

minimum wage of their province and $.25 above.

        Like the papers just discussed, Yuen limits his sample to those who are initially employed and

therefore only addresses possible transitions from employment to non-employment. The author identifies

and uses at-risk individuals whose wage is between the old and new minimum wage. Dummy variables

are also included for province, quarter, and year. He finds that estimates using the control group that
                                                          - 67 -


includes high-wage workers are consistent with previous work, with large significant negative

employment effects for the at-risk group. Employment elasticities can be calculated as roughly −.75 to

−.84 for teens and −1.23 to −1.77 for young adults.65 These are large elasticities, but they are based on a

very narrow group of workers, and hence are not necessarily inconsistent with overall estimated

elasticities for teens or young adults that are smaller in absolute value. In contrast, estimates using only

the low-wage control group lead to employment effects that are insignificant and near zero for both teens

and young adults. These finding contrast with those in Neumark et al. (2004), which also uses workers in

other areas (in this case states) but in the same position in the wage distribution as controls.

           However, Yuen illustrates that low-wage workers are not a homogenous group by breaking the

low-wage group into two subgroups: “transitory” low-wage workers, who worked fewer than three

quarters at low wages over the study period; and “permanent” low-wage workers, who had three or more

quarters of low-wage employment. The author motivates this distinction by arguing that transitory low-

wage workers more likely consist of those whose marginal productivity is higher than their current

wage—for example, a student with a summer job. Yuen reports estimates with implied elasticities of

employment of 1.18 (significant) for transitory low-wage working teens and .31 (insignificant) for

transitory low-wage working young adults. For permanent low-wage teen workers (which is a bit of a

misnomer, since no teenager can accumulate a long history of minimum wage work) the elasticity of

employment is approximately −.86 (significant), and for permanent low-wage young adults the estimated

elasticity is −1.15 (significant). Furthermore, for the permanent low-wage workers, the estimates are not

sensitive to the choice of control group. Yuen concludes that “when the treatment group is defined

appropriately, the standard ‘textbook prediction’ of a negative employment effect can still be retrieved”

(p.671). It is not immediately obvious that the textbook prediction should apply to what Yuen classifies

as permanent low-wage workers, but not transitory ones. His argument, however, is that it is more likely

that permanent low-wage workers are the intended beneficiaries of minimum wage laws, and in that sense

65
     The author provides an average minimum wage increase (8.4%), which is used to calculate the elasticities. This
     average is calculated as the average percentage increase across all 19 increases weighted by the number of at-risk
     individuals at the time of each provincial increase.
                                                         - 68 -


the negative employment results for the permanent low-wage workers are potentially significant from a

policy perspective.66

           Campolieti et al. (2005b) apply a similar methodology to a different data set for the period 1993-

1999 and find results more consistent with negative employment effects. In particular, these authors use

longitudinal data from the Canadian Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics to examine the effect of

provincial changes in minimum wages on the transitions from employment to nonemployment among

low-wage youths. As in Yuen (2003) and the earlier U.S. studies, the paper defines an at-risk group as

consisting of those youths who resided in a province in which the minimum wage changes between year

t−1 and year t and whose initial wage was between the old and new minimum wage. They then compare

transition probabilities for these individuals with a control group consisting of young workers who

resided in provinces in which the minimum wage did not change during that year. The study presents

estimates from comparisons with a variety of control groups, ranging from workers with a wage between

the minimum wage and 25 cents above the minimum to all workers in the control set of province-year

observations. In addition, they present evidence from both the standard “affected” indicator minimum

wage variable and the wage gap variable used in previous analyses, as well as a variant that attempts to

control for within-group heterogeneity by including as an additional control variable the gap between an

individual’s wage and the upper bound of the control group wage for individuals in the control group.

           Similar to Yuen, Campolieti et al. find large negative effects from the minimum wage (elasticities

ranging from of −1.61 to −1.24) when they use all youth workers from other provinces as the control

group. However, they also report significant negative effects using low-wage control groups (MW+.25 to

MW+.75), with elasticities ranging from −.83 to −1.68. Converting these to an overall employment

elasticity for youths by adjusting for the relative sizes of the at-risk group and low-wage control groups

yields elasticity estimates between −.33 and −.54. The authors speculate that their finding of significant



66
     Moreover, the different results for permanent low-wage workers, if they hold for the United States, could help
     explain the adverse effects of minimum wages on low-income families reported in Neumark et al. (2005), since it
     seems likely that such workers are likely to be in low-income families.
                                                        - 69 -


disemployment effects reflects the greater bite of the minimum wage in the 1990s than in Yuen’s sample,

although they present no direct evidence in support of this potential nonlinearity.

         The question of the impact of the minimum wage on the least-skilled is sometimes framed in

terms of “labor-labor” substitution—the hypothesis that a rise in the minimum wage prompts employers

to hire a more-skilled workforce and hence impacts the least-skilled more adversely than might be

indicated by a standard employment study. Connolly (2005) focuses on this issue directly.67 Using SIPP

data, she finds that the probability that a minimum wage worker (defined as earning a wage below 130

percent of the minimum prior to an increase) has less than a high school degree increases in states where

the minimum wage increases, but is unchanged in states without increases. She concludes that “the low-

educated minimum wage workers benefit proportionally more than the high-educated” (p. 17). However,

when the minimum wage increases, there is likely to be reduced demand for less-skilled workers and

increased demand for more-skilled workers. In this case, the relative reduction in the share of minimum

wage workers with higher education does not necessarily mean they are being displaced, but instead that

they are now earning higher wages, as demand for more-skilled workers increases and their wages are bid

up. Indeed her difference-in-difference estimates (Tables 6 and 7) are consistent with this. For males,

minimum wage increases are associated with a higher rate of transition out of minimum wage jobs and

into higher-wage jobs for those with more education, while transitions from above-minimum wage jobs

into minimum wage jobs occur at a higher rate for those with less education. For females, the differences

are much smaller or non-existent, implying that the qualitative results for males hold for the whole

sample. Thus, her findings could arise simply from increased demand for more-educated workers in

above minimum wage jobs.68




67
   Lang and Kahn (1998) study the effect of the minimum wage on the distribution of employment between
   teenagers/students and adults working at the minimum wage. Their model predicts shifts in employment toward
   the more-skilled. They find some evidence that employment shifts towards teenagers and students, who may well
   be more skilled than adults at minimum wage jobs.
68
   The analysis is also potentially flawed because it focuses only on out-of-school individuals, and as noted earlier,
   there are important flows of teenagers between schooling and employment induced by minimum wage increases.
                                                       - 70 -


Other Issues and Approaches

        We close this section by highlighting a couple of new avenues of research on the employment

effects of minimum wages. First, there is a budding literature on the effects of minimum wages in

structural equilibrium search models, which frequently takes as its starting point the positive employment

effects of minimum wages found in some of the new minimum wage research. Prominent examples

include van den Berg and Ridder (1998), Flinn (2006), and Ahn et al. (2005).69 These types of studies can

provide answers about both employment effects and welfare effects, although the answers are highly

dependent on the underlying assumptions. For example, the Flinn paper yields very different results

depending on whether the contact rate (the arrival rate of contacts to job searchers) is endogenous or not.

When it is exogenous, employment (of 16-24 year-olds) is increasing in the minimum wage up to about

$8 (in data from the period when the federal minimum went from $4.25 to $5.15), and minimum wages

increase welfare. But when the contact rate is treated as endogenous, the minimum wage reduces

employment sharply, even at a minimum wage of $5, and welfare is decreasing in the minimum wage for

a minimum above $3.33. Furthermore, the data have difficultly distinguishing between these two cases.

        As should be obvious by now, we do not focus on this literature in our review. Rather, we focus

on research that, as Flinn accurately states it, pursues “the more limited objective of carefully describing

the observed effects of recent minimum wage changes using quasi-experimental methods” (2006, p.

1013). We do this in part because most of the debate about minimum wages focuses on the latter type of

study, and it is a sufficiently daunting challenge to summarize and synthesize this literature, and in part

because we find the results from this approach more defensible, while recognizing the limitations of what

this approach can tell us. We also feel that, given the types of results described above, the search model


Also, although not the focus of her paper, Connolly also reports results that she claims are consistent with minimum
   wages increasing employment. In particular, she reports that there was a larger increase in minimum wage
   employment following a minimum wage increase in affected states than in control states. But if the minimum
   wage increases, more workers are caught below the new minimum wage (or in her case, the new minimum wage
   plus 30 percent). This says nothing about what happens to overall employment. Nor does the result that among
   high school dropouts minimum wage employment increased more in states raising the minimum than did
   minimum wage employment among more-educated groups imply that the less-educated gained. More of the less-
   educated are caught by any increase in the minimum.
69
   Arcidiacono and Ahn (2004) present a simplified discussion of such a model.
                                                   - 71 -


approach to minimum wages is as yet highly dependent on unsettled theoretical questions regarding

model specification, and we do not know how to discern the validity of alternative estimates. At the same

time, we know our comparative advantage and disadvantage. Other researchers are better versed than us

in these methods and thus can provide a much more informative discussion of the alternative types of

results one gets from these models, the key assumptions underlying the results, and the evidence on their

validity. Finally, based on the evidence reviewed thus far (and the international evidence that follows),

we are much less convinced that the textbook model cannot account for the existing findings, although the

equilibrium search approach may still turn out to provide valuable insights and a better accounting of the

evidence.

        Second, some very recent research has focused on testing for monopsony via evidence on prices,

which is an indirect approach to exploring whether minimum wages could lead to employment increases.

In particular, Aaronson et al. (2005) and Aaronson and French (2007) look at the restaurant industry, for

which some evidence suggestive of positive employment effects has prompted some researchers to

propose monopsony explanations. Aaronson et al. (2005) present evidence that minimum wage increases

lead to price increases and consider how that result conforms to the predictions of alternative theoretical

models. In the standard competitive model, for example, minimum wage increases cause prices to rise

and employment to fall. In contrast, the authors show that monopsony models and efficiency wage

models that have a similar flavor (for example, Rebitzer and Taylor, 1995) generally imply that prices

either fall or do not change in response to a minimum wage increase, if employment rises. One exception

is a version of the monopsony model in which a significant number of firms exit in response to a

minimum wage increase, in which case prices and employment can both rise. However, they discount
                                                           - 72 -


this possibility based on what they claim are small observed exit rates in the restaurant industry, although

they do not present direct evidence on exit or on how much would be needed to overturn their result.70

           Based on these findings, Aaronson and French (2007) calculate employment effects in the

restaurant industry via a calibrated competitive model of the labor market. They find that with their

calibrated substitution elasticities, the benchmark competitive model that is consistent with the price

increases found in the earlier paper predicts an employment elasticity for low-skilled workers with respect

to the minimum wage of around −.35. They then augment the model so that employers have some

monopsony power in the labor market, but—based on the earlier paper on price responses—assume that

few employers increase employment in response to the minimum wage. This results in only slightly

smaller employment elasticities.

           Of course, the standard monopsony model implies that if the minimum wage is set high enough,

prices will rise and employment will fall, just as predicted by the competitive model. In this case,

however, the monopsony model cannot be used to explain zero or positive employment effects of

minimum wages, so those arguing for a monopsony-based explanation must implicitly believe that the

minimum wage is in the range where employment will increase, in which case prices should not rise.

Aaronson et al. therefore regard their results for prices as providing evidence against the view that

monopsony power can explain findings of employment effects near zero in studies of the restaurant

industry. Of course, as the earlier discussion suggests, the evidence for the restaurant industry is, on

balance, more consistent with negative effects of minimum wages on employment.

VI. International Evidence

           The international evidence on minimum wages is large and growing, and covers both

industrialized and developing countries. We cannot cover the international evidence as extensively as we

70
     Another exception, which they do not address, is Wessels (1997), who presents a model of monopsony in the
     restaurant industry based on the notion that with tipped workers, tip income is inversely related to the number of
     servers, so that base wages have to be raised for all workers when employment increases. This model implies that
     a minimum wage increase for tipped workers will raise their employment over some range, but because average
     wage costs also increase, cause prices to rise as well. Although Wessels does not analyze price effects directly, he
     does find that the ratio of employment to sales in the restaurant industry (which he views as a proxy for total hours
     of servers) is positively related to state-specific tipped minimum wage for relatively low levels of the minimum
     wage.
                                                      - 73 -


do the evidence for the United States, if for no other reason than that some of the studies are written in

languages other than English.71 Our review of the international evidence may therefore provide a less

reliable description of the distribution of estimated employment effects of minimum wages across studies.

In this section, we begin with a review of the evidence for the industrialized countries, and then turn to

studies of developing countries.72 As we have already discussed the available evidence for Canada and

Sweden, we do not repeat that material here, although we do include the findings in the summary table for

employment effects in industrialized countries (Table 3).

Industrialized Countries

Panel Studies

        Two studies estimate minimum wage effects using data from a panel of industrialized countries,

essentially paralleling the state-level panel data studies for the United States. The first such study is a

report written by economists at the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD,

1998), who motivate their use of international comparisons to study the employment effects of minimum

wages by noting that national wage floors vary considerably more across countries than over time within

a country.73 The study begins by summarizing minimum wage setting and levels in OECD countries that

have a national minimum wage.74 The authors construct a measure of the relative minimum wage by

dividing the nominal minimum wage by median earnings of full-time workers.75 This ratio, which varied

in 1997 from .36 in Spain to .69 in France, is used in a set of pooled regressions with data for seven to




71
   The language barrier is not necessarily innocuous. For example, in our study of minimum wage effects in the
   OECD countries (Neumark and Wascher, 2004, discussed below), we find that three of the four countries with
   institutional settings most likely to lead to negative effects of minimum wages on employment are English-
   speaking countries (the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada), and that the two other English-speaking
   countries (Australia and New Zealand) are in the set of countries with institutions that are also relatively
   conducive to disemployment effects.
72
   There is also some emerging work on the effects of the minimum wage in transition economies (for example,
   Eriksson and Pytlikova, 2004), which we do not cover in this survey.
73
   See also Hamermesh (2002).
74
   Bazen (2000) also provides details on minimum wage setting in various OECD countries.
75
   For a few countries, median earnings are not available and so mean earnings are used instead.
                                                         - 74 -


nine countries from 1975 to 1996.76 In particular, the authors regress the employment-population ratio on

the relative minimum wage; a business cycle control (either the prime-age male unemployment rate or the

output gap); institutional factors such as union density, the unemployment benefit replacement rate, and

the payroll tax rate; and fixed country and year effects. The authors’ preferred specifications, which also

control for country-specific serial correlation and heteroscedasticity, generally show negative and

statistically significant disemployment effects for teenagers, and negative but only marginally significant

or insignificant effects for 20-24 year-olds. The estimated employment elasticities for teenagers range

from −.07 to −.41, with the larger estimates evident in the sample that excludes Portugal and Spain. For

20-24 year-olds, the elasticities range from −.03 to −.10, with only the latter estimate statistically

significant at conventional levels. The study also reports results for adults, but these show no effect of the

minimum wage on their employment rates.

           Although the OECD study includes a few variables to account for institutional differences across

countries, critics of the cross-country approach stress the difficulty of distinguishing the impact of

minimum wages from other labor market policies and institutions and stress the importance of

considering how the latter may influence the impact of the minimum wage. In a general sense, a large

literature has explored variation across the industrialized countries in other labor market policies and

institutions, with Scarpetta (1996) and Nickell and Layard (1999), among others, presenting cross-country

evidence on the effects of a variety of labor market institutions on employment and unemployment, and

Blanchard and Wolfers (2000) and Belot and Van Ours (2001) emphasizing potential interactions

between institutions and economic shocks, and between different types of labor market institutions. From

a theoretical standpoint, Coe and Snower (1997) develop a model in which various labor market

policies—including the minimum wage—can have complementary effects on labor market outcomes.

           To address these criticisms, we studied the effects of minimum wages across a larger number (17)

of the OECD countries, taking account of variation in a variety of labor market policies and institutions

76
     The countries included in the regression are Belgium, Canada, France, Greece, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal,
     Spain, and the United States. A lack of data for Portugal and Spain limited some of the analyses to the other
     seven countries.
                                                    - 75 -


(Neumark and Wascher, 2004). The inclusion of additional countries in the analysis increases the

variation in the minimum wage variable; for example, in the last year of data for each country the relative

minimum wage ranges from .32 to .71, and changes within countries over the sample period range from

−.18 to .08, with five countries exhibiting declines of .1 or greater. The use of additional countries also

increases variation in the institutional variables included in the model, thus increasing identification along

that dimension as well.

        The study begins with the standard panel data specification for employment, including a one-year

lag of the minimum wage relative to the average wage, aggregate labor market and demographic controls,

fixed country and year effects, and country-specific time trends. We also estimate a dynamic

specification that includes a lagged employment rate. The models are estimated for teenagers (aged 15-

19) and youths (aged 15-24), with data extending from the mid-1970s through about 2000. The results

consistently point to negative effects of the minimum wage on employment. For the standard model, the

estimated short-run elasticities range from −.18 to −.24 for teenagers and from −.13 to −.16 for youths,

with all of these estimates statistically significant. The estimated long-run elasticities from the dynamic

specification are somewhat larger: roughly −.40 for teenagers and −.23 for youths.

        We then augment the models to control for institutional differences in other characteristics of the

minimum wage policies in each country, as well as for cross-country differences in other labor market

policies. Following the theoretical argument of Coe and Snower, we also include interactions of the

minimum wage with indicators for these institutional and policy differences. With regard to minimum

wage systems, the strongest evidence is that the negative effect of the minimum wage on teenage or youth

employment appears only in countries without a youth subminimum, consistent with the hypothesis that a

higher minimum wage might induce substitution toward young workers in such cases. There is also

evidence, although somewhat weaker, that minimum wages do not result in employment losses in

countries in which minimum wages are set by some type of national collective bargaining process. This

evidence is consistent with the argument that collective bargaining takes more explicit account of (and

hence avoids) potential disemployment effects in setting minimum wages.
                                                         - 76 -


         We also interact the minimum wage variable with country-specific measures of the rigidity of

labor standards (for example, legislated working time rules, worker representation rights, and restrictions

on the use of contract workers), the strength of employment protection regulations, the use of active labor

market policies by the government, union density, and the generosity of unemployment insurance. In

accordance with expectations, minimum wages have more adverse effects when labor standards are more

restrictive, presumably because the presence of rigidities causes firms to make more of the adjustment to

the higher minimum through the employment channel (although the differences are typically not

significant). Conversely, there is quite strong evidence that when employment protection is high, the

disemployment effects of minimum wages are muted.77 The same is true when active labor market

policies are more prevalent, presumably because some of those who would otherwise be considered non-

employed are instead participating in these programs. Finally, minimum wages are estimated to have

more adverse employment effects when union density is high, possibly reflecting greater power of

incumbent workers (Coe and Snower, 1997); in contrast, Dolado et al. (1996) suggest that sources of

wage compression—such as unions—can make the minimum wage less relevant because they reduce the

share of workers at or near the minimum.78

         Finally, we use these characteristics of labor market policies to classify countries along two

dimensions: high versus low labor standards, and high versus low employment protection or active labor

market policies. For example, the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, and Canada fall into the

quadrant with low standards and low protection, while Germany, Italy, Sweden, Spain, and France fall

into the quadrant where both are high. The estimates implied by the interactive specifications and by

models fit for the separate sets of countries indicate that negative employment effects are strongest for the

least-regulated economies, although the disemployment effects also show up to some extent in countries

with high labor standards but low employment protection/active labor market policies. For the other

77
   Dolado et al. (1996) also discuss some of these issues, pointing out, for example, that with higher firing costs, the
   adjustment of employment to an increase in the minimum wage may be smaller or slower.
78
   Of course, a fraction below the minimum measure would capture this phenomenon, so in this case the findings for
   the interactive effects may depend on the specification of the minimum wage variable, an issue we have not
   explored.
                                                          - 77 -


countries in the sample, the estimated effects are zero or positive. These results indicate that the effects of

minimum wages can vary considerably depending on the presence of other labor market institutions, and

they suggest—perhaps not surprisingly—that the neoclassical prediction about disemployment effects of

minimum wages holds most strongly for the economies in which labor markets are less regulated.

Studies of Individual Industrialized Countries

           Although the country panel studies yield some interesting findings, it is difficult to effectively

capture the institutional and policy environment of any particular country with a few regressors and their

interactions, making these studies less informative about the effects of the minimum wage on

employment in a given country. To provide this evidence, which is of greater relevance to policymakers,

researchers have conducted studies of minimum wage effects for specific industrialized countries.

Because most industrialized countries have a uniform minimum wage that varies only over time, the

challenge is to identify an appropriate control group, similar to the issues that confronted U.S. researchers

prior to the proliferation of state-specific minimum wages. However, there a few countries in which the

minimum wage varies by age or industry. Many of the first-generation country-specific studies are

reviewed and discussed in Dolado et al. (1996), so we do not repeat that material here. Instead, we focus

on the more recent evidence of minimum wage effects in Europe and elsewhere, including new evidence

that Dolado et al. report.79

           United Kingdom. We discuss most extensively the evidence for the United Kingdom, for which

there has been a large number of interesting studies. Some of the U.K. studies found no negative effects

of minimum wages or even positive effects, and these results seem to have played an important role in

undermining the earlier consensus among economists that minimum wages reduced employment.

Moreover, the authors of these papers have been influential in promoting monopsony explanations of

their findings (see especially Manning, 2003)—not in the context of the company town of labor




79
     This paper appears to present analyses for a number of countries, with each analysis conducted by a subset of the
     paper’s eight authors.
                                                          - 78 -


economics textbooks, but in dynamic monopsony models along the lines of those developed by Burdett

and Mortensen (1998).

           The United Kingdom experienced two policy changes that have been used to identify the effects

of minimum wages. Prior to the early 1990s the United Kingdom had a system of Wages Councils,

which consisted of equal numbers of employer and worker representatives together with independent

members appointed by the government, and which set minimum wages in low-wage sectors. However,

the Wages Councils were abolished in 1993, and from 1993 to 1998 there was no minimum wage in the

U.K. Subsequently, in 1999, a national minimum wage was introduced.

           In their 1994 paper and in a later paper co-authored with Richard Dickens (Dickens et al., 1999),

Machin and Manning study the period from 1979-1992, during which minimum wages declined relative

to average wages in the eighteen industries covered by the Wages Councils.80 These authors first

establish that the minimum wages were binding by verifying that an increase in the minimum wage in

each Council-year observation raised wages at the bottom of that sector’s wage distribution. This result is

particularly important because the authors include all workers in an industry in their study rather than just

teenagers or young adults. In addition, earlier research had raised doubts about the Wages Councils’

ability to enforce minimum wage rates, which these results appear to put to rest. The papers then report

one-year first difference regressions of the change in log employment on the change in the log of the

minimum wage relative to the average wage in each sector. For the low-wage sector as a whole, these

models consistently yield positive estimated employment effects, which are in some cases statistically

significant and often quite large with elasticities as high as .43. Moreover, the estimates remain positive

when lags are included.

           There are legitimate questions about the source of minimum wage variation in these data.

Committees of workers and owners may set minimum wages in such a way that boosts the pay of low-

wage workers when conditions in the industry are (or are projected to be) good and not when conditions

80
     The empirical analyses in these two papers are very similar, and the qualitative conclusions are the same. Our
     discussion focuses on the more recent paper, which is based on a slightly longer time period and, in some
     specifications, includes lags.
                                                    - 79 -


are bad, which would impart a positive bias to estimates of the employment effects. On the other hand,

the authors’ minimum wage variable is a relative wage measure, so the story would have to be more

complicated than just raising the minimum wage in response to a general increase in demand. Of course

the potential problem of the endogeneity of minimum wage increases is not unique to this study, and is

one that we regard as an important unanswered question more generally. However, we suspect that this

problem is more likely to arise in the context of the U.K. Wages Councils than in cases where minimum

wages are enacted by legislatures (for which there often seems to be more regard for political than

economic timing).

        The Dickens et al. paper acknowledges the endogeneity problem. The authors cite discussions

with independent members of Wages Councils (although in a footnote they only mention one) as

indicating that “the method of minimum-wage fixing was generally rather crude, using only recent pay

settlements and inflation figures and making no attempt to forecast future market conditions” (p. 8). That

anecdote provides some reassurance, although more systematic evidence on what influenced the

minimum pay rates set by Wages Councils—admittedly, no simple task—would be preferable. In any

event, while the potential for endogeneity bias in these studies is of some concern, it does not follow that

such a bias would be large enough to overturn Machin and Manning’s finding that the minimum wages

set by Wages Councils in the United Kingdom had positive employment effects. At the same time, one

should be cautious in presuming that these results carry over to the effects of legislated minimum wage

changes, especially when they are nationwide.

        Although Dickens et al. are inclined towards a monopsony interpretation of their findings, the

specifications that show the largest positive effects are arguably the least defensible. In particular, many

of the specifications estimated by the authors include a control for sales in the industry covered by the

Wages Council. However, conditioning the results on sales is problematic because an important channel

through which the minimum wage is thought to influence employment is by raising labor costs and prices,

which reduces product and labor demand. The authors do instrument for sales with lags in order to
                                                       - 80 -


remove the contemporaneous endogeneity between sales and employment.81 However, their reduced-

form estimates, which are generally smaller and not statistically significant, strike us as more meaningful.

         Moreover, even taking their positive estimates at face value, it is not apparent to us that the

evidence favors the monopsony model. As we noted earlier, non-negative estimates can arise by

statistical chance, and even in a competitive setting, an increase in the minimum wage can raise

employment in a specific industry. As a result, we think that more convincing evidence in favor of the

monopsony model requires the researcher to tie the minimum wage effects more explicitly to monopsony

power—that is, to show that the positive effects predicted over some range of the minimum wage actually

arise over that range—or to provide additional evidence that confirms or contradicts other explicit

predictions of the monopsony model (as, for example, in Aaronson and French, 2007). Dickens et al. take

a small step in this direction. They develop a stylized theoretical model that predicts, as does the textbook

monopsony model, that below some level a higher minimum wage will increase employment, while

above this level a higher minimum wage will reduce employment. They then report evidence that the

positive effects of the minimum wage on employment are stronger at low values of the minimum wage,

while the effect of the minimum wage on employment is essentially zero at higher levels of the minimum.

However, this is not really what the model predicts, and so, in the end, the correspondence between the

empirical findings in the paper and the theoretical implications of the monopsony model is not

particularly compelling. Regardless, we think this is at least a step in what we consider a useful direction

of inquiry.82

         Moving chronologically through the changes in minimum wage policy in the United Kingdom,

Dolado et al. (1996) present evidence stemming from the abolition of the Wages Councils in 1993. The


81
   We are skeptical of this approach in dynamic panel data models because identification requires the exclusion of
   lagged values from the equation of interest, yet theory provides little guidance in specifying the appropriate lag
   length of the underlying model. The same issue arises when the authors instrument for minimum wages with lags.
   They note that there is reason—as discussed above—to believe that minimum wage increases are driven by past
   minimum wage increases. However, that does not imply that lagged minimum wages can be excluded from the
   employment equation.
82
   As noted above, we presented related evidence in Neumark and Wascher (2002) suggesting that some state-year
   observations could be characterized as being on the upward-sloping portion of the labor supply curve, but that the
   monopsony model, in general, does not fit the data significantly better than a competitive model.
                                                    - 81 -


authors find that eliminating the minimum wage did not result in sharp declines in wages in these sectors,

or (in the retail sector, which they examine more closely) to the disappearance of a spike in the wage

distribution at the minimum wage, although the spike became less pronounced. As the authors point out,

however, employers may have been reluctant to cut nominal wages for their current employees, and

relative wage concerns may have limited the willingness of employers to bring in new workers at wage

rates below the minimums previously set by the Wages Councils.

         Turning to employment effects, the authors present data on the share of total employment

accounted for by the Wages Councils industries before and after the abolition of the Councils and

compare hiring rates and exit rates in industries covered by Wages Councils with the equivalent rates in

industries not covered by the Councils. Based on these data, they conclude that “There is no noticeable

change in the behaviour of the Wages Council sector relative to the rest of the economy” (1996, p. 355).

However, we do not read the evidence this way. Using average employment totals for the three quarters

before and two quarters after the abolition of the Wages Councils, it is clear that employment grew more

rapidly in the Wages Councils industries following the elimination of the minimum wage; employment in

this sector grew by 1.29 percent, while falling trivially (by .04 percent) in the non-Wages Councils sector

(see their Table 10). Moreover, a similar pattern is evident from the data on hiring and exit rates. The

average hiring rate in the Wages Council sector during the three quarters preceding abolition exceeded the

hiring rate in other industries by 2.69 percentage points, while the average exit rate in the Wages Councils

sector exceeded the exit rate in the other sectors by 2.58 percentage points; that is, hiring and turnover

were both higher by roughly the same amount—not surprising for low-wage industries. But in the post-

Councils period, the difference between hiring rates in the two sectors widened sharply to 3.67 percentage

points, while the difference in exit rates increased only negligibly to 2.88 percentage points (see their

Table 11). Because the difference in hiring rates increased by more than the difference in exit rates, a

simple difference-in-difference estimate suggests that the abolition of the Wages Councils led to a relative

increase in employment in the Wages Council sector, consistent with disemployment effects of minimum

wages.
                                                      - 82 -


        Finally, a number of recent studies have examined the effects of the introduction of a national

minimum wage in April 1999. Machin et al. (2003) focus on the low-wage residential care home (nursing

home) sector in the period from nine months before to nine months after the minimum wage was

implemented. Although not central to their paper, the authors first describe the behavior of aggregate

employment in this sector, which trended up rather strongly from 1994 through 1999 and then flattened

out; this pattern is evident in the data even after controlling for the aggregate unemployment rate and

despite the fact that demand, in the form of the number of people aged 75 and over, likely kept rising.83

Although suggestive of a negative effect of the minimum wage on employment, this simple analysis

ignores other changes that may have influenced the nursing home sector during this time period and does

not establish that employment fell at the establishments that were more strongly impacted by the

minimum wage.

        To study the latter question, the authors conducted a survey of nursing homes and collected data

on employment, hours, and wages at each establishment. They measure the extent to which the minimum

wage was binding at each establishment by calculating both the share of workers initially paid less than

the minimum and the average wage gap (hours weighted). Although the response rate to the survey was

low (20 percent), the data suggest that the introduction of the minimum wage boosted wages in this

sector. In addition, the evidence on employment and hours points to adverse effects of the minimum

wage on both. The estimated employment effects are mostly statistically significant and range from −.08

to −.39.84 Reiterating the point we made about other studies of specific industries, these estimates are not

necessarily informative about the overall employment effects of minimum wages on low-skill individuals.

However, they do seem to establish that conventional effects of minimum wages can be found in the low-

wage sector in the United Kingdom. Exactly why these findings differ from those reported in the studies



83
   They do not report the aggregate regression with this control as well, which we suspect would suggest even more
   of a downturn.
84
   The authors also speculate that the effects might be larger over the longer term. In this context, they report
   evidence suggesting that the minimum wage boosted closures, although these estimates were not statistically
   significant. Machin and Wilson (2004) extend this analysis to include the 2001 increase in the minimum wage
   and report similar results for both employment and closures.
                                                         - 83 -


of the Wages Councils is unclear, although the focus of this study on a single sector limits its

comparability to the earlier research. Arguably, though, this is a better research design for a policy

change that the authors describe as a “very good testing ground for evaluating the economic effects of

minimum wages” (p. 155).

           In a series of papers, Stewart (2002, 2004a, and 2004b) and Stewart and Swaffield (2006) provide

a broader investigation of the effects of introducing the national minimum wage in the United Kingdom.

In particular, Stewart (2002) follows the approach taken by Card (1992a) to test whether employment

changes differed across 140 geographic areas in which the introduction of the national minimum wage

had a varying impact on wages. He first uses information from the New Earnings Survey to document

that wages at the bottom of the wage distribution showed a larger increase following the introduction of

the minimum wage in areas that had a larger share of workers paid below the new minimum.85 Stewart

then uses a fraction affected variable to test for the presence of employment effects. He also presents

results from a difference-in-differences estimator that compares employment changes in high wage areas

with employment changes in low wage areas.

           For workers covered by the minimum wage (ages 18 and over), Stewart’s estimates of the effect

of the minimum wage on employment are generally negative, but not statistically significant. However,

his point estimates are suggestive of potentially sizable effects. For example, the difference-in-

differences estimate in the first row of his Table 3 indicates that the introduction of the minimum wage

reduced the employment rate by 2 percentage points, while raising wages at the 5th and 10th percentile

about 5 percent. If we treat this wage increase as the effective increase in the minimum, then the implied




85
     Because the samples are relatively small in some areas, this finding might also reflect regression to the mean.
     This possibility could have been explored by examining evidence on wage declines among the highest wage areas,
     or by showing that the same result at the lower end of the wage distribution was not present in years prior to the
     imposition of the national minimum wage. For example, Machin et al. (2003) do the latter exercise for nursing
     home workers, and find some relationship, albeit a weaker one, in the period prior to the introduction of the
     national minimum wage.
                                                      - 84 -


elasticity is −.4.86 The fact that an estimate this large is not detectable as statistically significant is

suggestive of deficiencies in either the data Stewart uses or in his research design.

        Stewart also estimates employment models for a variety of low-wage groups of workers (women,

those with less tenure, less-skilled occupations, and so on), to see if the impact of the minimum wage is

more apparent for workers more likely to be affected by it. In general, the estimated effects are smaller,

more often positive than negative, and never significant. However, the samples are considerably smaller

for these subgroups, and the paper does not present any evidence on the effects of the new minimum on

wages for these groups. Finally, most of the employment models are estimated only over the one-year

window surrounding the introduction of the new minimum wage, which may not be long enough to

observe an effect on employment.87 This short-term focus is not unusual, but given the evidence for

lagged effects in other studies, it would have been preferable for the employment analysis to cover a

period at least as long as the wage analysis, if not longer.

        Stewart (2004a) looks at the effects for workers in different parts of the wage distribution prior to

the minimum wage’s introduction, building on the framework used in Abowd et al. (1999), Neumark et

al. (2004), and Yuen (2003). In particular, he uses a standard difference-in-differences approach,

comparing the change in the probability of a transition from employment to non-employment for those

initially paid less than the new minimum wage to the change in transition probabilities for workers who

were initially paid just above the new minimum wage. One potential drawback to this identification

strategy is the possibility that aggregate influences on transition probabilities may differ across the

groups. However, because the minimum wage variation is national, there is no way to control for this

with year effects, in contrast to what one can do when there is regional minimum wage variation.

        The empirical analysis uses three different data sources. Stewart first establishes that the

introduction of the minimum wage boosted wages of workers whose wages were initially below the


86
   Stewart also reports estimates for youths and finds either weak positive or weak negative effects. However, the
   1999 legislation included a youth subminimum, which may have induced substitution towards young workers.
87
   The exception is the analysis of data from the New Earnings Survey (NES), for which the analysis focuses only on
   employment changes among those individuals who were initially employed.
                                                        - 85 -


minimum. Turning to the results for employment, he consistently finds small and insignificant effects

that are generally positive for men and more mixed for women, and he presents a variety of robustness

checks that yield the same answer. However, Stewart does not consider the possibility that minimum

wage effects on employment may occur with a lag. Of the three data sets, one (the NES) ends in the same

month as the imposition of the minimum, one extends eight months beyond this month, and the third

extends eleven months beyond it, raising questions about whether the sample period is too short to

adequately pick up the full impact of the minimum wage.88

         Stewart and Swaffield (2006) extend the analysis to an investigation of the effects of the

minimum wage on hours worked by workers who remained employed, appealing both to the U.S. studies

suggesting that the minimum wage reduced hours worked and to reports by the Low Pay Commission that

many U.K. employers responded to the introduction of the minimum wage by reducing hours. This paper

uses the same empirical framework as in Stewart (2004a), but includes a lagged effect of the minimum

wage on hours. The estimates show a small and insignificant contemporaneous effect of the minimum

wage on hours, paralleling the employment results in the earlier papers. However, the evidence also

suggests that the longer-run effects of the minimum wage are more adverse. In particular, the lagged

effect on hours is always negative, larger in absolute value, and generally, although not always,

statistically significant. Summarizing the results, Stewart and Swaffield conclude that the minimum wage

led to reductions of one to two hours per week for affected workers.89 However, the evidence of lagged

minimum wage effects on hours raises the question of whether there might also be lagged effects on

employment, and, in this regard, it is surprising that this paper did not consider this possibility, especially



88
   In a brief note, Stewart (2004b) extends this analysis to include the 2000 and 2001 increases in the minimum
   wage. However, this analysis also focuses only on the short-run effects of minimum wages. This paper also
   attempts to account for the possibility that macroeconomic influences had different effects on the transition rates
   of affected and non-affected workers. However, the identification strategy used for this purpose requires rather
   strong assumptions, and, of course, this is not the only source of potential differences in changes for higher-wage
   and lower-wage workers.
89
   The authors do not report the mean level of hours in their sample, but if we assume that the average workweek is
   30 hours, then the decline in hours is on the order of 3 to 7 percent. Using our earlier calculation that places the
   effective minimum wage increase at about 5 percent, we get implied elasticities ranging from about −.6 to roughly
   −1.4.
                                                       - 86 -


given that the contemporaneous effects on hours were similar to what Stewart’s earlier papers showed for

employment.90

         Finally, Galindo-Rueda and Pereira (2004) use firm-level data to study the introduction of the

national minimum wage in the United Kingdom. Their identification strategy, like many of the other

studies, compares changes at firms more affected by the minimum wage relative to firms less affected,

although they implement this strategy in a number of different ways. First, they match firm-level data

from the Annual Business Inquiry (ABI) with individual-level data from the NES to create a data set that

has detailed information about the characteristics of each firm and information on the internal distribution

of wages in each firm. However, because the NES randomly samples only about 1 percent of workers,

larger firms are much more likely to have enough matched workers to make a reasonable inference about

the internal wage distribution. As the authors acknowledge, this leads to a sample that is heavily biased

towards larger firms, whereas smaller firms may be more adversely affected by minimum wages. In

addition, with few matched workers per firm, the sample-based estimates of the fraction of workers in

each firm that earn below the minimum wage (or some other wage floor) may be imprecise. Despite

these limitations, the authors report regression results for employment and other outcomes from 1994

through 2001, using specifications that include a dummy variable for firms more exposed to a higher

minimum, year effects, firm fixed effects,91 and year dummy variables interacted with the exposure

dummy variable; these interactions trace out the evolution of changes in the dependent variables since the

introduction of the minimum wage. For manufacturing, the results indicate that the minimum wage raised

per person pay and reduced employment in 1999 and 2000, although none of the estimates are significant.


90
   Connolly and Gregory (2002) also study the effects of the introduction of the national minimum wage on hours,
   although they limit their analysis to women. They employ a very similar empirical approach to Stewart (and
   Swaffield) and use many of the same data sets (although they include a slightly longer time frame). The
   difference-in-differences estimates using the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) are positive but not
   statistically significant. In contrast, the estimates based on the NES show essentially no effect in the year in
   which the minimum wage introduced, but negative effects two and three years after the minimum wage was
   introduced, results which more closely resemble those reported by Stewart and Swaffield. The source of the
   differences between the estimates from the two data sets is not readily apparent, as the second-year NES estimates
   should roughly correspond to the BHPS estimates. However, the authors note that the NES has the advantage of
   much larger sample size (60,000 women per year versus 3,000 in the BHPS).
91
   They also report results with industry fixed effects, but we focus on the former.
                                                   - 87 -


For services (for which data are available only from 1998-2001), the evidence points to positive and

significant effects on pay (in 2000 only) and small and insignificant negative effects on employment in

1999 and 2000. Thus, this analysis fails to find evidence of a significant disemployment effect.

        Their second approach seeks to avoid the problems created by matching to a random sample of

workers by using the full ABI file and imputing exposure to the minimum wage (specifically, the

percentage of workers with a wage at or below the new minimum) based on the distribution of wages at

the regional and sectoral level. In particular, they estimate models for changes in employment and other

outcomes using a specification that includes this fraction affected variable interacted with year dummy

variables, along with sector and region specific trends; the interactions capture the minimum wage effect.

The regression results point to significant disemployment effects for services but not for manufacturing.

For services, the estimates imply that a percentage point increase in the share of workers affected reduces

employment (total or full-time equivalent) growth from 1998 to 1999 by between .06 and .12 percentage

point, which seems like a rather large effect. Because the fraction affected variable is based only on the

1998 data, and hence captures only the introduction of the new minimum wage in 1999, this implies a

one-time relative reduction in the level of employment in 1999.

        Finally, Galindo-Rueda and Pereira study the entry and exit of business establishments in low-

wage sectors, using data from the Office of National Statistics (which covers all companies in the United

Kingdom). For this analysis, they estimate models for the total number of establishments by sector and

for total employment, and identify minimum wage effects from the variation in wage levels across

regions. So, for example, if the minimum wage deters entry in a particular low-wage sector, this should

appear as relatively lower entry in that sector in the lower-wage regions, where the introduction of the

minimum wage had a larger impact. Our interest is in the employment results, which indicate significant

disemployment effects in four of the eight low-wage sectors they study, negative estimates in seven of the

eight, and no significant evidence of positive effects in the eighth. Because these results come from

information on all establishments rather than from employment changes at existing firms, and because

auxiliary evidence suggests that minimum wages may deter entry in lower-wage areas, the authors
                                                   - 88 -


interpret the combined evidence as suggesting that the introduction of the minimum wage had relatively

little effect on already employed workers, but likely exerted more of its impact through its effect on job

creation in low-wage sectors.

        Aside from the United States, the effect of minimum wages on employment has probably been

studied more extensively in the United Kingdom than in any other country. The research for the United

Kingdom is particularly significant, in our view, because it seems to be widely cited as providing

evidence that an increase in the minimum wage does not reduce employment. What conclusions do we

take away from our review of the evidence for the United Kingdom? There is clearly a lot of variation in

the estimated effects across studies, and, in general, the evidence for significant disemployment effects

appears to be weaker for the United Kingdom than for the United States. However, we see two reasons to

be cautious about concluding that minimum wages have not had adverse consequences for employment in

the United Kingdom. First, the evidence based solely on the Wages Councils era, which tends to indicate

zero or positive effects, would seem to be of only limited relevance to the current policy environment,

both because of the potential endogeneity bias in those estimates and because of the focus of this research

on narrow industries. Even then, the evidence from the abolition of the Wages Councils is more

consistent with disemployment effects. Second, most of the existing research on the United Kingdom has

been limited to estimating short-run effects, and, in our view, the question of the longer-run influences of

the national minimum wage on U.K. employment has yet to be adequately addressed; indeed, the research

tends to find negative effects on hours (of the employed) when lagged effects are allowed. Thus, we do

not think one can yet state definitively that the evidence for the United Kingdom points unambiguously in

one direction or the other, and we would regard it as incorrect to point to the evidence from the United

Kingdom as making a strong case that the minimum wage does not reduce labor demand.

        Australia. Although Australia’s labor market is similar in many respects to labor markets in the

United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada, it has a relatively complicated set of rules and

institutions governing wage setting. Prior to 2005, federal minimum wages were set by the Australian

Industrial Relations Commission (AIRC), consisting of employer, union, and government representatives
                                                      - 89 -


who determined minimum wage rates based on economic conditions.92 In particular, the minimum wage

set in any given industry consisted of a national statutory minimum wage applicable to all industries and

an additional amount that was dependent on worker productivity. In addition, state governments were

permitted to, and often did, set their own minimum wages, although these typically did not apply to all

workers. Leigh (2003) studies a series of statutory minimum wage increases enacted by the state

government in Western Australia between 1994 and 2001. This minimum wage covered workers not

covered by the federal minimum wage or other wage agreements or industrial commission awards. The

level of the minimum wage in Western Australia was initially below the national minimum, but gradually

caught up to it over this period. While the setting is complicated, Leigh argues that the minimum wage

increases in Western Australia provide exogenous variation that can be used to assess the effects of the

minimum wage on employment. Indeed, his discussion of the economic and political conditions

surrounding these minimum wage increases is a nice example of the type of consideration that should be

given to the potential endogeneity of such increases, absent a more complete solution to the endogeneity

problem.

        Leigh reports a variety of estimates. He first constructs short (seven-month) first differences for

total employment for the periods surrounding each of six minimum wage increases in Western Australia

and compares these changes to similarly-constructed employment changes outside of Western Australia.

The difference-in-differences estimates are mostly negative, with elasticities ranging from .01 to −.81; in

addition, the four largest estimates (ranging from −.38 to −.81) are statistically significant.93 Leigh also

estimates a pooled model that combines these observations and finds an overall employment elasticity of

−.29, which is again statistically significant. In addition, he estimates models that disaggregate by age

and sex, to try to isolate those more likely to be bound by the minimum wage. When he disaggregates by



92
   In 2005, the wage-setting functions of the AIRC were replaced by the Australian Fair Pay Commission, which
   sets a single federal minimum wage for all adult workers.
93
   There have been a series of papers fixing problems in the original paper (Leigh, 2004a), criticizing his work
   (Watson, 2004), and responding to that criticism (Leigh, 2004b). The paper by Watson speculates about potential
   problems with the study, but does not present any evidence, and Leigh’s reply suggests that Watson’s criticisms
   have little merit. Here, we present the corrected estimates in Leigh (2004a).
                                                         - 90 -


age, the estimated elasticity is −1.01 for 15-24 year-olds and ranges from −.03 to −.14 for the other age

groups; however, the estimated effect is significant only for 15-24 year-olds. In addition, the estimated

elasticity is larger for young women (−1.43) than for young men (−.68), although both are statistically

significant. The elasticities that Leigh reports for aggregate employment of young individuals are quite

large relative to those found for other industrialized countries, especially given his estimate that only

about 4 percent of workers were affected by these changes in the minimum wage. Unfortunately, he does

not offer a potential explanation for the size of his estimates, and in the absence of such an explanation,

the magnitudes of these estimates, at least, might be regarded skeptically.

           A report by Harding and Harding (2004) estimates the effects of state minimum wage increases in

2003, based on surveys of employers with minimum wage workers who report their change in

employment in a relatively short period following the minimum wage increases, as well as the

counterfactual regarding how much employment would have changed absent the increases. They arrive at

a short-run elasticity for minimum wage workers of −.2. However, it is unclear whether we should view

employers’ responses regarding the employment change due to minimum wage increases as reliable.94

           New Zealand. New Zealand, like Australia, has a relatively complicated history of minimum

wages interacting with industry specific mandated wage floors (“awards”). Prior to 1991, workers in

many industries were covered by Arbitration Court awards, which fixed a minimum wage for the industry

that applied to all workers, whether unionized or not. In 1983, a national minimum wage was enacted for


94
     Two other papers for Australia report evidence on minimum wage effects, although both have rather serious
     limitations and thus warrant only a brief mention. Mangan and Johnston (1999) present panel data evidence
     across states as well as evidence from individual-level census data, on the effects of minimum wages on 15-19
     year-olds. The first analysis leads to negative but insignificant estimates of employment effects of minimum
     wages, while the second analysis indicates that the minimum wage reduces the probability of employment, with
     estimates that are generally significant. However, this study is quite sketchy on the details, with little or no
     information provided on the source of the minimum wage variation, such as the relationship between minimum
     wage and industrial commission awards, the source of cross-state variation, and the teen minimum (“junior award
     wage”) relative to the minimum wage for other workers. In addition, a study by Junankar et al. (2000) estimates
     separate time-series regressions on quarterly data for a ten-year period covering 1987-1997, using teen minimum
     wages relative to average weekly earnings for the industry. The specifications should include minimum wages for
     non-teenagers as well, since it is the spread between the various minimum wages that may drive teen employment
     (the same comment applies to the first paper). The authors report negative effects of minimum wages on total
     hours worked by some groups of teenagers in retail, but little other evidence of either positive or negative
     employment effects. However, the elasticities they report are sometimes extraordinarily large, exceeding 5 or
     even 10 in absolute value for the retail sector.
                                                  - 91 -


workers aged 20 and over. Initially, given the industry awards, the minimum may not have been relevant

for many workers. However, Chapple (1997) cites evidence suggesting that by 1985 the minimum wage

was high enough to be binding in a number of industries. In 1991, the industry awards system was

eliminated, leaving New Zealand with only the national minimum wage. In March 1994, a subminimum

wage for teenagers was introduced, initially at 60 percent of the adult minimum. Finally, in March 2001,

the minimum wage for 18-19 year-olds was raised to the adult minimum in one step, and the minimum

wage for 16-17 year-olds was raised to 80 percent of the adult minimum wage in two steps.

        Maloney (1995) reports estimates from relatively standard time-series specifications for teens and

young adults. He uses time-series data from the quarterly Household Labour Force Survey, a CPS-style

data set, for the period 1985 through 1993. Because the minimum wage in effect in this period only

covered workers aged 20 and over, it provides an opportunity to test whether the minimum wage induced

employers to substitute away from young adults and towards teenagers. Indeed, Maloney finds evidence

of a significant negative effect of the minimum wage on employment of young adults, with an elasticity

of −.35, and a significant positive effect on teens, with an elasticity of .69. Weighted by the employment

rates of the two groups, these elasticities imply that the employment declines among young adults were

closely balanced by the employment gains among teens, suggesting that workers in these age groups are

close substitutes. Furthermore, when Maloney restricts the sample to less-educated young adults, he finds

a much larger disemployment elasticity (−.57) than for young adults as a whole, suggesting that the

adverse employment effect of the minimum wage falls mainly on them.

        Although these results are quite consistent with the predictions from the standard competitive

model, results in a subsequent paper (Maloney, 1997) are somewhat less so. In this paper, Maloney

extends the data set to 1996, enabling him to examine the effects of the introduction of the subminimum

wage for teenagers in March 1994, which he does by adding to the teen equation a dummy variable for

the introduction of the teenage minimum wage. His specifications yield similar evidence of negative

minimum wage effects for young adults, but somewhat weaker evidence of a positive effect of the adult

minimum wage on teen employment. From a variety of specifications, he reports estimated elasticities
                                                            - 92 -


for young adults ranging from −.1 to −.4, with the smaller (absolute value) estimates not significant. For

teens, the estimated effects of the adult minimum range from −.1 to .4, and are never significant.

            Finally, the estimated coefficient on the introduction of the teen minimum in the equation for teen

employment is near zero and insignificant, in contrast to the negative effect we might expect. Maloney

speculates that this may be because the teen minimum was non-binding, although he does not present any

evidence to support this claim. He also suggests that the teen minimum may not have been in effect long

enough. Given that his data extend nine quarters beyond its introduction, this argument does not seem

very compelling, although evidence differentiating shorter- and longer-run effects of the teen minimum

might have made this case more strongly. Finally, given the evidence from Maloney’s first paper, one

might have expected the introduction of the teen minimum to have had a positive effect on young adult

employment, given the compression in the wage differential between young adults and teenagers. But

Maloney omits this variable from his young adult employment regression, and given that he uses a

systems estimator, the bias from this omission would also affect estimates of the teen employment

regression. With a positive correlation between the errors of the two equations, the bias in the estimated

coefficient of the teen minimum wage variable in the teen employment equation is positive, which could

potentially explain the absence of a negative estimate for this coefficient.95 It also is not clear why

Maloney does not use the value of the teen minimum wage, paralleling the treatment of the adult

minimum wage, rather than just a dummy variable for its introduction.

            Chapple (1997) revisits Maloney’s time-series analysis, using somewhat different specifications.

For some reason he focuses only on young adults, ignoring both the question of how the adult minimum

affected teen employment before the teen minimum was introduced, and how the introduction of the teen

minimum itself affected teen and young adult employment. He generally confirms Maloney’s results for

young adults, obtaining time-series estimates of elasticities ranging from −.17 to −.34, again with the

smaller estimates insignificant. He offers some reasons why the specifications with the smaller estimates

95
     When the teen minimum is implemented, the residual in the young adult equation is too high. Given the positive
     error correlation, this is transmitted to the residual in the teen equation, which is therefore positively correlated
     with the dummy variable for the teen minimum wage.
                                                    - 93 -


should be preferred, although we do not find these particularly compelling. Regardless, the time-series

estimates are all negative, and the lower estimates—even if insignificant for the relatively short time-

series available—are in the consensus range from the earlier U.S. literature.

        Chapple then estimates panel data models across industries for the period 1980-1997, using the

national minimum wage divided by industry price deflators. Because the minimum wage varies

nominally only at the national level, he chooses to omit the year fixed effects and instead includes

aggregate controls (for the inflation rate, GDP, and the exchange rate). We have already raised concerns

about the reliability of specifications that omit year effects and identify the effects of minimum wages

from aggregate minimum wage changes. In addition, in the context of research on Puerto Rico, discussed

below, Krueger (1995) points out that cross-industry estimates are reliant on the assumption that the

elasticity of labor demand is the same across industries. Otherwise, it is possible that minimum-wage-

induced employment losses in a low-wage industry with less elastic labor demand could be of similar

magnitude to employment declines in a higher-wage industry with more elastic labor demand, leading to

the erroneous conclusion that there is no effect of the minimum wage on employment.

        Regardless of these problems, the estimated employment effects are negative and significant, with

elasticities of −.06 to −.10, which seem rather large given that these are for total industry employment

rather than for just unskilled employment. The estimates become a bit smaller and insignificant, although

still negative, in specifications that include the (log) minimum wage and price index separately, rather

than in ratio form. Moreover, the estimated coefficients of the minimum wage and the price deflator are

both negative, rather than the equal and opposite-signed effects we might expect if the minimum wage

and an average wage were entered into the equation. In addition, the estimates are not robust. For

example, for the latter half of the sample, the elasticity of industry employment to the minimum wage is

−.48 in one specification and .66 in another. Finally, Chapple also estimates separate time-series models

for each industry. In these specifications, the elasticities are roughly centered on zero; but with only 10

degrees of freedom per industry, we do not regard these as meaningful.
                                                           - 94 -


           All told, Chapple’s time-series evidence parallels Maloney’s, while his industry-level estimates

are often negative, but not robust. Given the potential problems with the industry analysis, we view this

set of papers as pointing more in the direction of negative employment effects of minimum wages in New

Zealand.

           A more recent paper by Hyslop and Stillman (2004) challenges this conclusion. These authors

study the effects of large increases in teen minimum wages beginning in 2001—a 69 percent increase in

the minimum wage for 18-19 year-olds in 2001 and 19 percent increases for 16-17 year-olds in both 2001

and 2002 (the adult minimum wage increased by 2 and 4 percent, respectively, in these two years). They

also use the Household Labour Force survey, with data covering the 1997-2003 period, and conclude that

the minimum wage had either no effect or a positive effect on teen employment.

           They begin their analysis by computing, for 16-17, 18-19, and 20-25 year-olds, the change in the

average level of employment from 1997-2001:Q1 to 2001:Q2-2003:Q3. The simple difference-in-

differences one can compute from these averages indicates that employment of the two younger groups

rose slightly relative to employment of 20-25 year-olds, in contrast to what one would expect if the

minimum wage reduces employment.96 However, the choice of these before and after periods are

problematic. First, although the initial minimum wage increase took place in March 2001, it was

announced nearly a year in advance, and thus, at a minimum, one might want to cut off the “before”

period somewhat earlier. Second, if disemployment effects occur with a lag, a comparison based on data

further beyond the implementation date might be more informative.

           The authors do provide a figure (Figure 4) that provides quarter-by-quarter employment rates for

each age group. They describe this figure as providing little “to suggest that employment … by teenage

workers was affected by the minimum wage increases” (p. 15). However, this figure shows that in the

first quarter of 2001, when the minimum wage jumped sharply for 18-19 year olds, employment for this

age group fell while employment of the other two groups rose. Similarly, in the first quarter of 2002,


96
     They also report results for hours conditional on working, as well as for other outcomes less related to
     employment.
                                                    - 95 -


when the minimum wage jumped for 16-17 year-olds, their employment fell, employment of 18-19 year-

olds rose, and employment of 20-25 year-olds was little changed. The dynamics may tell a different

story, but the short-term differences are suggestive of some disemployment effect.

        Finally, Hyslop and Stillman present regression estimates in which they allow separate

employment changes for each of the three age groups in 2001, 2002, and 2003. Although the estimated

coefficients for 16-17 and 18-19 year-olds are positive in almost every case, the estimated changes for 20-

21 year-olds are almost always larger, and sometimes considerably so. For example, in 2001, the

regression estimates indicate that employment rose (net of the controls) by .04 for 20-21 year-olds, .007

for 18-19 year-olds, and .022 for 16-17 year-olds. That is, employment of 18-19 year-olds—for whom

the minimum wage increase was by far the largest—fell relative to both groups, and employment of 16-17

year-olds, who experienced the second-largest minimum wage increase, fell relative to 20-21 year-olds.

Thus, if overall employment of young workers (aged 16-21) rose for reasons unrelated to the minimum

wage (the type of influence that researchers can control for in a triple-differenced estimate), these results

would be quite consistent with the predictions of the standard competitive model. Of course, part of the

increase in employment for 20-21 year-olds may have reflected substitution by employers toward them,

but that effect is also predicted by the competitive model. Thus, in the end, we view the evidence for

New Zealand as more consistent with negative employment effects of minimum wages.

        France. The minimum wage in France is set by the federal government and is generally increased

each year in line with prices and average wages for blue-collar workers. The level of the minimum wage

tends to be high relative to the average wage in France and is often blamed for the high level of youth

unemployment in that country. Dolado et al. (1996) present evidence from two analyses. First, they

compare wage and employment changes over two periods—1981-1985 (when the minimum wage rose

sharply) and 1985-1989 (when it did not). In particular, they estimate the changes over these periods in

hourly wages and in employment and unemployment rates for 48 age-sex-education groups, and then

regress these changes (by sex) on the proportion of each group at or below the minimum wage. Contrary

to expectations, they find little evidence that the minimum wage increases in 1981-1985 raised the wages
                                                         - 96 -


of low-wage workers or that wage increases for low-wage workers were held down by the absence of an

increase in the relative minimum wage in the second half of the 1980s. Despite this outcome, they then

estimate similar regressions for the change in employment. Perhaps surprisingly given the wage results,

they find that the unemployment rate rose more for groups with a greater proportion of workers paid at or

below the minimum wage in the early period (when the relative minimum wage was rising) and fell more

for these groups in the later period (when the relative minimum wage did not change); the patterns of

change in employment rates are weaker, but in the consistent direction. As the authors note, however, the

two periods are less comparable than one would like, in that the first—when the minimum wage rose

more quickly—included a recession, while the second—when the relative minimum wage was about

unchanged—was characterized by an economic recovery. This lack of comparability makes it difficult to

distinguish minimum wage effects from the differential impact of the business cycle on the employment

and unemployment rates of different skill groups.

           The authors then take a different approach and focus on regional differences in employment

change from 1967-1992.97 Their rationale is that in the earlier part of this period the national minimum

wage rose sharply, but because initial wage levels were very different across regions, the impact of the

national minimum wage increase should have been greater in the lower-wage areas. The authors find a

negative relationship between regional wage growth and the level of the initial wage during the period in

which the relative minimum wage was rising, consistent with the rise in the minimum boosting wages

more in low-wage regions. However, a regression of the change in employment on the initial wage also

yields a negative estimate, in contrast to what would be expected if the minimum wage reduced

employment more in low-wage areas. Although the authors seem to find this evidence more compelling,

there are problems with this analysis. First, they do not control for differences in aggregate economic

conditions across regions. If wages in the initially low-wage regions were held down at the beginning of

the sample by cyclically weak labor market conditions, these areas would also have tended to exhibit

initially low employment rates. In this case, a regression of the change in employment on the initial wage

97
     This analysis is also reported in Machin and Manning (1997), who are co-authors of the Dolado et al. paper.
                                                    - 97 -


could yield a negative coefficient simply because labor demand returned to normal in subsequent years.

Second, this part of the analysis does not focus on low-skill workers along any particular dimension, and

as for the United States, the effects of the minimum wage may be difficult to detect from data on

aggregate employment.

        Bazen and Skourias (1997) study the effects of the 1981-1984 increases in the French minimum

wage on youth employment (for 15-24 year-olds). They split their sample into 32 sectors and calculate

the ratio of youth employment to total employment in each sector and the proportion of workers in the

sector whose wage was below the level of the minimum wage set in June 1981. Using a difference-in-

differences approach, they find that, conditional on overall employment growth in the sector, the share of

youth employment fell in relative terms in the sectors for which the minimum wage increase was more

binding. The estimates are negative and statistically significant for the first-differences estimates (for

October 1980 to October 1981 and March 1981 to March 1982) and become somewhat larger when a

longer difference is used.

        We have two concerns about their specification. First, the authors estimate an equation for the

change in the youth employment share, using as a control the percentage change in total sector

employment. Since the percentage change is sensitive to the base, and employment levels can differ

sharply across sectors, it would have been preferable to define the dependent and independent variables

consistently. Second, their longer-differenced specifications regress changes in youth employment from

March 1980 to March 1984 on the proportion of workers directly affected by the June 1981 increase in

the minimum wage, whereas it would seem more natural to use a measure of workers affected by the

entire set of minimum wage increases from 1980 to 1984 (17 percent of which occurred, in relative terms,

prior to June 1981). Otherwise, sectors that adjusted employment more slowly to the increases in 1980

and early 1981 would have had more minimum wage workers in June 1981, and possibly sharper

employment declines subsequently, even if their employment declines over this period were no larger

than those with fewer minimum wage workers prior to entire set of increases.
                                                        - 98 -


           The final set of studies we consider are those by Abowd et al. (1999, 2000a, 2000b), whose

results for the United States were summarized in the previous section. As we described earlier, these

authors use individual-level panel data and test for disemployment effects among initially-employed

workers who are “caught” by an increase in the minimum wage. For France, which generally had a rising

nominal minimum wage over the period they study (1982-89), the authors consistently find considerably

higher transitions to non-employment for workers newly bound by the minimum wage than for workers

with marginally higher wages, especially among those just above age 24 who were not protected by

employment promotion contracts. For example, for men aged 25-29 caught by the minimum, the

elasticity of employment with respect to the minimum wage is −4.6, relative to similar men just above the

minimum. For women the results are weaker and not significant, but the elasticity is still large (−1.38).

For those aged 20-24, the elasticities are smaller and not significant, and the elasticities are smaller still,

and insignificant, for males and females aged 16-19. The elasticities for those above 25 are large, but as

the authors point out, these are elasticities that apply to a very small share of the population in the age

group. Thus, these results reinforce our previous argument that the effects of minimum wages are quite

different when one focuses on directly affected workers rather than on a broader group.

           All told, the evidence for France regarding overall employment effects of minimum wages on

young and less-skilled workers is mixed. Our paper on European and other OECD countries, discussed

above, suggests that France may have a combination of labor market institutions that make it less likely

that minimum wages will have detectable disemployment effects on young workers, and the results in the

Abowd et al. paper, on those under age 25, appear to confirm this.98 At the same, however, the results

reported by Abowd et al., point to disemployment effects of the minimum wage among low-skilled

workers less protected by these institutions, and the evidence from France, on balance, is consistent with

disemployment effects.

98
     In a related vein, Kramarz and Philippon (2001) study the effects of the combination of minimum wages and other
     labor costs, with a focus on payroll taxes and exemptions. Similarly, Laroque and Salanié (2002) present
     estimates of a relatively simple structural model intended to capture the effects of the minimum wage and the
     welfare system on the employment of married women in France, based in part on the Meyer-Wise approach to
     estimating the employment effects of minimum wages (discussed below).
                                                         - 99 -


           The Netherlands. The minimum wage is also set by statute in the Netherlands. However, this

country represents an interesting case because the government instituted reductions in the youth

subminimum wage in 1981 and 1983 (as well as a reduction in the nominal adult minimum wage in

1984), which, for example, lowered the subminimum wage for 20 year-olds from 77.5 percent to 61.5

percent of the adult minimum wage and the subminimum wage for 16 year-olds from 47.5 percent to 34.5

percent of the adult minimum wage. Dolado et al. (1996) study the effects of these declines in youth

subminimums.99 The authors first verify that relative wages of young workers declined following these

changes, which indicates that the youth subminimum wages were a binding constraint on the wages of

these workers. They then calculate that the ratio of youth employment to total employment fell by 3

percentage points from 1979 to 1985, contrary to what would be expected from an exogenous reduction in

wages for younger workers. However, they also recognize that a severe recession in the Netherlands at

that time may have disproportionately affected youth employment, making it difficult to distinguish the

effects of the minimum wage reduction from cyclical influences. As a result, the authors examine

changes in the shares of youth employment in four low-skilled occupations relative to changes in the

shares of youth employment in somewhat higher-skilled occupations. Among the low-skilled

occupations, the youth share of total employment fell by 2 percentage points in one, remained constant in

one, and rose by 2 and 4 percentage points in the other two. They summarize by suggesting that the

evidence from the Netherlands about adverse employment effects of the minimum wage is “scarcely

compelling.” However, in all four industries the youth share in employment rose both relative to the

overall youth share of employment (which fell by 3 percentage points over the period) and relative to the




99
     One problem they note, which also applies to Spain and Brazil (discussed below), is that in the Netherlands the
     minimum wage also influences benefit levels—in this case unemployment benefits—making it more difficult to
     separately identify the effects of legislated minimum wage changes.
                                                        - 100 -


youth share of employment in the higher-skilled occupations, consistent with the response we would

expect if minimum wages reduce employment.100

         Spain. The final country for which Dolado et al. (1996) present evidence is Spain. The national

minimum wage in Spain is also set by statute, but is determined the Council of Ministers after

consultation with trade unions and employer organizations. As in the United States, the ratio of the

national minimum wage to the average wage has gradually declined over time, limiting the extent to

which the time variation can be used to identify the effects of minimum wages on employment. In an

attempt to increase the exploitable variation in the data, the authors use a panel-data approach to

investigate the effects of minimum wage changes on six low-wage sectors. In particular, they regress

sector-specific changes in employment and youth employment (16-19 year-olds) on changes in the

relative minimum wage, cyclical controls, and fixed sector effects.101 The results show a positive and

statistically significant elasticity of .08 for total employment, but a negative elasticity of −.15 for youths

(significant at the 10-percent level). They also find stronger disemployment effects for 16-19 year-olds in

the set of industries for which the minimum wage is most binding.

         Dolado et al. also report on what is likely a cleaner experiment—an 83 percent increase in 1990

in the minimum wage for 16 year-olds; there was also a more modest increase of 15 percent for 17 year-

olds. In this case, they use regional data and regress region-specific changes in youth employment

between 1990 and 1994 on the fraction of workers in each region that were low paid prior to the

implementation of the higher minimum wage. The results provide strong evidence that employers


100
    There are also some papers that estimate the effects of the minimum wage on employment in the Netherlands
   using either structural search models (Koning et al., 1994) or the Meyer and Wise (1983) approach of inferring
   minimum wage effects from “missing” workers in the wage distribution (van Soest, 1994). The Meyer-Wise
   approach has seldom been used in recent research on minimum wages and hence is not covered in this review.
   One exception is a paper by Dickens et al. (1998), who present evidence using this method for the United
   Kingdom and find that the employment estimates resulting from this approach are quite sensitive to assumptions
   about the distribution of wages and the wage above which the minimum has no effect.
101
    The authors exclude fixed year effects from their panel data specifications, which hampers comparability with
   other studies that typically include such effects to sweep out the effects of aggregate changes. They report that
   they could not reject the exclusion of these year effects, but with small samples (168 in the pooled analysis, and
   28 in the analysis of each industry) the statistical power of these tests may be weak. Unfortunately, it is not
   possible to determine the effect on the results of omitting fixed year effects from the information provided in the
   paper.
                                                     - 101 -


substituted away from 16-19 year-old workers after the increase in the minimum wage for 16-17 year-

olds. This effect is not evident in the data for 20-24 year-olds (indeed the coefficient is positive), which

suggests that the results reflect the change in the minimum wage, rather than other changes in labor

demand. The authors conclude from their study that minimum wage increases in Spain reduced youth

employment.102

        Portugal. A similar quasi-experiment took place in Portugal in January 1987. In this case, the

government eliminated the 75 percent subminimum wage for 18-19 year-old workers, making them

eligible instead for the adult minimum wage. In effect, this legislative change resulted in a 49.3 percent

increase in the nominal minimum wage for this age group, as compared with a minimum wage increase of

only 12 percent for workers aged 20 and over. Pereira (2003) uses this policy change to study the effects

of the minimum wage on teenage employment in Portugal, using a firm-level panel data set for the period

1986-1989, with observations pertaining to March of each year.103 From this data set, Pereira extracts

firm-specific information on employment, hours, and wages for three age groups: 18-19 year-olds, 20-25

year-olds, and 30-35 year-olds. She then uses two related research designs to test for the effects of

minimum wages on employment. First, she compares changes in employment and hours (and wages)

across the three age groups for intervals of one, two, and three years after the minimum wage increase.

Second, she estimates models that separate out the differences in changes in employment by age for firms

whose average wage for teenagers in March 1986 was between the old and the new minimum, identifying

the minimum wage effect from those firms that were most likely to be directly affected by the minimum




102
    At the same time, they interpret the evidence of positive effects on aggregate employment as consistent with a
   “monopsony effect” (p. 352). However, we question whether the apparent positive effect of minimum wages on
   overall employment should be taken seriously. Few economists would expect any detectable effect of minimum
   wages on aggregate employment in modern industrialized economies. And even if we were inclined to the
   monopsony view, we would expect such effects to show up most strongly for workers directly affected by the
   minimum wage. In contrast, the evidence for Spain points to negative employment effects for the most affected
   workers.
103
    The subminimum wage was also increased for 17 year-olds, from 50 percent to 75 percent of the adult minimum
   wage. However, Pereira focuses only on 18-19 year-olds because there are few workers in the younger age group
   and few firms employing them in her data. One year later, the subminimum for workers aged 16 and under was
   increased as well (Portugal and Cardoso, 2006).
                                                          - 102 -


wage increase. All of the models include controls for initial firm size, industry, and region, and she also

presents analyses that account for firm entry and exit, which is substantial.104

            Pereira seems able to rule out any anticipatory effects, arguing that news of the impending change

in the minimum wage first surfaced in August 1986, well after the March 1986 measurement of initial

employment levels (and wages). In addition, she finds that the minimum wage increase pushed up wages

of teenagers in both absolute and relative terms, and that the spike at the subminimum prior to the

increase disappeared soon after the minimum wage increase for teenagers took effect.

            The evidence indicates that teen employment fell relative to employment for 30-35 year-olds,

with the difference statistically significant and implied elasticities from her preferred estimates ranging

from −.2 to −.4. In contrast, employment of 20-25 year-olds increased relative to the older group,

consistent with substitution away from teenagers and toward this group. This substitution is exactly what

would be expected if the minimum wage increased the price of teen workers relative to their close

substitutes. In addition, the estimates imply that overall youth employment (ages 18-25) declined

slightly. The evidence is particularly strong for the specifications that identify the minimum wage effects

from the most-affected firms. The evidence also indicates that the effects are stronger one or two years

after the minimum wage increase than in the first year of the increase, consistent with other evidence on

lagged effects. Pereira also estimates similar models for total hours and finds even larger effects,

suggesting that employers reduced the average workweeks of their teenage employees as well.

            Portugal and Cardoso (2006) study the same minimum wage change using the same data source

(although they use nearly the full universe of firm-level data, whereas Pereira used a 30-percent random

sample). They focus mainly on the effects of minimum wages on worker flows—that is, accessions and

separations. We do not delve into these results because this review is focused primarily on net

employment effects. However, we would note that their results suggest that the increase in the minimum

wage reduced both job separations and new hires among teenagers (in all cases relative to workers aged

up to 35 years old). The reduction in teen hiring is evident for new firms as well as for existing firms,

104
      Note that Krueger’s question about the role of variation in labor demand elasticities applies here as well.
                                                    - 103 -


while the separation results vary—with the higher minimum wage increasing the share of teenage job loss

due to firm closures.

        In addition to providing information on the effects of minimum wages on the dynamics of

employment change, the authors assert that their results are at odd with the results we have reported for

the United States suggesting that higher minimum wages cause teenagers who have already dropped out

and are working to lose their jobs, and teens in school (perhaps already working part-time) to leave school

for full-time employment (for example, Neumark and Wascher, 1996b). Portugal and Cardoso argue that

these transitions are unlikely to be occurring in Portugal because this type of response would suggest

increased separations of teenagers and increased accessions rather than reduced separations and

accessions. Of course, the context of secondary schooling in the employment behavior of teens in

Portugal could be quite different from that in the United States and so it is difficult to evaluate the

relevance of any differences in transitions.

        The authors also take issue with the net negative employment effects for teenagers estimated by

Pereira (2003). They report aggregate employment figures for teens and other age groups indicating that

teen employment grew faster in 1988 and 1989 than employment of other age groups. They then compare

these figures to those reported by Pereira, which show declining employment for teens and all other age

groups, and argue that these discrepancies in growth rates indicate that Pereira’s sample is “severely

biased with respect to the actual trend in employment for the affected group” (p. 995)—and, they could

have added based on the comparison they do, for all groups. However, Pereira reports employment levels

only for firms that survive, and given the large turnover of firms in these data, her employment totals

naturally shrink; thus, this comparison is invalid. Pereira also shows that her regression results are

qualitatively similar whether or not account is taken of entering and exiting firms. Given that Portugal

and Cardoso do not present any kind of overall analysis of net employment effects (they only report
                                                     - 104 -


overall levels, with no regression controls), we do not find their criticism of Pereira’s estimates

convincing.105

        Greece. The only evidence we have uncovered for Greece comes from a time-series study that

uses annual data from 1974-2001 (Karageorgiou, 2004). This paper focuses on teens (ages 15-19) and

young adults (ages 20-24). Greece had different minimum wages for these groups, but although their

levels were different, their relative movements were quite similar over much of the period, with the

exception of an increase in the teen minimum relative to the young adult minimum in the early 1980s.

        Estimating separate models for these two age groups, and paying attention to the specification

issues raised in Williams and Mills (2001), Karageorgiou finds evidence of negative employment effects

of the minimum wage for young adults, with elasticities (from the log specification) ranging from −.05 to

−.12, although never significant. For teens, in contrast, the estimates are large and positive, with

elasticities ranging from .22 to .63, with the larger estimates significant.

        There are a few reasons to be skeptical of the results. First, minimum wages in Greece vary by

age, education, tenure, occupation, and marital status. As a result, it is not clear that we necessarily want

to focus solely on young or unskilled workers—in contrast to the more common case where there is a

single wage floor that is presumably most binding on the least skilled. Second, there is relatively little

real variation in minimum wages, especially after the late 1990s, because the minimum wage was indexed

to inflation. Third, the estimated effect of the aggregate unemployment rate on young adult employment

is positive and significant, which is suggestive of model misspecification. Fourth, the author does not

adequately explain the extraordinarily large positive minimum wage effects for teenagers. Although he

suggests that part of the explanation may be that teens and youths are very close substitutes, so that a

higher minimum wage causes strong substitution toward teenagers, this would seem to require large

105
   Portugal and Cardoso present no other evidence—such as erroneous computer code—that undermines Pereira’s
  claim that she drew a 30-percent random sample that should be unbiased. They do note that even when they tried
  to replicate Pereira’s sample, they found opposite results from hers (footnote 9). However, it appears that this
  exercise attempted to replicate the employment trends reported by Pereira rather than her regression estimates.
  Portugal and Cardoso also present employment figures from another household-level data set, but they report only
  that employment of teenagers grew (and unemployment fell) from 1986 to 1989 rather than anything about the
  difference in employment growth between teenagers and older workers. Given that this period was characterized
  by an economic expansion, these calculations are not especially informative.
                                                            - 105 -


negative effects for young adults as well. Moreover, testing this hypothesis requires estimates of how

teen (and young adult) employment responds to the minimum wages for both groups. However, the

employment equation for each group contains only that group’s minimum wage relative to an adult

average; in addition, as noted above, there seems to be little variation in the difference between the

minimum wage for these two groups, and so it may not be possible to test this conjecture. These

problems, coupled with the difficulty of interpreting the evidence in the case where many other workers

are also bound by minimum wages, leads us to regard the evidence from Greece as inconclusive one way

or the other.

Developing Countries

            The analysis of minimum wage effects in developing countries is complicated by a number of

factors. First, there is often a large informal sector in which minimum wages (and other labor laws) do

not apply or are not enforced, and to which there can be substantial spillovers from the formal sector.

Second, even in the formal sector, there are serious concerns about the enforcement of and compliance

with minimum wage laws. Third, for some countries confounding factors such as anti-sweatshop

campaigns have also created upward pressure on wages of low-skilled workers. And fourth, in some

cases minimum wage increases have occurred in the context of high inflation, in which case legislated

minimum wage increases may convey little more than extraordinarily short-term changes in relative

prices of different kinds of labor. Because of these complications, the results from developing countries

are more difficult to interpret and are less likely to be applicable to other countries. In addition, after

reviewing the literature, it seemed to use that many of the complexities involved in thinking about the

evidence for each country were better left to scholars of those particular countries’ economies.106 We

therefore provide a much briefer overview of this evidence, more as a guide to the literature than as a

comprehensive review.




106
      A significant portion of this literature is also written in languages other than English.
                                                   - 106 -


Latin America and the Caribbean

        Brazil. The effects of minimum wages in Brazil have attracted interest for a number of reasons,

including this country’s long reliance on the minimum wage, the extreme inequality in the country, the

role of the minimum wage in coordinating centralized wage bargaining as part of anti-inflationary efforts

in the 1980s and early 1990s, and recent efforts to increase the minimum wage substantially. Although

minimum wages were originally set at the regional level, the government switched to a national minimum

wage in 1984. Since then, there have been periods in which the nominal minimum wage has increased

sharply, periods in which it was frozen, and periods in which it has been indexed to inflation. In general,

however, the real value of the minimum wage has tended to decline over time. In addition, although all

workers are legally covered by the minimum wage in Brazil, there is a sizable informal sector for which

compliance is relatively low.

        Fajnzylber (2001) takes an indirect approach to estimating the employment effects of the

minimum wage in Brazil. Using matched data from the Brazilian Monthly Employment Survey—a CPS-

type data set—for the period 1982-1997, he applies the same methods as in Neumark et al. (2004) to

estimate minimum wage effects at different points of the wage distribution. However, he only estimates

the effects of the minimum wage on income, and then backs out the employment effects by comparing the

estimated effects on income for a sample working at both observations and a sample that also includes

those not working. Given that he still has to condition on initial employment to use this strategy, it is not

clear why he did not estimate employment effects directly. Nonetheless, his indirect approach implies

that for formal sector workers earning below or very near the minimum, the employment elasticity is

around −.10 in the first year, and −.05 to −.08 after allowing for lagged effects, with the moderation

attributable, he argues, to some giveback in the wage effects. For the informal sector, the implied

employment elasticities for those below or near the minimum range from −.25 to −.35 in the short-run and

from −.05 to −.15 in the longer-run. He suggests that the stronger effects for the informal sector may

reflect individuals leaving informal sector employment to queue for formal sector jobs, although there is
                                                         - 107 -


some question as to whether this is a real phenomenon that can account for the differences. In addition,

the implied disemployment effects are stronger for women and teenagers.107

           Lemos has written a sequence of closely-related papers that use the same data set as Fajnzylber,

but with observations that extend through 2000. Lemos (2004) considers a variety of measures of the

minimum wage and estimates the effects of the minimum wage on employment and hours from a cross-

section time-series panel of regional data over the 1982-2000 period. She uses a standard panel

specification that includes region and time fixed effects, as well as lagged employment terms to capture

shorter-run and longer-run effects in some specifications. Because the nominal minimum wage is

uniform across the country, the regional variation comes either from differences in regional price indexes

(when the real minimum wage is used) or from differences across regions in the share of workers at or

below the minimum. Nevertheless, wage and price levels vary substantially across regions, and so the

bite of the national minimum wage may vary considerably by location. The estimates of the employment

and hours effects are sometimes positive and sometimes negative, but rarely statistically significant. In

addition, many of the estimated elasticities are near zero, although there are some outliers (both positive

and negative).

           Lemos does not address the question of why she obtains much smaller employment effects than

Fajnzylber. His estimates, however, make clear that the (implied) employment effects are concentrated

among workers in the lower part of the wage distribution. Given these prior results, it is not entirely clear

why Lemos focuses on overall employment effects rather than on the segments of the workforce most

likely to bear any employment impact. Some of her results discussed below try to get closer to lower-

skill groups, but none build on Fajnzylber’s work by focusing on those with wages near the minimum.

More attention to this issue would clarify the extent to which her results differ because they are more

aggregate, or because of her use of alternative minimum wage measures, a longer sample period, and

other differences in her analyses.



107
      These estimates do not take account of possible hours effects, however.
                                                    - 108 -


        In two subsequent studies, Lemos considers whether the evidence of negative employment effects

is more compelling for labor markets in which we might expect them to be stronger. In Lemos

(forthcoming), for example, she estimates minimum wage effects separately for the private and public

sectors. In particular, she speculates that public sector labor demand is more inelastic than in the private

sector—either because the state can raise revenues to cover higher costs, or because of the necessity of

providing public services. Lemos finds that the wage effects in the two sectors are roughly comparable.

Her evidence on employment and hours effects suggests no impact or a slight (and insignificant) positive

impact in the private sector (with long-run elasticities of zero to .01). For the public sector, she finds a

weak positive effect on employment but a stronger (although still insignificant) negative effect on hours,

resulting in an overall long-run elasticity of total hours of −.07.

        Lemos (2006) examines the formal and informal sectors separately to see whether the minimum

wage causes wages to rise and employment to decline in the formal sector (where the minimum wage

should be more binding), but wages to fall and employment to rise in the informal sector (where

compliance is lower), as would be predicted by the standard two-sector model of the minimum wage. In

contrast to the predictions of this model, she finds that the minimum wage increases wages at the low end

of the wage distribution in both sectors, and no significant evidence of either positive or negative effects

of the minimum wage on employment or hours in either sector; and in all cases the estimates are small.

Lemos does not try to explain these differences, nor those for the public versus private sector.

        Echoing concerns raised in Neumark et al. (2006) about the extent to which employers would

respond to an increase in the nominal minimum wage in an environment of hyperinflation, Lemos (2006)

also reports evidence on the effects of the minimum wage in high versus low inflation periods. In the low

inflation periods, when minimum wage increases are more likely to be perceived as longer-lasting

increases in the cost of low-wage labor, the estimated effect of the minimum wage on employment in the

formal sector is more negative, although still not statistically significant. Lemos also restricts the sample

to less-educated (four years of schooling or less) workers to see if the adverse effects of the minimum

wage show through more clearly for workers whose wages are most likely to be boosted by an increase.
                                                     - 109 -


The estimated disemployment effects in the formal sector are larger for this subsample, although once

again the estimates are insignificant.

        Finally, Lemos (2005) extends her analysis of aggregate employment effects to attempt to

account for the endogeneity of minimum wage changes, noting that if minimum wages are increased in

times of stronger economic growth, the estimated coefficients on the minimum wage variable will be

biased upward. Lemos uses a variety of political measures as instruments for minimum wages, which she

argues meet the standard criteria for validity. She then compares IV and OLS estimates for a number of

different estimation approaches and disaggregations of the sample (for example, looking at teenagers or

those with less education). We read her evidence as suggesting that the estimated disemployment effects

tend to be somewhat more negative when the political instruments are used, although the standard errors

increase enough that these estimates are never significant (Table 3).

        We have some doubts about the validity of these instruments, which, as Lemos notes, need to

affect minimum wages but not be correlated with the error term in the employment equation. A natural

source of such a correlation, however, is the influence of these political variables on other labor market

policies that may have differential effects on employment across the regions of Brazil.108 Thus, while

Lemos concludes that there is no evidence to support the hypothesis that endogeneity of the minimum

wage biases the estimated employment effect upward, we view the evidence as less informative.

        Neumark et al. (2006) focus mainly on the distributional effects of minimum wages in Brazil, but

they also report some employment effects for the 1996-2001 period, following the end of the hyper-

inflation. Using the same data set as Lemos, they first estimate an employment effect for household

heads, yielding a significant elasticity of −.07 when lags of the minimum wage are included. In contrast,

the estimates imply positive effects of the minimum wage on employment and hours of other family

members, which may reflect labor supply increases for these individuals (who are more likely to work in




108
   Of course, one could also argue that other studies of minimum wages omit variation in other labor market
  policies, and that the problem in this paper is no different than in most others.
                                                       - 110 -


the informal sector) in response to the employment declines for household heads (who are more likely to

work in the formal sector).

        Overall, our sense is that the evidence for Brazil suggests that the effects of the minimum wage

on employment are small in the aggregate. However, the evidence sometimes points to disemployment

effects where we are more likely to find them—in low-inflation environments, and for less-skilled

individuals and particularly lower-wage individuals.109

        Mexico and Colombia. These countries provide an interesting contrast in minimum wage policy,

with the minimum wage in Mexico falling sharply in real terms between 1981 and 1987, and the

minimum wage in Colombia increasing sharply over this period. As a result, the relative value of the

minimum wage was quite low in Mexico at the end of that decade and relatively high in Colombia. Bell

(1997) exploits this divergence in minimum wage policy to examine whether the employment effects of

the minimum wage show through more clearly in the country where the minimum wage is higher. She

first presents standard time-series regressions using annual manufacturing data for Mexico and Colombia

over a relatively long sample period. For Mexico, she finds a small positive minimum wage elasticity

(.17) for wages and a small negative elasticity (−.18) for employment; neither estimate is statistically

significant. For Colombia, the estimated effects of the minimum wage are larger and statistically

significant in both the wage and employment equations, with elasticities of .44 for wages and −.34 for

employment.

        She then turns to firm-level panel data sets that allow her to focus on the 1980s period, when the

divergence between the minimum wage changes in the two countries was especially large. For Mexico,

specifications that include firm fixed effects yield elasticities of employment ranging from −.03 to .03 for

unskilled workers and −.01 to .05 for skilled workers, with all of the estimated minimum wage effects

insignificant. Similar models estimated for Colombia generate different results, with statistically

significant elasticities ranging from −.15 to −.33 for unskilled and −.03 to −.24 for skilled workers. Bell

109
   An earlier review of minimum wage effects on employment in Brazil (Carneiro, 2001), which covers many
  unpublished papers circulating in Brazil (and written in Portuguese), argues that the evidence tends to point to
  disemployment effects.
                                                      - 111 -


attributes the differing results between Mexico and Colombia to the minimum wage being binding on

firms in Colombia but not in Mexico, as suggested by distributions of average firm-level wages in both

countries.

         In contrast, Feliciano (1998) studies minimum wage effects for Mexico using data on all workers

rather than just manufacturing workers. Her study uses data from the 1970, 1980, and 1990 Mexican

Census of Population coupled with other sources. As a result, her sample period includes the 1980s

when, as noted above, the minimum wage in Mexico declined sharply. But minimum wages also fell

noticeably over the longer period she studies and became more uniform across states and regions within

states as well.110 Feliciano uses a standard panel data specification with a relative minimum wage

variable, controls for the business cycle, and state and year fixed effects; the model is estimated at the

state level, using the average minimum wage for regions within a state in cases when there was minimum

wage variation within states.111 She finds no minimum wage effects for males, with estimated elasticities

typically close to and centered on zero, and generally insignificant. The one exception is for males aged

55 to 64, for which she find a small but significant positive effect, which she suggests could reflect

substitution towards these workers rather than direct effects of the minimum wage. For females,

however, there is consistent evidence of disemployment effects for all age groups, with elasticities

ranging from −.41 to −.76. Feliciano speculates that the differences between her results and Bell’s arise

because Bell focuses only on the manufacturing sector. She presumably could have checked this with her

data, but did not. Nonetheless, this study seems to provide reliable evidence that the reductions in the

minimum wage in Mexico increased employment of women and had little impact on men, consistent with

overall disemployment effects.




110
    The number of geographic areas with a separately-determined minimum wage declined from 111 in 1970 to two
   in 1990.
111
    She also presents estimates from a specification that instruments for the relative minimum wage variable with a
   real minimum wage variable (that is, divided by a price index rather than an average wage measure), to correct for
   the possible endogeneity from unmeasured factors that positively affect both the average wage and employment.
   However, her IV estimates are almost always more strongly negative, contrary to expectations. The discussion
   therefore focuses on the OLS estimates.
                                                    - 112 -


        In a related paper, Maloney and Nuñez Mendez (2004) examine the impact of minimum wages on

wage distributions in 1998 for eight Latin American countries. Because the data reveal an especially

pronounced impact of the minimum wage on the wage distribution in Colombia, paralleling Bell’s

findings, they narrow their focus to study the employment effects of minimum wages in that country.

Using a rotating household panel data set with matched individual data across two quarters, they estimate

the effects of two minimum wage increases during the 1997-1999 period covered by their data. Their

sample consists only of men working 30 to 50 hours per week; it would be desirable to see evidence for

other groups as well. As in much of the existing research using individual longitudinal data, they

calculate transition rates from employment to non-employment for individuals who were employed as of

the first observation and estimate how minimum wage increases affected these transition probabilities. In

this particular study, the authors use the self-employed as a control group because they are not subject to

the minimum wage. Because the minimum wage is often used as a numeraire for other wages (as

discussed in the context of Brazil), the specification also controls for each individual’s initial position in

the wage distribution, and separate estimates of the minimum wage effects on employment are reported at

various wage levels (as in Neumark et al., 2004). The models also include individual characteristics,

quarterly and regional dummy variables, and, in some specifications, lagged values of the minimum wage

changes.

        The estimated employment effects reported by the authors are large, negative, and statistically

significant. In addition, these negative effects are evident in some of the higher locations in the wage

distribution, suggesting that the function of the minimum wage also causes employment losses, although

it is difficult to understand why this wage rigidity would persist. The lagged effects are also negative and

significant, suggesting a period of adjustment. The authors repeat the analysis excluding the dummies for

location in the wage distribution to get average effects and calculate an elasticity of employment with

respect to the minimum of −.15. Overall, this research appears to confirm Bell’s previous finding that

minimum wages have negative consequences for employment in Colombia, albeit for a select group of

workers.
                                                      - 113 -


          Chile. Montenegro and Pagés (2004) estimate effects of job security provisions and minimum

wages on the relative employment of different groups, using a time-series of cross-sectional data sets for

Santiago from 1960-1998. They estimate a model for employment at the individual level and include a

set of variables for age, skill level, and sex, as well as these variables interacted with real minimum wage

indexes (differentiating the minimum for those under age 18 and those aged 18 and over). Because the

minimum wage varies by age, it is possible, in principle, to include year effects and still estimate an

overall minimum wage effect on the level of employment. However, they indicate that the coefficient on

the minimum wage variable was not robust in this specification, so they instead included only the

interaction terms and the year dummy variables, and thus estimate relative employment effects.112 This

research design does not control for possible differences in trends for different demographic and skill

groups.

          For the most part, the authors’ estimates are consistent with the competitive model, with the

evidence indicating that a higher minimum wage reduces the employment of young workers and unskilled

workers relative to that for older male skilled workers, with the disemployment effects particularly strong

for workers who are both young and unskilled. Curiously, though, even though women earn lower

wages, minimum wages appear to increase their employment relative to that for older males.

          Costa Rica. As pointed out by Gindling and Terrell (2004), Costa Rica provides fertile ground

for studying minimum wages in a developing country context. In the period they study, the country

moved from a system of over 500 minimum wages based on occupation and skill categories to a system

of only 19 different levels. This sharp consolidation of the number of separate minimum wages generated

a great deal of exogenous variation in minimum wages by occupation and skill category. Gindling and

Terrell exploit this variation to study the effects of minimum wage changes on employment and hours,

using individual-level data covering 1988-2000.



112
   At the end of their paper, they attempt to estimate overall employment effects on older skilled male workers and
  to use these estimates to back out total effects on each age-sex-skill group. However, we do not see how this
  approach circumvents the problem just discussed.
                                                   - 114 -


        Specifically, they create a pooled time-series cross-sectional data set on about 10,000 individuals

per year, and estimate models for employment in the covered sector and hours worked by workers in each

sector (as well as for wages and earnings). The models include the real value of the minimum wage

applicable to each individual, a set of human capital controls, and dummy variables for year and for each

occupation-skill category that was used in the determination of minimum wages in 1988. Because of the

need for information on occupation, the sample for the employment analysis is restricted to those who

have worked before.

        The analysis first establishes that minimum wages affect wages, via inspection of histograms and

estimates of similar regression models for wages. The estimates from the employment and hours

regressions indicate significant negative effects in the covered sector. The employment elasticity is −.11,

and the hours elasticity is −.06, with the effects concentrated toward the bottom deciles of the skill

distribution. There is also a reduction in uncovered sector hours, although this estimate, unlike the others,

is not significant. While the employment elasticity is of a similar magnitude to those estimated for

teenagers in the United States, the implied employment effects are much bigger because far more workers

are affected by the minimum wage in Costa Rica. Given the significant variation in minimum wages in

Costa Rica and the authors’ ability to assign minimum wages to individuals, we regard this as one of the

more convincing developing country studies.

        Trinidad and Tobago. Strobl and Walsh (2003) examine the effects of the introduction of a

national minimum wage in April 1998 in Trinidad and Tobago. They use a rotational household survey

administered quarterly, which lets them construct short panels on individuals. Because their data set is

limited to the 1996-1998 period, they can estimate only relatively short-run effects (at most eight months)

of the minimum wage’s introduction. Given the problem of large informal sectors in developing

countries (and likely low enforcement), Strobl and Walsh focus mainly on compliance, and more

tangentially on employment. Their evidence suggests substantial non-compliance, but also that the

minimum wage is binding on some workers, and led to wage increases in large firms.
                                                   - 115 -


        Strobl and Walsh estimate employment effects by asking whether workers initially employed

below the new minimum wage were less likely to be employed after its introduction. They find that, for

males, being caught by the minimum wage increases the probability of job loss by .09. Additionally, the

larger the gap between the individual’s initial wage and the minimum wage, the higher the probability of

job loss. In contrast, the estimated effects for females are close to zero and insignificant (.023 for being

caught by the minimum), although large firms were more likely to lay off females than small firms in

response to the minimum wage. The introduction of a new minimum wage in Trinidad and Tobago

provides a nice—although rare—instance in which to study minimum wage effects, paralleling that for

the United Kingdom. However, a valid control group is still necessary to control for aggregate trends. In

the probit for job loss, the authors use all workers whose initial wage was above the new minimum wage

as the control group. However, it might have been preferable to use a narrower group of workers who are

relatively low wage but not bound by the minimum, although even in this case, aggregate trends that

differ by skill level can invalidate estimated effects of introducing a national minimum wage.

        Puerto Rico. Although a U.S. territory, Puerto Rico shares some similarities with the countries

covered in this section because of its low wage levels. In 1938, when the FLSA was passed, the federal

minimum applied as in the mainland. Recognizing that market wages were considerably lower in Puerto

Rico than in the rest of the United States, the Congress passed subsequent amendments that allowed

industry committees (including representatives from employers, labor, and the public) to set lower

minimum wages and to leave some important industries (like trade and services) uncovered. However, in

1974 the Congress reversed itself and enacted automatic increases to make the minimum uniform across

industries, bring it to mainland levels, and extend coverage as in the mainland; these objectives were

accomplished by 1983. As a result, with average wages in Puerto Rico about half the average for the

remainder of the United States, the minimum wage subsequently had much more bite in Puerto Rico than

in the United States. As shown by Castillo-Freeman and Freeman (1992), wage distributions using Puerto

Rican Census data on workers working over 20 hours per week clearly show the sharp impact of the

federal minimum wage on wages in Puerto Rico.
                                                        - 116 -


        The authors use this variation to study the effects of the U.S. federal minimum wage in Puerto

Rico. In particular, they estimate time-series regressions for the log of the employment-to-population

ratio for the period 1956-1987. Using two different measures of the ratio of the minimum wage to the

average wage, they estimate minimum wage elasticities for aggregate employment of −.11 and −.15, both

of which are statistically significant. In addition to this aggregate time-series approach, they implement a

cross-section time-series analysis for 37 manufacturing industries in order to exploit the variation in

minimum wages by industry, estimating a model that includes fixed year and industry effects. For the

entire sample period, they report a statistically significant employment elasticity of −.54.113 They then

estimate the model separately for the 1956-1973 and 1974-1987 subperiods. The estimated elasticities are

.20 and −.91 respectively, indicating that all of the effect occurred after Congress mandated that the

minimum wage in Puerto be realigned with the U.S. federal minimum. The contrast between the pre- and

post-1974 estimates may also suggest that the industry committees that set minimum wages in Puerto

Rico prior to 1974 took local labor market conditions into account in deciding on the appropriate levels of

the minimum.

        Krueger (1995) reexamined the evidence for Puerto Rico using the same data as in the original

study. His findings generally indicate that the conclusions reached by Castillo-Freeman and Freeman are

quite fragile, with different answers (especially for the cross-industry analysis) emerging from

specifications that differ in terms of weighting or functional form. Krueger also suggests, as noted earlier,

that labor demand elasticities could vary across industries in such a way as to generate spurious

disemployment effects, although the force of this argument would be stronger were it accompanied by

evidence that this is responsible for the results that Castillo-Freeman and Freeman report. Nevertheless,

we are left with somewhat inconclusive evidence for Puerto Rico.




113
   Note that these cross-industry elasticities should be larger than those from the time-series analysis, as
  employment may shift among industries with less of a change in overall employment.
                                                    - 117 -


Indonesia

        In the early 1990s, international pressure led Indonesia to increase minimum wages sharply, and

they tripled in nominal terms (and doubled in real terms) over the first half of the decade. Two papers

(Rama, 2001; Suryahadi et al., 2003) exploit this sudden and arguably exogenous increase to study the

effects of minimum wages in a developing country context, and other papers followed.

        Rama (2001) exploits province-level differences in minimum wage increases in the early 1990s

that stemmed from the fact that minimum wages varied considerably across provinces prior to 1989, but

converged during the early 1990s in response to legislation passed in 1989.114 In particular, he uses data

for the years 1988 to 1994 to estimate a standard panel data regression of the urban employment rate on a

minimum wage variable, province and year fixed effects, and other controls. The minimum wage

variable is measured in a variety of ways, although most of the specifications use the ratio of the

minimum to measures of average or aggregate wages or labor productivity. The estimated elasticity of

aggregate urban employment with respect to the minimum wage is small, ranging from zero to −.04. The

range is larger for 15-24 year-olds, extending from .02 to −.25. However, the estimates are all

insignificant. Rama also presents results disaggregated by firm size, suggesting that small firms (without

providing a definition of the size cutoff) would be expected to conform more to the competitive model,

while larger firms could exhibit monopsony power. His evidence is consistent with positive (but

insignificant) elasticities for large manufacturing firms, and negative, much larger, and sometimes

significant elasticities (ranging from −.77 to −1.30) for small firms.

        Suryahadi et al. (2003) extend this analysis through 2000. They also present results for various

subgroups of workers among the urban, formal-sector workforce, including men and women, adults and

youths, more- and less-educated workers, full-time and part-time workers, and white-collar and blue-




114
   There is some question as to how much real variation in minimum wages across provinces was generated by this
  change, given that—as Rama notes, “minimum wages were not enforced in practice” (p. 866).
                                                       - 118 -


collar workers.115 The estimates in this paper provide stronger evidence of disemployment effects than

does Rama’s analysis, and evidence from wage distributions suggests that the larger negative employment

effects occur among individuals more likely to be bound by the minimum wage. In particular, for overall

employment, the authors estimate a significant negative employment elasticity of −.06. For females, the

estimated elasticity is −.16, and for less-educated workers −.09; in both cases these estimates are

significant. The point estimates are negative, but generally insignificant and smaller for males, adults,

youths, those with more education, blue-collar workers, and both full-time and part-time workers.116 The

one exception to the evidence of negative employment effects is for white-collar workers, for whom the

authors find a large positive elasticity. They interpret this result as evidence that employers substitute

away from blue-collar labor in response to minimum wage increases. Regardless of whether this

interpretation is correct, white-collar wages are much higher and are not directly influenced by the

minimum wage.117

         Other studies for Indonesia attempt use more compelling information to identify the effects of

minimum wages. Harrison and Scorse (2005) analyze both the effects of increases in the minimum wage

and the effects of the U.S.-driven anti-sweatshop campaigns on wages and employment in Indonesia,

using firm-level data from the Annual Manufacturing Survey of Indonesia over the years 1990-1996. In

contrast to the above studies, they exploit variation in minimum wages by districts within provinces. In

addition, the authors are able to separate the effects of the minimum wage from those stemming from

anti-sweatshop activism by recognizing that the latter effects should be limited to the textiles, apparel, and


115
    In some specifications they include the share of workers earning above the minimum wage as a measure of
   compliance. This is potentially problematic because it is endogenous with respect to employment. However, the
   authors also report results without this control variable (in Table 3), and we emphasize those for comparability.
116
    The estimated disemployment effects are considerably larger and significant for youths and both part-time and
   full-time workers when the compliance measure is included.
117
    Islam and Nazara (2000) also revisit Rama’s evidence using data through 1998. Their reporting of results is
   rather unclear, but it appears that they find negative and significant employment effects for overall formal
   employment in models that include region and period dummy variables, but positive effects if the region and
   period dummy variables are dropped. They describe the negative estimates, therefore, as “model-specific.”
   However, as this review makes clear, it is very standard to include some version of region and period effects, and
   it is well-understood that models without these effects may be misspecified. The case for including these effects
   in Indonesia is particularly strong, as economic conditions differ considerably across regions and the East Asian
   financial crisis struck in the latter part of the sample period.
                                                    - 119 -


footwear industries that were the target of this activism and that these industries are located in a narrower

geographic area.

        Using long-difference regressions for the change in log employment from 1990 to 1996, the

authors report estimates of the elasticity of employment with respect to the minimum wage ranging from

−.12 to −.18; the estimates are generally statistically significant and robust to a variety of specifications

changes. Only in small firms were the estimated effects insignificant (and smaller), which the authors

suggest may be the result of lower compliance among small firms. Using annual differences instead, they

find smaller elasticities of −.05. They also examine the effects of the minimum wage on firm closings

and find weak evidence that the minimum wage increased the probability of exit, although they note that

the effect of the minimum wage on exit rates could be larger over a longer time period.

        Finally, Alatas and Cameron (2003) also try to use a sharper identification strategy. They focus

on manufacturing firms in Greater Jakarta, which includes the province of Jakarta and three districts of

the province of West Java; this three-district area is known as Botabek. Although Jakarta and Botabek are

adjacent and both urban, the provincial minimum wage was considerably higher in Jakarta than in West

Java, resulting in a 36 percent differential in the legal minimum wage between Jakarta and Botabek in

1990. Recognizing this discrepancy, the provincial government of West Java subsequently legislated

separate minimum wages for Botabek and the rest of West Java, resulting in a convergence of minimum

wages in Jakarta and Botabek by 1994. Alatas and Cameron also provide evidence that, in these

provinces, improved enforcement throughout the 1990s coupled with the large minimum wage changes

led to detectable shifts in wage distributions.

        Using a panel of all Indonesian manufacturing firms with 20 or more employees, the authors

implement a matched difference-in-differences approach to estimate employment effects for production

workers, who are typically less skilled, identifying the minimum wage effect from changes in otherwise

similar firms in Botabek relative to Jakarta. The authors estimate the model separately for small (20-150

workers) domestic, large domestic, and large foreign firms because they believe that different cost

structures across these categories may result in different minimum wage effects. For large firms, all of
                                                   - 120 -


the estimates are insignificant. The point estimate for large foreign firms is negative, while the evidence

for large domestic firms is inconclusive, with some negative and some positive estimates. For small

firms, the estimated employment effect is negative overall, indicating significantly faster employment

growth in Jakarta in this period, but it becomes insignificant when the control group is narrowed to a

small strip just along the border (to hold economic conditions more similar) or when a higher-wage

control group from Botabek is used. The authors conclude that the disemployment effects of the

minimum wage increases in Indonesia were, overall, not very large. Other evidence reported in the paper

suggests that higher minimum wages did not increase exit rates.

        Overall, the evidence for Indonesia is mixed, with the results dependent upon research design and

firm size. As a result, we do not think one can draw firm conclusions, although the Harrison and Scorse

study seems to us to provide the most compelling evidence, both because of its careful research design

and because the data cover a wider swath of employment. Either way, the minimum wage changes and

availability of data in Indonesia suggest that further research on the effects of the minimum wage in this

country could be especially informative in a developing country context.

VII. Conclusions and Discussion

        What may be most striking to the reader who has managed to wade through our lengthy review of

the new minimum wage research is the wide range of estimates of the effects of the minimum wage on

employment, especially when compared to the review of the earlier literature by Brown et al. in 1982.

For example, few of the studies in the Brown et al. survey were outside of the consensus range of −.1 to

−.3 for the elasticity of teenage employment with respect to the minimum wage. In contrast, even

limiting the sample of studies to those focused on the effects of the minimum wage of teenagers in the

United States, the range of studies comprising the new minimum wage research extends from well below

−1 to well above zero. This wider range for the United States undoubtedly reflects both the new sources

of variation used to identify minimum wage effects—notably the greater state-level variation in minimum

wages—and the new approaches and methods used to estimate these effects. And, the range would be
                                                         - 121 -


considerably wider if we were to include estimates for narrower subsets of workers and industries or

estimates from other countries.

         Although the wide range of estimates is striking, the oft-stated assertion that the new minimum

wage research fails to support the traditional view that the minimum wage reduces the employment of

low-wage workers is clearly incorrect. Indeed, in our view, the preponderance of the evidence points to

disemployment effects. For example, the studies surveyed in this monograph correspond to 102 entries in

our summary tables.118 Of these, by our reckoning nearly two-thirds give a relatively consistent (although

by no means always statistically significant) indication of negative employment effects of minimum

wages, while only eight give a relatively consistent indication of positive employment effects. In

addition, we have highlighted in the tables 33 studies (or entries) that we view as providing the most

credible evidence; 28 (85 percent) of these point to negative employment effects.119 Moreover, when

researchers focus on the least-skilled groups most likely to be adversely affected by minimum wages, the

evidence for disemployment effects seems especially strong. In contrast, we see very few—if any—cases

where a study provides convincing evidence of positive employment effects of minimum wages,

especially among the studies that focus on broader groups for which the competitive model predicts

disemployment effects.

         Based on our review of the literature, we would also highlight some important considerations that

economists and policymakers should keep in mind when assessing the empirical evidence from future

studies of the employment effects of minimum wages. First, longer panel studies that incorporate both

state and time variation in minimum wages tend, on the whole, to find negative and statistically

significant employment effects from minimum wage increases, while the majority of the U.S. studies that

found zero or positive effects of the minimum wage on low-skill employment were either short panel data

studies or case studies of the effects of a state-specific change in the minimum wage on a particular

118
    We do not include every single paper we have discussed. In particular, a few papers that use very similar data
   and estimators to other papers included in the tables, but that largely comment on or replicate the latter, or present
   a narrower set of estimates, are not included.
119
    Note that we have left out of this calculation some of our studies that use similar specifications and data to other
   studies we have done, and which instead explore other issues.
                                                    - 122 -


industry. This raises the question, highlighted in the reviews of Myth and Measurement by both Brown

(1995) and Hamermesh (1995), of whether the latter analyses encompass too short of a time period with

which to capture the full effects of minimum wage changes given the time that is often needed to adjust

the production process to economize on low-skilled labor. Indeed, when they are considered, the

inclusion of lagged effects seems to help in reconciling alternative estimates of minimum wage effects,

and, in our view, the need to allow for sufficient time to observe the consequences of a minimum wage

change is an important lesson for researchers and policymakers.

        Second, the concerns raised in the literature about the case study approach seem especially

problematic. Even aside from the question of whether the authors’ own surveys provide accurate

estimates of employment and other indicators, the doubts expressed about the adequacy of the so-called

natural experiments used in the case study approach, along with the fact that the standard competitive

model provides little guidance as to the expected sign of the employment effects of the minimum wage in

the narrow industries usually considered in these studies, makes the results from them difficult to

interpret. As a result, it is not clear to us that these studies have much to say either about the adequacy of

the neoclassical model or about the broader implications of changes in either the federal minimum wage

or state minimum wages.

        Third, even aside from the estimates of the effects of the minimum wage on low-wage workers as

a whole, there seems to be substantial evidence of labor-labor substitution within low-skill groups.

Although the choice of the aggregate teenage employment rate as the dependent variable in much of the

literature is due to the fact that a sizable portion of this group consists of low-wage workers, not all

teenagers are low-wage workers and not all low-wage workers are teenagers, and, from a policy

standpoint, the effect of the minimum wage on teenage employment is probably of less interest than its

effect on other less-skilled individuals. Some of the more recent literature has attempted to identify these

substitution effects more directly or has focused more specifically on those individuals whose wage and

employment opportunities are most likely to be affected by the minimum wage, and the estimates from

this line of research tend to support the notion that employers replace their lowest-skilled labor with close
                                                   - 123 -


substitutes in response to an increase in the wage floor. As a result, minimum wages may harm the least-

skilled workers more than is suggested by the net disemployment effects estimated in many studies.

         Finally, our review of the literature leads us to suggest a number of areas where additional

research may prove to be especially fruitful. One question that is relevant to much of the literature is how

to address the potential endogeneity of minimum wage policy with respect to economic conditions and

other policy choices. To date, most studies have largely ignored this issue, with the result that many of

the estimates reported in the literature may be biased to some degree. A principal difficulty is that in

specifications that include cross-sectional fixed effects, the researcher needs a set of instrumental

variables that vary over time. In addition, although much of the literature has focused on the employment

effects of the minimum wage, the predictions of theory tend to be about overall labor input rather than

employment specifically. A few studies have attempted to disentangle the implications for aggregate

hours from those for employment, and the differences in results reported in rather similar studies suggests

that this remains an area for further research. Another useful extension of the literature would be to bring

more direct evidence to bear on whether the monopsony model or the competitive model better

characterizes the low-wage labor market. The evidence presented in much of the existing research is

indirect in nature, and given the ambiguous predictions of the competitive model in specific

circumstances, more structural approaches to this question may ultimately prove more informative.

Finally, a systematic assessment of the sources of differences in the estimates across studies using meta-

analysis techniques (rather than simply combining estimates across studies to obtain one “meta” estimate)

could provide complementary evidence to this survey and improve our understanding of how to interpret

the literature.

         In sum, we view the literature—when read broadly and critically—as largely solidifying the

conventional view that minimum wages reduce employment among low-skilled workers, and as

suggesting that the low-wage labor market can be reasonably approximated by the neoclassical

competitive model. Of course, as we have argued elsewhere, the effect of the minimum wage on

employment represents only one piece of the analysis necessary to assess whether minimum wages are a
                                                 - 124 -


useful policy tool for improving the economic position of those at the bottom of the income distribution—

which we believe is the ultimate goal of minimum wage policy. In particular, a more comprehensive

review that includes the implications of the minimum wage for the levels and distributions of wages,

employment and hours, incomes, and human capital accumulation, as well as consideration of alternative

policies, is ultimately needed to assess whether raising the minimum wage is good economic policy. But

given that the weight of the evidence points to disemployment effects, the wisdom of pursuing higher

minimum wages hinges on the tradeoffs between the effects of minimum wages on different workers and

other economic agents, and on whether other policies present more favorable tradeoffs.
                                             References

Aaronson, Daniel, Eric French, and James MacDonald. 2005. “The Minimum Wage, Restaurant Prices,
and Labor Market Structure.” Unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Aaronson, Daniel, and Eric French. 2007. “Product Market Evidence on the Employment Effects of the
Minimum Wage.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 25, No. 1 (January), pp. 167-200.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. “Minimum Wages and Employment in
France and the United States.” Working Paper 6996. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, Thomas Lemieux, and David N. Margolis. 2000a. “Minimum Wages
and Youth Employment in France and the United States.” In David Blanchflower and Richard Freeman,
eds. Youth Employment and Joblessness in Advanced Countries. Pp. 427-72. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, David N. Margolis, and Thomas Phillipon. 2000b. “The Tail of Two
Countries: Minimum Wages and Employment in France and the United States.” Discussion Paper No.
203. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Adams, Scott, and David Neumark, 2005. “Living Wage Effects: New and Improved Evidence.”
Economic Development Quarterly. Vol. 19, No. 1 (February), pp. 80-102.

Ahn, Tom, Peter Arcidiacono, and Walter Wessels. 2005. “Minimum Wages and Positive Employment
Effects in General Equilibrium.” Unpublished paper, Duke University.

Alatas, V. and L. Cameron. 2003. “The Impact of Minimum Wages on Employment in a Low Income
Country: Exploiting a Quasi-Natural Experiment.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
2985.

Arcidiacono, Peter, and Tom Ahn. 2004. “Minimum Wages and Job Search: What Do Employment
Effects Really Measure?” Employment Policies Institute, Washington, D.C.

Baker, Michael, Dwayne Benjamin, and Shuchita Stanger. 1999. “The Highs and Lows of the Minimum
Wage Effect: A Time-Series Cross-Section Study of the Canadian Law.” Journal of Labor Economics.
Vol. 17, No. 2 (April), pp. 318-50.

Bazen, Stephen. 2000. “The Impact of the Regulation of Low Wages on Inequality and Labour-Market
Adjustment: A Comparative Analysis.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 16, No. 1 (Spring), pp.
57-69.

Bazen, Stephen, and Julie Le Gallo. 2006. “The Differential Impact of Federal and State Minimum Wages
on Teenage Employment.” Unpublished paper, University of Savoie.

Bazen, Stephen, and Velayoudom Marimoutou. 2002. “Looking for a Needle in a Haystack? A Re-
examination of the Time Series Relationship between Teenage Employment and Minimum Wages in the
United States.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 64, Supplement, pp. 699-725.

Bazen, Stephan, and Nicolas Skourias. 1997. “Is There a Negative Effect of Minimum Wages in France?”
European Economic Review, Vol. 57, Nos. 3-5 (April), pp.723-732.
Bell, Linda. 1997. “The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Colombia.” Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 15, No.3, Part 2 (July), pp. S102-S135.

Belot, Michele, and Jan C. Van Ours. 2001. “Unemployment and Labour Market Institutions: An
Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Japanese and International Economies.” Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 403-418.

Bernstein, Jared, and John Schmitt. 2000. “The Impact of the Minimum Wage: Policy Lifts Wages,
Maintains Floor for Low-Wage Labor Market.” Economic Policy Institute Briefing Paper.

Bernstein, Jared and John Schmitt. 1998. “Making Work Pay: The Impact of the 1996-97 Minimum
Wage Increase.” Economic Policy Institute, Washington, D.C.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Justin Wolfers. 2000. “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence.” Economic Journal. Vol. 110 (March), pp. C1-C33.

Brown, Charles. 1995. “Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage:
Comment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 48, No. 4 (July), pp. 828-30.

Brown, Charles. 1999. “Minimum Wages, Employment, and the Distribution of Income.” In Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3. pp. 2101-2163. New York:
Elsevier.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
Employment and Unemployment.” Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. 20, No. 2 (June), pp. 487-528.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1983. “Time Series Evidence on the Effect of the
Minimum Wage on Teenage Employment and Unemployment.” Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 18,
No. 1 (Winter), pp. 3-31.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment.”
International Economic Review, Vol. 39, No. 2 (May), pp. 257-73.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000a. “A Reassessment of the
New Economics of the Minimum Wage Literature with Monthly Data from the Current Population
Survey.” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol. 18, No. 4 (October), pp. 653-680.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000b. “Who Minimum Wage
Increases Bite: An Analysis Using Monthly Data from the SIPP and the CPS.” Southern Economic
Journal. Vol. 67, No. 1 (January), pp. 16-40.

Campolieti, Michele, Tony Fang, and Morley Gunderson. 2005a. “How Minimum Wages Affect
Schooling-Employment Outcomes in Canada, 1993-1999.” Journal of Labor Research. Vol. 26, No. 3
(Summer), pp. 169-82.

Campolieti, Michele, Tony Fang, and Morley Gunderson. 2005b. “Minimum Wage Impacts on Youth
Employment Transitions, 1993-1999.” Canadian Journal of Economics. Vol. 38, No. 1 (February), pp.
81-104.

Campolieti, Michele, Morley Gunderson, and Chris Riddell. 2006. “Minimum Wage Impacts from a
Prespecified Research Design: Canada 1981-1997.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 45, No. 2 (April), pp. 195-
216.
Card, David. 1992a. “Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal Minimum
Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 46, No. 1 (October), pp. 22-37.

Card, David. 1992b. “Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California, 1987-
1989.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 46, No. 1 (October), pp. 38-54.

Card, David, Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Comment on David Neumark and William
Wascher, ‘Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages: Panel Data on State Minimum
Wage Laws.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 47, No. 3 (April), pp. 487-96.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-
Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” American Economic Review. Vol. 84, No. 5 (December),
pp. 772-93.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995a. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
Wage. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995b. “Time-Series Minimum Wage Studies: A Meta-analysis.”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 85, No. 2 (May), pp. 238-43.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 2000. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-
Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply.” American Economic Review. Vol. 90, No. 5
(December), pp. 1397-1420.

Carneiro, Francisco Galrão. 2001. “An Overview of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Brazilian
Labor Market.” Unpublished paper, Catholic University of Brasília.

Castillo-Freeman, Alida, and Richard B. Freeman. 1992. “When the Minimum Wage Really Bites: the
effect of the US-Level Minimum on Puerto Rico.” In George Borjas and Richard Freeman, eds.
Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas. pp.
177-211. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Chapman, Jeff. 2004. “Employment and the Minimum Wage: Evidence from Recent State Labor Market
Trends.” Economic Policy Institute Briefing Paper.

Chapple, Simon. 1997. “Do Minimum Wages Have an Adverse Impact on Employment? Evidence from
New Zealand.” Labour Market Bulletin, No. 2, pp. 25-50.

Coe, David T., and Dennis J. Snower. 1997. “Policy Complementarities: The Case for Fundamental
Labor Market Reform.” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 44, No. 1 (March), pp. 1-35.

Connolly, Helen. “Are Low-educated Workers Disproportionately Affected by a Change in the Minimum
Wage?” Unpublished paper, Northeastern University.

Connolly, Sara, and Mary Gregory. 2002. “The National Minimum Wage and Hours of Work:
Implications for Low Paid Women.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 64, Supplement,
pp. 607-31.

Couch, Kenneth A., and David C. Wittenburg. 2001. “The Response of Hours of Work to Increases in the
Minimum Wage.” Southern Economic Journal. Vol. 68, No. 1 (January), pp. 171-77.
Currie, Janet, and Bruce Fallick. 1996. “The Minimum Wage and the Employment of Youth: Evidence
from the NLSY.” Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 31, No. 2 (Spring), pp. 404-28.

Deere, Donald, Kevin M. Murphy, and Finis Welch. 1995. “Employment and the 1990-1991 Minimum-
Wage Hike.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 85, No. 2 (May), pp. 232-37.

Dickens, Richard, Stephen Machin, and Alan Manning. 1998. “Estimating the Effect of Minimum Wages
on Employment from the Distribution of Wages: A Critical View.” Labour Economics, Vol. 5, No. 2
(June), pp. 109-34.

Dickens, Richard, Stephen Machin, and Alan Manning. 1999. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on
Employment: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 17, No. 1 (January), pp. 1-22.

Dolado, Juan, Francis Kramarz, Stephen Machin, Alan Manning, David Margolis, Coen Teulings, Gilles
Saint-Paul, and Michael Keen. 1996. “The Economic Impact of Minimum Wages in Europe.” Economic
Policy, Vol. 11, No. 23 (October), pp. 317-72.

Dube, Arindrajit, Suresh Naidu, and Michael Reich. “The Economic Impacts of a Citywide Minimum
Wage.” Forthcoming in Industrial and Labor Relations Review.

Ehrenberg, Ronald. 1992. “New Minimum Wage Research: Symposium Introduction.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review. Vol. 46, No. 1 (October), pp. 3-5.

Ericksson, Tor, and Mariola Pytlikova. 2004. “Firm-Level Consequences of Large Minimum-Wage
Increases in the Czech and Slovak Republics.” Labour, Vol. 18, No. 1 (March), pp. 75-103.

Evans, William N., and Mark Turner. 1995. “Minimum Wage Effects on Employment and School
Enrollment: Comment.” Unpublished manuscript. University of Maryland.

Fajnzylber, Pablo. 2001. “Minimum Wage Effects Throughout the Wage Distribution: Evidence from
Brazil’s Formal and Informal Sectors.” Unpublished paper, Department of Economics and CEDEPLAR,
Universidade Federal do Belo Horizonte.

Fiscal Policy Institute. 2004. State Minimum Wages and Employment in Small Businesses. New York:
Fiscal Policy Institute.

Feliciano, Zadia M. 1998. “Does the Minimum Wage Affect Employment in Mexico?” Eastern Economic
Journal, Vol. 24, No. 2, Spring, pp. 165-80.

Flinn, Christopher. 2006. “Minimum Wage Effects on Labor Market Outcomes under Search, Matching,
and Endogenous Contact Rates.” Econometrica, Vol. 74, No. 4, July, pp. 1013-1062.

Freeman, Richard B. 1995. “Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage:
Comment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 48, No. 4 (July), pp. 830-34.

Gindling, T. H., and Katherine Terrell. 2004. “The Effects of Multiple Minimum Wages Throughout the
Labor Market.” Discussion Paper No. 1159, IZA, May.

Goldfarb, Robert S. 1974. “The Policy Content of Quantitative Minimum Wage Research.” Proceedings
of the Industrial Relations Research Association. Vol. 27, pp. 261-68.
Grant, James H., and Daniel S. Hamermesh, 1981. “Labor Market Competition Among Youths, White
Women, and Others.” Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol. 63, No. 3 (August), pp. 354-60.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1995. “Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage:
Comment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 48, No. 4 (July), pp. 830-34.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 2002. “International Labor Economics.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 20, No. 4
(October), pp. 709-32.

Harding, Don, and Glenys Harding. 2004. Minimum Wages in Australia: An Analysis of the Impact on
Small and Medium Sized Businesses. Turning Point Research Pty Ltd., Australia.

Harrison, Ann, and Jason Scorse. 2005. “Moving Up or Moving Out? Anti-Sweatshop Activists and
Labor Market Outcomes.” NBER Working paper No. 10492.

Hyslop, Dean, and Steven Stillman. 2004. “Youth Minimum Wage Reform and the Labour Market.” IZA
Discussion Paper No. 1091, March.

Islam, Iyanatul, and Suahasil Nazara. 2000. “Minimum Wage and the Welfare of Indonesian Workers.”
International Labor Organization, June.

Junankar, P. N., Matthew Waite, and Grant Belchamber. 2000. “The Youth Labour Market: Anecdotes,
Fables and Evidence.” Economic and Labour Relations Review, Vol. 11, Supplement, pp. S159-S186.

Karageorgiou, Lazaros. 2004. “The Impact of Minimum Wage on Youth and Teenage Employment in
Greece.” Spoudai, Vol. 54, No. 4 (October-December), pp. 39-67.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast Food
Industry.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1 (October), pp. 6-21.

Keil, Manfred, Donald Robertson, and James Symons. 2001. “Minimum Wages and Employment.”
CEPR Working Paper No. 497.

Kennan, John. 1995. “The Elusive Effects of Minimum Wages.” Journal of Economic Literature. Vol. 33,
No. 4 (December), pp. 1950-65.

Kim, Taeil, and Lowell J. Taylor. 1995. “The Employment Effect in Retail Trade of California’s 1988
Minimum Wage Increase.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, vol. 13, No. 2 (April), pp. 175-
82.

Koning, Pierre, Geert Ridder, and Gerard J. van den Berg 1995. “Structural and Frictional Unemployment
in an Equilibrium Search Model with Heterogeneous Agents.” Journal of Applied Econometrics. Vol. 10,
Supplement (December), pp. S133-51.

Kramarz, Francis, and Thomas Philippon. 2001. “The Impact of Differential Payroll Tax Subsidies on
Minimum Wage Employment.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 82, No. 1 (October), pp. 115-46.

Krueger, Alan B. 1995. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage When It Really Bites: A Reexamination of the
Evidence from Puerto Rico.” In Solomon Polachek, ed. Research in Labor Economics. Vol. 14. pp. 1-22.
Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.
Lang, Kevin, and Shulamit Kahn. 1998. “The Effect of Minimum Wage Laws on the Distribution of
Employment: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Public Economics. Vol. 69, No. 1 (July), pp. 67-82.

Laroque, Guy, and Bernard Salanié. 2002. “Labour Market Institutions and Employment in France.”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 17, No. 1 (January/February), pp. 25-48.

Leigh, Andrew. 2003. “Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment.”
The Australian Economic Review, Vol. 36, No. 4 (December), pp. 361-73.

Leigh, Andrew. 2004a. “Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from a Quasi-Experiment—
Erratum.” The Australian Economic Review, Vol. 37, No. 1 (March), pp. 102-5.

Leigh, Andrew. 2004b. “Minimum Wages and Employment: Reply.” The Australian Economic Review,
Vol. 37, No. 2 (June), pp. 173-9.

Lemos, Sara. 2004. “Minimum Wage Policy and Employment Effects: Evidence from Brazil.” Economia.
Vol. 5, No. 1 (Fall), pp. 219-66.

Lemos, Sara. 2005. “Political Variables as Instruments for the Minimum Wage.” Contributions to
Economic Analysis & Policy, Vol. 4, No. 1, Article 16.

Lemos, Sara. 2006. “Minimum Wage Effects in a Developing Country.” University of Leicester
Discussion Paper 01/06.

Lemos, Sara. “The Effects of the Minimum Wage in the Private and Public Sectors in Brazil.”
Forthcoming in Journal of Development Studies.

Lester, Richard A. 1947. “Marginalism, Minimum Wages, and Labor Markets.” American Economic
Review. Vol. 37, No. 1 (March), pp. 135-48.

Leonard, Thomas C. 2000. “The Very Idea of Applying Economics: The Modern Minimum-Wage
Controversy and Its Antecedents.” History of Political Economy. Vol. 32, Supplement, pp. 117-144.

Linneman, Peter. 1982. “The Economic Impacts of Minimum Wage Laws: A New Look at an Old
Question.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 90, No. 3 (June), pp. 443-69.

Machin, Stephen, and Alan Manning. 1994. “Minimum Wages, Wage Dispersion and Employment:
Evidence from the UK Wages Councils,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 2
(January), pp. 319-29.

Machin, Stephen, and Alan Manning. 1997. “Minimum Wages and Economic Outcomes in Europe.”
European Economic Review. Vol. 41, Nos. 3-5 (April), pp. 733-42.

Machin, Stephen, Alan Manning, and Lupin Rahman. 2003. “Where the Minimum Wage Bites Hard:
Introduction of Minimum Wages to a Low Wage Sector.” Journal of the European Economic
Association, Vol. 1, No. 1 (March), pp. 154-80.

Machin, Stephen, and Joan Wilson. 2004. “Minimum Wages in a Low-Wage Labour Market: Care
Homes in the UK.” Economic Journal. Vol. 114 (March), pp. C102-09.
Maloney, Tim. 1995. “Does the Minimum Wage Affect Employment and Unemployment in New
Zealand.” New Zealand Economic Papers, Vol. 29, No. 1 (June), pp. 1-19.

Maloney, Tim. 1997. “The New Economics of the Minimum Wage? Evidence from New Zealand.
Agenda, Vol. 4, No. 2 (June), pp. 185-96.

Maloney, William F., and Jairo Nuñez Mendez. 2004. “Measuring the Impact of Minimum Wages:
Evidence from Latin America.” In James Heckman and Carmen Pagés, eds., Law and Employment:
Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean, pp. 109-30. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mangan, John, and John Johnston. 1999. “Minimum Wages, Training Wages and Youth Employment.”
International Journal of Social Economics, Vol. 26, No. 1/2/3, January-March, pp. 415-429.

Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Meyer, Robert, and David Wise. 1983. “The Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment and
Earnings of Youth.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January), pp. 66-100.

Michl, Thomas R. 1996. “Review of Myth and Measurement.” Eastern Economic Journal. Vol. 22, No. 2
(Spring), pp. 237-39.

Michl, Thomas R. 2000. “Can Rescheduling Explain the New Jersey Minimum Wage Studies?” Eastern
Economic Journal, Vol. 26, No. 3, Summer, pp. 265-76.

Minimum Wage Study Commission. 1981. Report of the Minimum Wage Study Commission, Vol. 1.
Washington, D.C.

Montenegro, Claudio E., and Carmen Pagés. 2004. “Who Benefits from Labor Market Regulations?
Chile, 1960-1998. In James Heckman and Carmen Pagés, eds., Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin
America and the Caribbean, pp. 401-34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Neumark, David. 2001. “The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from a Prespecified
Research Design.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 40, No. 1, January, pp. 121-44.

Neumark, David, Wendy Cunningham, and Lucas Siga. 2006. “The Effects of the Minimum Wage in
Brazil on the Distribution of Family Incomes: 1996-2001.” Journal of Development Economics. Vol. 80,
No. 1 (June), pp. 136-59.

Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wage Effects Throughout
the Wage Distribution.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 39, No. 2, pp. 425-50.

Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2005. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on the
Distribution of Family Incomes: A Non-parametric Analysis.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 40, No.
4, pp. 867-917.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1992. “Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum
Wages: Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 46, No.
1 (October), pp. 55-81.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1994. “Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum
Wages: Reply to Card, Katz, and Krueger.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 47, No. 3
(April), pp. 497-512.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1995a. “Minimum Wage Effects on Employment and School
Enrollment.” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics. Vol. 13, No. 2 (April), pp. 199-206.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1995b. “Minimum Wage Effects on School and Work
Transitions of Teenagers.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 85, no. 2 (May),
pp. 244-49.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996a. “Minimum Wage Effects on Employment and School
Enrollment: Reply to Evans and Turner.” FEDS Working Paper 1996-28. Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996b. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage
Employment and Enrollment: Evidence from Matched CPS Surveys.” In Solomon Polachek, ed. Research
in Labor Economics Vol. 15. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1998. “Is the Time-Series Evidence on Minimum Wage Effects
Contaminated by Publication Bias?.” Economic Inquiry. Vol. 36, No. 3 (July), pp. 458-470.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2000. “The Effect of New Jersey’s Minimum Wage Increase on
Fast-Food Employment: A Reevaluation Using Payroll Records.” American Economic Review. Vol. 90,
No. 5 (December), pp. 1362-96.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2002. “State-Level Estimates of Minimum Wage Effects: New
Evidence and Interpretations from Disequilibrium Models.” Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 37, No. 1
(Winter), pp. 35-62.

Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2003. “Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition: Another Look
at Schooling Effects.” Economics of Education Review. Vol. 22, No. 1 (February), pp. 1-10.

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wages, Labor Market Institutions, and Youth
Employment: A Cross-National Analysis.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 57, No. 2
(January), pp. 223-48.

Nickell, Stephen J., and Richard Layard. 1999. “Labour Market Institutions and Economic Performance.”
In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3. pp. 3029-3084. New
York: Elsevier.

Orazem, Peter F., and J. Peter Mattila. 2002. “Minimum Wage Effects on Hours, Employment, and
Number of Firms: The Iowa Case.” Journal of Labor Research. Vol. 23, No. 1 (Winter), pp. 3-23.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1998. Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD.

Osterman, Paul. 1995. “Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage:
Comment.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 48, No. 4 (July), pp. 839-42.

Pabilonia, Sabrina Wulff. 2002. “The Effects of Federal and State Minimum Wages Upon Teen
Employment and Earnings.” Unpublished manuscript. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Partridge, Mark D., and Jamie S. Partridge. 1999. “Do Minimum Wage Hikes Reduce Employment?
State-Level Evidence from the Low-Wage Retail Sector.” Journal of Labor Research. Vol. 20, No. 3
(Summer), pp. 393-413.

Pereira, Sonia C. 2003. “The Impact of Minimum Wages on Youth Employment in Portugal.” European
Economic Review, Vol. 47, No. 2 (April) , pp. 229-44.

Portugal, Pedro, and Ana Rute Cardoso. 2006. “Disentangling the Minimum Wage Puzzle: An Analysis
of Worker Accessions and Separations.” Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 4, No. 5
(September), pp. 988-1013.

Potter, Nicholas. 2006. “Measuring the Employment Impacts of the Living Wage Ordinance in Santa Fe,
New Mexico.” Unpublished paper, University of New Mexico Bureau of Business and Economic
Research.

Rama, Martin. 2001. “The Consequences of Doubling the Minimum Wage: The Case of Indonesia.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 54, No. 4 (July), pp. 864-81.

Rebitzer, James, and Lowell Taylor. 1995. “The Consequences of Minimum Wage Laws: Some New
Theoretical Ideas.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 56, No. 2, February, pp. 245-55.

Reich, Michael, and Peter Hall. 2001. “A Small Raise for the Bottom: The Impact of the 1996-1998
California Minimum Wage Increases.” In James Lincoln and Paul Ong, eds., The State of California
Labor, 2001, pp. 123-48. University of California Institute for Labor and Employment. Available at
www.ucop.edu/ile (viewed December 6, 2006).

Montenegro, Claudio E., and Carmen Pagés. 2004. “Who Benefits from Labor Market Regulations?
Chile, 1960-1998. In James Heckman and Carmen Pagés, eds., Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin
America and the Caribbean, pp. 401-34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sabia, Joseph J. 2006. “The Effect of Minimum Wage Increases on Teenage, Retail, and Small Business
Employment.” Unpublished paper, University of Georgia.

Scarpetta, Stephano. 1996. “Assessing the Role of Labour Market Policies and Institutional Settings on
Unemployment: A Cross-Country Study.” OECD Economic Studies. No. 26, pp. 43-98.

Schiller, Bradley R. 1994. “State Minimum Wage Laws: Youth Coverage and Impact.” Journal of Labor
Research. Vol. 15, No. 4 (Fall), pp. 317-329.

Singell, Larry D., and James R. Terborg. 2006. “Employment Effects of Two Northwest Minimum Wage
Initiatives: Eating and Drinking and Hotel and Lodging.” Unpublished paper, University of Oregon.

Skedinger, Per. 2006. “Minimum Wages and Employment in Swedish Hotels and Restaurants.” Labour
Economics, Vol. 13, No. 2 (April), pp. 259-90.

Smets, Kent. 2005. “Economics of the San Francisco Restaurant Industry 2005.” Unpublished
manuscript, San Francisco, California.

Smith, Ralph E., and Bruce Vavrichek. 1992. “The Wage Mobility of Minimum Wage Workers.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 46, No. 1 (October), pp. 82-88.
Solon, Gary. 1985. “The Minimum Wage and Teenage Employment: The Role of Serial Correlation and
Seasonality.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 20, No. 2, Spring, pp. 292-97.

Spriggs, William E., and Bruce W. Klein. 1994. “Raising the Floor: The Effects of the Minimum Wage
on Low-Wage Workers.” Washington DC: Economic Policy Institute.

Stewart, Mark B. 2002. “Estimating the Impact of the Minimum Wage Using Geographical Wage
Variation.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics & Statistics, Vol. 64, Supplement, pp. 583-605.

Stewart, Mark B. 2004a. “The Impact of the Introduction of the U.K. Minimum Wage on the
Employment Probabilities of Low-Wage Workers.” Journal of the European Economic Association,
Volume 2, No. 1 (March), pp. 67-97.

Stewart, Mark B. 2004b. “The Employment Effects of the National Minimum Wage.” The Economic
Journal, Vol. 114, No. 494 (March), pp. C110-116.

Stewart, Mark B., and Joanna K. Swaffield. 2006. “The Other Margin: Do Minimum Wages Cause
Working Hours Adjustments for Low-Wage Workers?” Unpublished paper, University of Warwick.

Stigler, George J. 1946. “The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation.” American Economic Review.
Vol. 36, No. 3 (June), pp. 358-65.

Strobl, Eric and Frank Walsh. 2003. “Minimum Wages and Compliance: The Case of Trinidad and
Tobago.” Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 51, No. 2 (January), pp. 427-50.

Suryahadi, Asep, Wenefrida Widyanti, Daniel Perwira, and Sudarno Sumarto. 2003. “Minimum Wage
Policy and Its Impact on Employment in the Urban Formal Sector.” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic
Studies, Vol. 39, No. 1 (April), pp. 29-50.

Turner, Mark D., and Berna Demiralp. 2001. “Do Higher Minimum Wages Harm Minority and Inner City
Teens?” Review of Black Political Economy. Vol. 28, No. 4 (Spring), pp. 95-121.

van den Berg, Gerard J., and Geert Ridder. 1998. “An Empirical Equilibrium Search Model of the Labor
Market.” Econometrica, Vol. 66, No. 5 (September), pp. 1183-221.

van Soest, Arthur.1994. “Youth Minimum Wage Rates: The Dutch Experience.” International Journal of
Manpower. Vol. 15, Nos. 2-3, pp. 100-17.

Watson, Ian. 2004. “Minimum Wages and Employment: Comment.” The Australian Economic Review,
Vol. 37, No. 2 (June), pp. 166-72.

Wachter, Michael L., and Choong-Soo Kim. 1982. “Time-Series Changes in Youth Joblessness.” In
Richard Freeman and David Wise, eds. The Youth Labor Market: Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences.
pp. 155-185. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Welch, Finis. 1995. “Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage: Comment.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 48, No. 4 (July), pp. 842-48.

Wellington, Alison. 1991. “Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of Youths: An
Update.” Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 26, No. 1 (Winter), pp. 27-46.
Wessels, Walter J. 1997. “Minimum Wages and Tipped Servers.” Economic Inquiry. Vol. 35, No. 2
(April), pp. 334-49.

Wessels, Walter J. “A Reexamination of Card and Krueger’s State-Level Study of the Minimum Wage.”
Forthcoming in Journal of Labor Research.

Williams, Nicolas. 1993. “Regional Effects of the Minimum Wage on Teenage Employment.” Applied
Economics. Vol. 25, No. 12 (December), pp. 1517-28.

Williams, Nicolas, and Jeffrey A. Mills. 2001. “The Minimum Wage and Teenage Employment:
Evidence from Time Series.” Applied Economics. Vol. 33, No.3 (February), pp. 285-300.

Wolfson, Paul, and Dale Belman. 2001. “The Minimum Wage, Employment, and the AS-IF
Methodology: A Forecasting Approach to Evaluating the Minimum Wage.” Empirical Economics, Vol.
26, No. 3, August, pp. 487-514.

Wolfson, Paul, and Dale Belman. 2004. “The Minimum Wage: Consequences for Prices and Quantities in
Low-Wage Labor Markets.” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics. Vol. 22, No. 3 (July), pp. 296-
311.

Yelowitz, Aaron S. 2005. “How Did the $8.50 Citywide Minimum Wage Affect the Santa Fe Labor
Market.” Employment Policies Institute, Washington, D.C.

Yuen, Terence. 2003. “The Effect of Minimum Wages on Youth Employment in Canada: A Panel
Study.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 38, No. 3 (Summer), pp. 647-72.

Zavodny, Madeline. 2000. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on Employment and Hours.” Labour
Economics. Vol. 7, No. 6 (November), pp. 729-750.
Table 1: Studies of General Minimum Wage Employment Effects in the United States
     Study         Minimum wage           Group                   Data              Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments           Criticisms
                       variation                                                                        on methods
Aggregate Panel Data Studies
Neumark and        Federal and      Teenagers and        CPS, 1973-1989            Teenagers: −.1 to −.2                                  For teens, significant
Wascher (1992)     state            young adults                                   Young adults: −.15 to −.2                              negative effects only when
                                                                                                                                          enrollment is included;
                                                                                                                                          enrollment rate too narrow
Williams (1993)    Federal and      Teenagers            CPS, 1977-89              Difference coefficients in across different regions:
                   state                                                           ranging from .09 (New England) to −.62 (Pacific)
Neumark and        Federal and      Teenagers and 16-    CPS, 1973-1989            IV for enrollment in some specifications:
Wascher (1994)     state            24 year olds                                   Teenagers: −.17 to −.39
                                                                                   Youth: −.12 to −.16
Evans and Turner   Federal and      Teenagers and 16-    CPS, 1978-1989            Teens: −.09                                            Mixes October
(1995)             state            24 year olds                                   Youth: −.04                                            employment data with
                                                                                   Not significant                                        May minimum wage data
Neumark and        Federal and      Teenagers            CPS, 1977-1989            Conditional logit analysis:
Wascher (1995a)    state                                                           Non-employed and enrolled: −.13
                                                                                   Employed and enrolled: −.40
                                                                                   Employed and not enrolled: .28
                                                                                   Idle: .64

Neumark and        Federal and      Teenagers            Matched CPS, 1979-1992    Multinomial logit analysis: increase in probability
Wascher (1995b)    state                                                           that teens leave school to work; increase in
                                                                                   probability that teens leave school to become idle;
                                                                                   increase in probability that employed low-wage
                                                                                   teens become idle
Neumark and        Federal and      Teenagers and        October CPS, 1980-1989    Teenagers: −.22
Wascher (1996a)    state            young adults                                   Young adults: −.14;
                                                                                   significant
Abowd et al.       Change in real   Low-wage workers     Matched CPS, 1981-82 to   Many results reported for exit and entry
(2000b)            federal and      affected by a        1990-91                   elasticities; generally small (of both signs) and
                   state minimum    change in the real                             not significant
                   wages            minimum wage
                                    relative to those
                                    marginally above
                                    them
Burkhauser et      Federal and      Teenagers            CPS, 1979-1997; monthly   1979-1997: 0 to −.35                                   Estimates excluding year
al. (2000a)        state                                 data                      1979-1991: −.22 to −.6                                 effects less convincing
                                                                                   1996-1997: −.17 to −.27
                                                                                   Estimates generally significant in specifications
                                                                                   excluding year effects
      Study          Minimum wage          Group                    Data             Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments              Criticisms
                         variation                                                                       on methods
Burkhauser et        Federal and     Teenagers and        CPS, 1979-1997; SIPP,     Teens: −.3 to −.6                                         Estimates excluding year
al. (2000b)          state           young adults, by     1990-1992; monthly data   Youths: −.20 to −.25                                      effects less convincing
                                     race and                                       Black youths: −.85
                                     educational                                    Nonblack youths: −.18
                                     attainment                                     High school dropouts (20-24): −.85
                                                                                    High school grads (20-24): −.16
Zavodny (2000)       Federal and     Teenagers            CPS, 1979-1993            Aggregate results
                     state                                Matched CPS, 1979-80 to   Employment: −.02 to −.12;
                                                          1992-93                   Total hours: .24 to −.11
                                                                                    Individual results
                                                                                    Employment: −.08 to −.10
                                                                                    Total hours: positive but not significant
Couch and            Federal and     Teenagers            CPS, 1979-1992            Employment: −.41 to −.58                                  Excludes year effects
Wittenburg           state                                                          Total hours: −.48 to −.77
(2001)                                                                              Estimates significant
Turner and           Federal         Teenagers by race    CPS, Jan-April 1991 to    Multinomial logit analysis: increase in overall teen
Demiralp (2001)      minimum wage    and location (city   Jan-April 1992            employment; sizable negative effects for black and
                     increase in     versus non-city)                               Hispanic teens and for teens in a central city
                     April 1991
Keil et al. (2001)   Federal and     Aggregate and        CPS, 1977-1995            Dynamic model:
                     state           youth employment                               Aggregate: −.11 (short-run); −.19 (long-run)
                                     (not defined)                                  Youths: −.37 (short-run); −.69 (long-run)
Pabilonia (2002)     State           14-16 year olds      NLSY97; data for 1996     Cross-section probit analysis: Males: −.6
                                                                                    Females: −1.3
                                                                                    Some estimates significant
Neumark and          Federal and     16-24 year olds in   CPS; 1973-1989            Switching regressions with state-year panel:
Wascher (2002)       state           the binding regime                             −.13 to −.21; significant
Neumark and          Federal and     Teenagers            October CPS, 1980-1998    Non-employed and enrolled: −.11
Wascher (2003)       state                                                          Employed and enrolled: −.09
                                                                                    Employed and not enrolled: .41
                                                                                    Idle: .18

Bazen and Le         Federal and     Teenagers            CPS; 1984-1992 and        0 to −.45; significant effects only evident for federal   Excludes year effects in
Gallo (2006)         state                                1992-1998                 minimum wage increases                                    specifications showing
                                                                                                                                              significant negative
                                                                                                                                              effects; no test of lagged
                                                                                                                                              effects
     Study          Minimum wage            Group                    Data                Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments           Criticisms
                        variation                                                                            on methods
Sabia (2006)        1. State        Teen employment       CPS ORG’s, 1979-2004         Share of 16-64 year-olds employed in retail: −.09 to    Focus on teen employment
                                    and hours in retail   (retail); March CPS files,   −.29                                                    in low-wage sectors
                                    and at small          1989-2004 (small             Share of 16-64 year-olds employed in small              generates ambiguous
                                    businesses (100 or    businesses)                  businesses: −.08 to −.12                                results; declines do not
                                    fewer in firm)                                     Share of teens employed in retail sector: −.27 to       imply overall declines in
                                                                                       −.43                                                    these sectors
                                                                                       Average retail hours worked by teens: −.53
                                                                                       Average retail hours worked by employed teens:
                                                                                       −.05 to −.28
                                                                                       Share of teens employed in small businesses: −.46 to
                                                                                       −.89
                                                                                       Average small business hours worked by teens: −.48
                                                                                       to −.88
                                                                                       Average small business hours worked by employed
                                                                                       teens: −.54 to −.70
                    2. State        Teen employment       CPS ORG’s, 1979-2004         Teen employment: −.18 to −.33
                                    and hours in retail                                Average hours worked by teens: −.37 to −.45
                                    and at small                                       Average hours worked by employed teens: −.01
                                    businesses (100 or                                 to −.29;
                                    fewer in firm)                                     almost all estimates significant
Federal Variation
Card (1992a)        1990 federal    Teenagers             CPS, 1989-1990               −.06 to .19; not significant                            No allowance for lagged
                    minimum wage                                                                                                               effects
                    increase
Deere, Murphy,      1990 and 1991   Teens and adult       CPS, 1985-1992               Male teens: −.27 to −.36                                Indicator variables may
and Welch (1995)    federal         high school                                        Female teens: −.42 to −.49                              pick up other influences
                    minimum wage    dropouts by sex                                    Black teems: −.37 to −.56
                    increases       and race                                           Adult high school dropouts: −.11 to −.33

Bernstein and       Federal         Teens and young       CPS ORG’s 1995-1998          Teens: −1.0 (significant) for 1995-1996, −.1 to −.4     Excessive disaggregation
Schmitt (2000)                      adult high school                                  for other intervals, not significant; smaller when      by year likely contributes
                                    dropouts                                           sample begins in 1994                                   to non-robustness and
                                                                                       20-54 year-old high school dropouts: estimates          statistical insignificance
                                                                                       variable, non-robust, of varying sign
Bernstein and       1. Federal      Teens and young       CPS ORG’s, 1995-1998         Many estimates, roughly centered on zero; large         Ignores state variation in
Schmitt (1998)                      adult high school                                  positive elasticities for minority females, sometimes   minimum wages
                                    dropouts                                           significant; large negative estimates for minority
                                                                                       males, insignificant
                    2. 1996 and     Teens                 CPS ORG’s, 1991-1998         Deere et al., specification:                            Ignores state variation in
                    1997 federal                                                       Male teens: −.45 to −.61; estimates sometimes           minimum wages;
                    minimum wage                                                       significant                                             differences from Deere et
                    increases                                                          Female teens: .32 to .86                                al., results not explored
      Study        Minimum wage             Group                    Data               Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments           Criticisms
                       variation                                                                            on methods
Neumark (2001)     Cross-state        Teens, young         October-December CPS       Teenagers: centered on zero                             Limited period and small
                   variation          adults (16-24),      files, 1995-1998           16-24 year-olds: −.02 to −.22; insignificant            number of minimum wage
                   generated by       non-enrolled                                    Non-enrolled, 16-24, high school or less: −.11 to       increases
                   1996 and 1997      young adults and                                −.53; significant
                   federal            20-24 year-olds                                 Non-enrolled, 20-24, high school or less: −.09 to
                   minimum wage       with high school                                −.15; sometimes significant
                   increases          education or less,                              Non-enrolled, 16-24, less than high school: −.21;
                                      and with less than                              significant
                                      a high school                                   Non-enrolled, 20-24, less than high school: −.11 to
                                      education                                       −.12; insignificant
State Increases
Chapman (2004)     Cross-state        Total workforce      Payroll Survey             N/A; estimated effect of −.01, insignificant            Regression does not test
                   variation in                                                                                                               effect of minimum wage
                   share between                                                                                                              on employment; focuses
                   100 and 120%                                                                                                               on total employment rather
                   of state                                                                                                                   than low-skilled group
                   minimum in
                   2003
Fiscal Policy      State minimum      Overall              Payroll Survey, County     Simple comparisons of employment growth:                Ignores variation in timing
Institute (2004)   wage increases     employment, and      Business Patterns          N/A; higher growth for all four measures in states      of state minimum wage
                   after 1997         employment in                                   that raised their minimums, but not for retail, small   increases; no controls for
                                      retail, in small                                business, or small retail employment growth relative    other factors affecting
                                      businesses, and in                              to total employment growth, for which simple            employment growth
                                      small retail                                    difference-in-difference estimates are centered on
                                      businesses                                      zero
Reich and Hall     California         Various groups       CPS, 1994-1999             Teen employment rate rose, but by much less than        Absence of comparison
(2001)             minimum wage                                                       for other age groups; retail and restaurant             groups or problematic
                   increases, 1996-                                                   employment growth increased by more than                comparison groups
                   1998                                                               manufacturing and construction employment
                                                                                      growth, but some comparisons suggest that
                                                                                      employment growth fell in retail and restaurant
                                                                                      sectors relative to manufacturing and construction
Orazem and         1990-1992          Retail and non-      QCEW;                      County level
Mattila (2002)     increases in       professional         Establishment UI records   Employment: −.06 to −.12; mostly significant
                   Iowa minimum       services             and author survey, 1989-   Firm level
                   wage                                    1992                       Employment: −.22 to −.85
                                                                                      Hours: −1.01 to −1.50
                                                                                      All estimates significant
City Increases
Yelowitz (2005)    Introduction of    Total, and more-     CPS, 2003-2005             Employment effects near zero and insignificant;
                   Santa Fe           versus less-                                    significant negative hours effects workers with 12
                   minimum wage       educated                                        or fewer years of education, elasticity of −.12
      Study         Minimum wage              Group                       Data             Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments            Criticisms
                        variation                                                                               on methods
Potter (2006)       Introduction of    Total,                 ES-202 data for Santa Fe   Difference-in-difference-in-differences estimates:      Control city of
                    Santa Fe           construction,          and Albuquerque            −.015 (all industries); −.16 (construction); −.009      Albuquerque may have
                    minimum wage       health care, retail,                              (retail); −.03 (health care); −.009 (accommodations     been chosen to minimize
                                       and                                               and food); significant only for construction            minimum wage effects
                                       accommodations
                                       and food
See also Dube et al. (forthcoming)
Aggregate Time-Series Studies
Wellington            Federal          Teenagers and 20-      1954-1986                  Teenagers: −.05 to −.09
(1991)                                 24 year olds                                      20-24 year olds: .002 to −.02
Card and Krueger Federal               Teenagers              1954-1993                  −.050 to −.087; only a few significant
(1995a)
Bernstein and         Federal          Teenagers              Data from Card and         Teenagers: −.001 to −.06
Schmitt (2000)                                                Krueger (1995), 1954 -
                                                              1993, updated through
                                                              2001:Q1
Williams and        Federal            Teenagers              Data from Card and         Teenagers: −.3 to −.5 after two years
Mills (2001)                                                  Krueger (1995), 1954-
                                                              1993
Bazen and           Federal            Teenagers              Data from Card and         Teenagers: −.11 (short-run), −.27 (long-run),
Marimoutou                                                    Krueger (1995), 1954-      significant, and similar estimates for subperiods
(2002)                                                        1993, updated through
                                                              1999:Q2
Wolfson and         Federal            Low-wage               BLS payroll survey,        Pooled time-series estimates by industry:               Theory does not predict
Belman (2001                           industries and         various years through      Employment elasticities vary across industries, with    employment declines in all
and 2004)                              industries             1997                       many insignificant; of significant estimates of         industries; industries with
                                       employment large                                  effects of legislated increases, most are negative;     larger wage increases may
                                       share of young                                    effects of real declines in minimum are of              be those with less ability
                                       adults                                            unexpected sign in one-half of cases; no more           to substitute away from
                                                                                         evidence of disemployment effects in industries         low-wage labor toward
                                                                                         where minimum wages increased average wages             non-labor inputs, or
                                                                                         more                                                    greater ability to substitute
                                                                                                                                                 towards more-skilled labor
Studies Focused on the Least Skilled
Currie and Fallick 1980-81             Workers with           NLS, 1979-1987             −.19 to −.24; significant                               Control group includes all
(1996)              increases in       initial wage                                                                                              workers above minimum
                    federal            between old and                                                                                           wage
                    minimum wage       new minimum
     Study        Minimum wage            Group                    Data               Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments           Criticisms
                     variation                                                                            on methods
Abowd et al.      Change in real    Low-wage workers      Matched CPS, 1981-82 to   Varies by age                                           No actual change in
(1999)            federal           (ages 16-60) freed    1986-87                   Male average: −.42                                      minimum wage
                  minimum wage      by decline in real                              Female average: −1.57
                                    minimum wage                                    (conditional on employment in t+1)
                                    relative to those
                                    marginally above
Abowd et al.      Change in real    Low-wage young        Matched CPS, 1981-82 to   Varies by age                                           No actual change in
(2000a)           federal           workers (ages 16-     1986-87                   Male average: −2.23                                     minimum wage
                  minimum wage      30) freed by                                    Female average: −1.87
                                    decline in real                                 (conditional on employment in t+1)
                                    minimum wage
                                    relative to those
                                    marginally above
Neumark et al.    Federal and       Workers at            Matched CPS, 1979-80 to   Employment: −.06 to −.15 for workers between 1
(2004)            state             different points in   1996-97                   and 1.3 times the old minimum wage
                                    the wage                                        Hours: −.3 for workers between 1 and 1.2 times
                                    distribution                                    the old minimum wage
The Bernstein and Schmitt papers also look at young adults aged 20-54 with less than a high school education, but the results are not reported here because
they fail to find any effects of minimum wages on wages for this group. Results from studies we regard as more reliable tests of employment effects of
minimum wages are highlighted.
Table 2: Studies of Minimum Wage Employment Effects in Specific Sectors in the United States
      Study           Minimum              Group                   Data             Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on            Criticisms
                    wage variation                                                                          methods
Katz and Krueger    1991 federal     Fast-food          Survey of restaurants in    1.7 to 2.65; significant                                 Potentially large amount of
(1992)              minimum          employment in      December 1990 and July                                                               measurement error
                    wage increase    Texas              1991
Card (1992b)        1988             Teen employment    CPS; QCEW                   Teens: .35; significant                                  Questionable control groups
                    California       and retail trade                               Retail trade: .04; not significant
                    minimum          employment                                     Eating and drinking: −.07; not significant
                    wage increase
Spriggs and Klein   1991 federal     Fast-food          Survey of restaurants in    Estimates centered on zero, not significant              Potentially large amount of
(1994)              minimum          employment in      March 1991 and April                                                                 measurement error; short
                    wage increase    Mississippi and    1991                                                                                 period over which to
                                     North Carolina                                                                                          observe effects
Card and Krueger    1992 New         Fast-food          Survey of restaurants in    FTEs: .63 to .73; some estimates significant             Potentially large amount of
(1994)              Jersey           employment in      February 1992 and                                                                    measurement error
                    minimum          New Jersey and     November 1992
                    wage increase    Pennsylvania
Kim and Taylor      1988             Retail trade       QCEW                        −.15 to −.2; some estimates significant                  No direct measure of hourly
(1995)              California       employment                                                                                              wages
                    minimum
                    wage increase
Partridge and       Federal and      Retail trade       CPS and BLS                 Retail: −.08 to −.25
Partridge (1999)    state            employment         establishment survey;       Eating and drinking: −.05 to −.2
                                                        1984-1989                   Other retail: −.09 to −.26
                                                                                    Total nonfarm: −.10 to −.21
                                                                                    Teens: −.23 to −.72
Neumark and         1992 New         Fast-food          Payroll data collected      FTEs: −.1 to −.25; some estimates significant
Wascher (2000)      Jersey           employment in      from establishments
                    minimum          New Jersey and
                    wage increase    Pennsylvania
Card and            1992 New         Fast-food          BLS establishment-level     FTEs: .005 to .15; not significant
Krueger (2000)      Jersey           employment in      data
                    minimum          New Jersey and
                    wage increase    Pennsylvania
Michl (2000)        1992 New         Fast-food          Neumark-Wascher             Employment: .044                                         Small sample
                    Jersey           employment in      payroll data (subsample     Total hours: −.018
                    minimum          New Jersey and     of observations reporting   Hours per worker: −.062
                    wage increase    Pennsylvania       employment)
      Study             Minimum               Group                  Data           Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on           Criticisms
                    wage variation                                                                          methods
Singell and         Oregon and         Eating and          BLS monthly              Eating and drinking employment: −.2; significant         Want-ad specifications
Terborg (2006)      Washington         drinking workers;   employment data, 1997-   Hotel and lodging employment: .15 to .16;                different from industry
                    minimum            hotel and lodging   2001; help-wanted ads,   significant                                              employment specifications
                    wage increases workers                 1994-2001                Want-ads: negative and significant for all
                    at different                                                    restaurant jobs except cooks, and for hotel
                    times                                                           housekeepers
Dube et al. (2006) Introduction of Restaurant              Survey data              .01 to .12; not significant                              Low survey response rate;
                    San Francisco      employment in                                                                                         short-term effects only;
                    minimum            mid-size                                                                                              exclusion of larger
                    wage               establishments                                                                                        restaurants
See also Reich and Hall (2001); Sabia (2006)
Results from studies we regard as more reliable tests of employment effects of minimum wages within a sector are highlighted.
Table 3: International Studies of Minimum Wage Employment Effects, Industrialized Countries
      Study           Minimum wage            Group                      Data             Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on   Criticisms
                        variation                                                                                 methods
 Panel Studies
 OECD (1998)         Time-series        Teens (15-19),         National sources           Teens: −.07 to −.41
                     variation across   young adults (20-                                 20-24: −.03 to −.10
                     countries          24), and adults (25-                              25-54: 0 to .02
                                        54)                                               Estimates for teens mostly significant
 Neumark and         Time-series        Teens (15-19) and      OECD and various           Employment
 Wascher (2004)      variation across   youths (15-24)         sources, mid-1970s         Standard models: teens, −.18 to −.24 to; youths,
                     countries                                 through 2000 (varies by    −.13 to −.16
                                                               country)                   Less negative with youth subminimum, with
                                                                                          bargained minimum, with greater employment
                                                                                          protection, and with more active labor market
                                                                                          policies; more negative with stronger labor
                                                                                          standards (working time rules, less flexible
                                                                                          contracts) and higher union density
 Canada
 Baker et al.        Across provinces   Teenagers (15-19)      Special tabulations from   Panel data analysis, with attention to frequency
 (1999)              and over time                             Statistics Canada, 1979-   domain:
                                                               1993                       Within-group: −.27 (−.47 with one lag)
                                                                                          First difference: .07 (−.23 with one lag)
                                                                                          Second difference: −.13
                                                                                          Third difference: −.31
                                                                                          Fourth difference: −.40
                                                                                          Within-group estimates and longer-difference
                                                                                          estimates significant; similar result reflected in
                                                                                          lower-frequency filters
 Yuen (2003)         Across provinces   Teenagers (16-19)      Labor Market Activity      Permanent low-wage teen workers: −.86 (significant)
                     and over time      and young adults       Survey, 1988-1990          Permanent low-wage young adult workers: −1.15
                                        (20-24)                                           (significant)
                                                                                          Transitory low-wage teen workers: 1.18
                                                                                          (insignificant)
                                                                                          Transitory low-wage young adult workers: .31
                                                                                          (insignificant)
 Campolieti et al.   Provincial         Teenagers              Survey of Labour and       Multinomial logit analysis:
 (2005a)                                                       Income Dynamics (1993-     Non-employed and enrolled: .72
                                                               1999)                      Employed and enrolled: −.57
                                                                                          Employed and not enrolled: −1.92
                                                                                          Idle: .02
                                                                                          Net employment: −2.49; significant
                                                                                          Net school enrollment: 0.15; not significant
     Study           Minimum wage              Group                     Data              Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on            Criticisms
                        variation                                                                                  methods
Campolieti et      Provincial           Youths (16-24)        Survey of Labour and         −.33 to −.54
al. (2005b)                                                   Income Dynamics (1993-
                                                              1999)
Campolieti et      Provincial           16-19, 20-24, and     April Labor Force            Teens: −.17 to −.44
al. (2006)                              16-24 year-olds,      Surveys, 1981-1997           20-24 year-olds: −.14 to −.43
                                        including full-time                                16-24 year-olds: −.17 to −.44
                                        versus part-time
                                        and non-enrolled
Sweden
Skedinger (2006)   Union negotiated     All workers           Surveys from                 Job separations in response to minimum wage                Wage floors vary by
                   minimum wages in                           Confederation of Swedish     increases: elasticity .58 overall; .36 to 1.00 for 20-65   worker characteristics,
                   hotels and                                 Enterprise, 1979-1999        year-olds; .77 to .80 for teenagers (although −.12 to      so may not be
                   restaurants                                                             −.14 and insignificant for the 1993-1998 subperiod)        applicable to uniform
                                                                                           Job accessions in response to minimum wage                 minimum wages
                                                                                           decreases: .84 overall; .45 to .55 for teenagers
United Kingdom
Machin and         Wages Councils       All workers in        New Earnings Survey,         .05 to .43                                                 Change in institutional
Manning (1994);                         covered (low-         Employment Gazette,                                                                     setting of minimum
Dickens et al.                          wage) industries      1978-1992                                                                               wages in 1986 is
(1999)                                                                                                                                                ignored; questions
                                                                                                                                                      about exogeneity of
                                                                                                                                                      minimum wages
Dolado et al.      Abolition of Wages   Workers in Council    Quarterly Labour Force       Relative increases in hiring rate and employment in        Questions about
(1996)             Councils             and non-Council       Survey Micro Data            Council sector after Councils abolished                    exogeneity of minimum
                                        sectors                                                                                                       wage Increases chosen
                                                                                                                                                      by Wages Councils,
                                                                                                                                                      and hence of variation
                                                                                                                                                      created by abolition of
                                                                                                                                                      Wages Councils
Machin et al.      Introduction of      Workers in            Labor Force Survey,          Employment and hours fell more where initial
(1999)             national minimum     residential care      1994-2001, and authors’      proportion of minimum wage workers or wage
                   wage in 1999         homes                 survey of residential care   gap higher; implied elasticities for employment
                                                              homes                        −.08 to −.38, for hours −.15 to −.39
     Study           Minimum wage                Group                     Data             Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on         Criticisms
                         variation                                                                                   methods
Stewart (2002)     Variation across        All workers and       New Earnings Survey,       Wide variety of estimates, and not easily translated     Ignores possible
                   local areas in effect   various lower skill   1998, 2000; Labour Force   into elasticities given that estimates are for           workings of youth
                   of imposition of        groups                Survey Local Areas Data,   introduction of new minimum wage; many positive          subminimums; many
                   national minimum                              Annual Business Inquiry,   and many negative estimates, none significant            estimates for all
                   wage in 1999                                  1998-1999                                                                           workers rather than
                                                                                                                                                     young workers;
                                                                                                                                                     analysis of less-skilled
                                                                                                                                                     individuals does not
                                                                                                                                                     provide information on
                                                                                                                                                     wage effects
Stewart (2004a)    Variation across        Adult men and         Matched Labor Force        Elasticities for transitions to non-employment almost    Focus is on short-run
                   workers at different    women (aged 22        Survey, March 1997-        always insignificant, more likely positive than          effects, and no evidence
                   points of the wage      and over), and        March 2000; British        negative                                                 on lagged effects
                   distribution            young men and         Household Panel Survey,
                                           women aged (18-       Fall 1994-Fall 1999; New
                                           21)                   Earnings Survey, April
                                                                 1994-April 1999
Stewart and        Variation across        Adult men and         Matched Labor Force        Weekly hours of employed workers decline by 1            No parallel evidence on
Swaffield (2006)   workers at different    women                 Survey, March 1997-        to 2 hours, with the reduction occurring at a lag        employment, despite
                   points of the wage                            September 2000; New        of approximately one year                                suggestion of lagged
                   distribution                                  Earnings Survey, April                                                              hours reductions
                                                                 1994-April 2000
Galinda-Rueda      1. Variation across     All                   Annual Business Inquiry    Manufacturing and services: small disemployment          Highly non-random
and Pereira        firms in exposure                             and New Earnings           effects, insignificant                                   sample because of
(2004)             to higher minimum                             Survey, 1994-2001                                                                   worker-firm match, and
                   based on matched                                                                                                                  potential measurement
                   worker data                                                                                                                       error in exposure to
                                                                                                                                                     minimum wage
                   2. Variation across     All                   Annual Business Inquiry    No disemployment effects in manufacturing; in
                   region-sector cells                           and New Earnings           services, 1 percentage point higher fraction
                   in fraction below                             Survey, 1997-2001          affected leads to .06 to .12 percent lower
                   new minimum                                                              employment
                   wage, as of 1998
                   3. Variation across     All                   Office of National         Significant disemployment effects in four of eight
                   regions in fraction                           Statistics, 1998-2001      low-wage sectors, negative estimates in seven of
                   below by region                                                          eight; evidence that effects stem in part from
                                                                                            slower job creation through firm entry in low-
                                                                                            wage sectors
      Study         Minimum wage                Group                   Data               Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on          Criticisms
                      variation                                                                                    methods
Australia
Leigh (2004a)     Minimum wage            Aggregate, and      Labour Force Survey,         Aggregate: −.25 to −.40                                  Very large elasticities
                  increases in            disaggregated by    1994-2001                    15-24: −1.01                                             for aggregate
                  Western Australia       age and sex                                      15-24, male: −.68                                        employment and for 15-
                  relatively to rest of                                                    15-24, female: −1.44                                     24 year-olds
                  country                                                                  Older groups: −.03 to −.14 (mostly insignificant)
Harding and       State minimum           Minimum wage        Survey of employers,         −.2                                                      Employer attributions
Harding (2004)    wage increases          workers             2003                                                                                  of employment changes
                                                                                                                                                    to minimum wage
                                                                                                                                                    increases unlikely to be
                                                                                                                                                    reliable
Mangan and        State minimum           15-19 year-olds     Panel analysis: Australian   Panel analysis: −.21 to .08, almost all estimates        Source of minimum
Johnston (1999)   wage differences                            Bureau of Statistics         negative, none significant                               wage variation unclear;
                  (over time and                              annual data, 1980-1995       Cross-section analysis: full-time, −.05 to −.31,         model should include
                  cross-sectionally)                          Cross-section analysis:      generally significant                                    non-teen minimum
                                                              unit record census data,                                                              wage
                                                              year unspecified
Junankar et al.   Time-series             16-20 year-olds     Quarterly data, 1987-1997    Time-series regressions by industry, age, and sex:       Absurdly large
(2000)            variation in youth                          (source unspecified)         Effects insignificant and often positive, except for     elasticity estimates;
                  minimum wages                                                            retail where there is some evidence of                   likely weak
                                                                                           disemployment effects; elasticities for retail range     identification given
                                                                                           from −1.6 to −23.1                                       short time-series; model
                                                                                                                                                    should include non-teen
                                                                                                                                                    minimum wage
New Zealand
Maloney (1995,    National minimum        Young adults (20-   Household Labour Force       Effect of adult minimum: 20-24: −.1 to −.4               Teen minimum omitted
1997)             wage for workers        24) and teenagers   Survey (HLFS), 1985-         15-19: −.1 to .4                                         from young adult
                  20 and over, and        (15-19)             1996                         No effect of introduction of teen minimum on teen        equation, could bias
                  introduction of teen                                                     employment                                               estimates of teen and
                  minimum wage                                                                                                                      young adult effects
Chapple (1997)    National minimum        Young adults (20-   Time-series: HLSF, 1985-     Time-series:                                             Ignores introduction of
                  wage for workers        24)                 1997                         20-24: −.17 to −.34                                      teen minimum wage in
                  20 and over                                 Cross-industry: Labour       Cross-industry: −.06 to −.10                             time-series analysis; in
                                                              and Employment Gazette       Separate time-series by industry: estimates centered     cross-industry analysis
                                                              and Statistics New           on zero                                                  year effects omitted,
                                                              Zealand Quarterly                                                                     and effects very
                                                              Employment Survey,                                                                    sensitive; separate time-
                                                              1980-1997                                                                             series by industry have
                                                                                                                                                    few degrees of freedom
     Study          Minimum wage              Group                   Data            Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on           Criticisms
                        variation                                                                             methods
Hyslop and        Introduction of       Teens, 20-21, and   HLSF, 1997-2003           Employment of 16-17 and 18-19 year-olds rose              Inspection of graphs
Stillman (2004)   higher minimums       20-25 year-olds                               relative to 20-25 year-olds, but fell relative to 20-21   and regressions give
                  for 16-17 and 18-                                                   year-olds in years corresponding to largest minimum       some suggestion of
                  19 year-olds                                                        wage increases                                            negative employment
                                                                                                                                                effects
France
Dolado et al.     1. Higher national    All                 Enquête Emploi, 1981-     Weak evidence that low-wage groups suffered larger        No wage impact, so no
(1996)            minimum wage                              1989                      employment losses in period when national                 employment impact
                  increases in early                                                  minimum increased more sharply                            expected
                  1980s than late
                  1980s
                  2. Differential       All                 Declaration Annuelle de   Regions with low initial wages experienced greater        Fluctuation in labor
                  impact of national                        Salaires, 1967-1992       employment growth                                         demand could explain
                  minimum wage                                                                                                                  results; not restricted to
                  increases across                                                                                                              low-skill workers
                  regions with
                  varying initial
                  wages
Bazen and         National minimum      Youths (under age   French Labor Force        Youth employment fell more in sectors where               Questions about
Skourias (1997)   wage increases        25)                 Survey, 1980-1984         minimum wage was more binding                             specification
                  across sectors with
                  different
                  percentages of
                  minimum wage
                  workers
Abowd et al.      Differences           Various ages        Enquête Emploi, 1982-     Large disemployment effects for workers newly
(1999)            between workers                           1989                      constrained by minimum relative to those with
                  caught by national                                                  marginally higher wages, especially those just
                  minimum wage                                                        above age 24 not protected by employment
                  increases and                                                       promotion contracts:
                  workers with                                                        Men, 25-30: −4.6
                  slightly higher                                                     Women, 25-30: −1.38
                  wages                                                               Men, 20-24: −.77
                                                                                      Women, 20-24: −1.21
                                                                                      Men, 16-19: −.08
                                                                                      Women, 16-19: .46
Netherlands
Dolado et al.     Declines in youth     Youths (17-22)      Labor Market Survey,      Youth employment fell by less or rose over this
(1996)            subminimums                               1979-1985                 period in occupations most intensive in use of young,
                  relative to adult                                                   unskilled workers, relative to overall changes in
                  minimum in 1981                                                     youth employment
                  and 1983
      Study          Minimum wage              Group                 Data               Estimated elasticities (or other effects), comments on          Criticisms
                       variation                                                                                methods
 Spain
 Dolado et al.     1. National           Teens (16-19)     Contalilidad Nacional        Teens: −.15, stronger in industries where minimum        Specifications exclude
 (1996)            minimum wage,                           Sectorial                    wage more binding                                        year effects
                   and variation in
                   effects across
                   industries where
                   minimum wage
                   more or less
                   binding
                   2. Sharp increases    Teens (16-19)     Contalilidad Nacional        Negative relationship across regions between
                   in minimum for 16                       Sectorial                    change in teenage employment rate and share
                   year-olds and more                                                   initially low-paid, but not for 20-24 year-olds
                   modest increase for
                   17 year-olds in
                   1990
 Portugal
 Pereira (2003)    Abolition of          18-19 and 20-25   Quadros de Pessoal,          Teen employment (and hours) declined relative to
                   teenage               year-olds         1986-1989                    employment of 30-35 year-olds, with elasticity of
                   subminimum                                                           −.2 to −.4; substitution towards 20-25 year-olds
                   wage in 1987
 Portugal and      Abolition of          16-65 year-olds   Quadros de Pessoal,          Overall teen employment grew faster than                 No regression analysis
 Cardoso (2006)    teenage                                 1986-1989; Labor Force       employment of 20-25 year-olds or older workers           of net employment
                   subminimum wage                         Survey, 1986-1989            following minimum wage increase; main results            effects or evidence of
                   in 1987                                                              concern effects of minimum wage on accessions and        failure to replicate
                                                                                        separations                                              Pereira’s results
                                                                                                                                                 (although focus of
                                                                                                                                                 paper is not on net
                                                                                                                                                 employment effects)
 Greece
 Karageorgiou      Variation in teen     15-19 and 20-24   Labor Force Survey,          Teens: .22 to .63 (larger estimates significant)         Little real time-series
 (2004)            and young adult                         Statistical Yearbooks of     Young adults: −.05 to −.12 (insignificant)               variation, unexpected
                   minimum wages                           National Statistical                                                                  results for other
                   relative to average                     Service of Greece,                                                                    controls, failure to
                   adult wages                             United Nations                                                                        account for minimum
                                                           Educational Scientific and                                                            wages for other groups
                                                           Cultural Organization,
                                                           OECD: 1974-2001 for
                                                           young adults; 1981-2000
                                                           for teens
Results from studies we regard as more reliable tests of employment effects of minimum wages for subset of workers are highlighted. Effects are sometimes
long-run effects from dynamic models, depending on which were emphasized by authors.
Table 4: International Studies of Minimum Wage Employment Effects, Developing Countries
      Study         Minimum wage variation                Group                     Data            Estimated elasticities (or other effects),         Criticisms
                                                                                                            comments on methods
 Brazil
 Fajnzylber       Largely time-series variation    All, but effects        Brazilian Monthly    Backed out from estimates of effects of             Stronger results
 (2001)                                            differ based on         Employment Survey,   minimum wages on income throughout the wage         for informal
                                                   initial wage            1982-1997            distribution:                                       sector
                                                                                                Formal sector, below and near minimum wage:         unexpected
                                                                                                −.05 to −.08
                                                                                                Informal sector, below and near minimum wage:
                                                                                                −.05 to −.15
 Lemos (2004,     Largely time-series variation,   All ages, many          Brazilian Monthly    Aggregate employment: centered on zero for          Some differences
 2006,            with different impact across     other comparisons       Employment Survey,   hours and employment                                in estimates
 forthcoming)     regions based on different       (public versus          1982-2000            Employment, formal sector: 0                        difficult to
                  wage levels                      private, less- versus                        Hours, formal sector: −.02                          explain or
                                                   more-educated,                               Employment, informal sector: −.02                   reconcile
                                                   formal versus                                Hours, informal sector: .02
                                                   informal sector)                             Employment, private sector: 0
                                                                                                Hours, private sector: .01
                                                                                                Employment, public sector: .03
                                                                                                Hours, public sector: −.09
                                                                                                More evidence of negative effects (still
                                                                                                insignificant) in low-inflation periods, and for
                                                                                                less-educated
 Lemos (2005)     Largely time-series variation,   All ages                Brazilian Monthly    Instruments for minimum wage variables with         Political
                  with different impact across                             Employment Survey,   political variables:                                variables may
                  regions based on different                               1982-2000            OLS: −.12 to .02 (most negative)                    influence other
                  wage levels                                                                   IV: large number of estimates, ranging from         labor market
                                                                                                −.29 to .12 (most negative)                         policies as well

 Neumark et al.   Largely time-series variation,   All ages                Brazilian Monthly    Household heads: −.07 (significant); positive for
 (2006)           with different impact across                             Employment Survey,   other family members
                  regions based on different                               1996-2001
                  wage levels
     Study           Minimum wage variation               Group                    Data                  Estimated elasticities (or other effects),       Criticisms
                                                                                                                 comments on methods
Mexico/Colombia
Bell (1997)     Mexico: minimum wages set          Firms in the          Mexico:                     Time series: Mexico, −.18 (insignificant), for
                by region, consolidated into       formal/               Annual Industrial Survey    Colombia, −.34 (significant)
                fewer regions over time            informal sectors      (1984-1990); National       Panel data, fixed effects: for Mexico skilled,
                Colombia: minimum wages            with information      Minimum Wage                −.01 to .05 , and unskilled, −.03 to .03
                by large/small cities until        broken down by        Commission Statistical      (insignificant); for Colombia skilled, −.03 to
                1984, then a national              skilled/              Reports (1984-1990);        −.24, and unskilled, −.15 to −.33 (significant)
                minimum wage implemented           unskilled workers     Mexican Ecuesta
                                                                         Nationale de Empleo
                                                                         (1988 only); time-series
                                                                         data source not specified
                                                                         Colombia:
                                                                         Annual Industrial Survey
                                                                         (1980-1987); National
                                                                         Minimum Wage
                                                                         Commission (1980-1987)
Mexico
Feliciano (1998)   Sharp consolidation of          Males and females,    Mexican Census of           Males: .005 to .01 (−.002 to .04 by age group)
                   regional minimum wages and      all ages              Population, 1970,1980,      Females: −.43 to −.58 (−.41 to −.76 by age
                   decline in average minimum                            and 1990; National          group)
                   wage                                                  Minimum Wage
                                                                         Commission Statistical
                                                                         Reports; Encuesta
                                                                         Nacional de Empleo
                                                                         Urbana
Colombia
Maloney and        Two federal minimum wage        Men working 30-       National Household          Uses self-employed as control group:              Select group of
Nuñez Mendez       increases during 1997-1999      50 hours per week     Survey, 1997-1999           Employment elasticity: −.15; stronger effects     workers
(2001)                                                                                               near minimum wage but effects also present
                                                                                                     higher in wage distribution
Chile
Montenegro and     Time-series variation in real   All, with effects     Household survey for        Minimum wages reduce relative employment of       Tenuous
Pagés (2004)       minimum wage, and variation     differentiated by     Santiago, Chile, 1960-      young, unskilled workers, but increase relative   evidence on
                   in teen relative to adult       age, sex, and skill   1998                        employment of women                               overall
                   minimum wage                                                                                                                        employment
                                                                                                                                                       effects
Costa Rica
Gindling and       Sharp consolidation of          All                   Household Surveys for       Covered-sector employment: −.11
Terrell (2004)     occupation-skill-specific                             Multiple Purposes,          Covered-sector hours of employed: −.06
                   minimum wages                                         industry data from Costa
                                                                         Rican Central Bank,
                                                                         1988-2000
     Study           Minimum wage variation                Group                   Data                    Estimated elasticities (or other effects),         Criticisms
                                                                                                                   comments on methods
Trinidad and Tobago
Strobl and Walsh Implementation of national          Females and males   Continuous Sample            Difference-in-differences in job loss between        Short time
(2001)            minimum wage in 1998               working in small    Survey of Population         those bound and those not bound by new               horizon after
                                                     (fewer than 10      (CSSP) 1996-1998             minimum wage:                                        minimum wage
                                                     employees) and                                   Males bound by new minimum more likely to            increase and
                                                     large firms                                      lose job by 9 percentage points; females by 2.3      potential
                                                                                                      percentage points (insignificant), although more     difficulties
                                                                                                      in large firms                                       controlling for
                                                                                                                                                           aggregate trends
                                                                                                                                                           for comparable
                                                                                                                                                           workers
Puerto Rico
Castillo-Freeman   U.S. federal minimum wage as      Puerto Rican        Puerto Rican Census, and     Elasticities of employment, time-series: −.11 to     Krueger (1995)
and Freeman        applied to Puerto Rico, as well   manufacturing,      the Puerto Rican Survey      −.15; panel: −.54 for full sample period, .20        shows that
(1992)             as cross-industry variation       workers working     of Manufacturing,            before 1974; −.91 after 1974 (when U.S. law          results are fragile
                                                     over 20 hours per   supplemented by data         generated increases)
                                                     week                from the Departmento del
                                                                         Trabajo and Recursos
                                                                         Humanos, U.S.
                                                                         Department of Labor and
                                                                         U.S. Department of
                                                                         Commerce
Indonesia
Rama (2001)        Cross-province variation in       Urban workers       Indonesia’s 1993 Labor       Elasticity for aggregate urban employment using      Strength of
                   minimum wage changes over                             Force Survey; data for       the log of the minimum wage, −.04; using the         identifying
                   the early 1990s                                       years 1988-1994 from         minimum over labor productivity measures,            information is
                                                                         multiple sources: national   −.04 to .00; for ages 15-24: using log of the        unclear, given
                                                                         accounts, the labor force    minimum wage, .02; using the minimum over            apparent lack of
                                                                         survey, the wage survey,     labor productivity measures, −.25 to .09 (all        enforcement of
                                                                         the survey of large          insignificant)                                       provincial
                                                                         manufacturing                Large firms: log of minimum, .20; minimum            minimum wages
                                                                         establishments and the       over productivity measures, .02 to .13 (all          as of 1989
                                                                         survey of small scale        insignificant)
                                                                         manufacturing industries     Small firms: log of the minimum −1.30
                                                                                                      (significant); minimum over labor productivity
                                                                                                      measures, −.77 to −.82 (insignificant)
Suryahadi et al.   Cross-province variation in       Urban workers       Indonesia’s 1993 Labor       Elasticity for aggregate urban employment, −.06
(2003)             minimum wage changes over                             Force Survey; data for       (significant); males, −.05; females, −.16
                   the early 1990s                                       years 1988-2000              (significant); adults, −.04; youths, −.12;
                                                                                                      educated, −.03; less-educated, −.09 (significant);
                                                                                                      white-collar, 1.00; blue-collar, −.07; full-time,
                                                                                                      −.06 (significant); part-time, −.11
      Study          Minimum wage variation                   Group                  Data                  Estimated elasticities (or other effects),   Criticisms
                                                                                                                    comments on methods
 Harrison and      District level differences in the   Manufacturing        Indonesia’s Annual        Difference-in-differences, elasticity for
 Scorse (2005)     minimum wage, within the            firms overall and    Survey of Manufacturing   manufacturing employment, −.05 for all
                   same province                       sub-group of         Firms (1990-1996)         firms; −.05 for balanced panel
                                                       textiles, apparel,                             Other specifications, −.12 to −.18 (all
                                                       and footwear                                   significant); insignificant only when done
                                                       factories                                      separately for small firms, −.02
 Alatas and        Differences in minimum wage         Manufacturing        Indonesia’s Annual        Significant negative employment effect only
 Cameron (2003)    changes between a province,         sector, Greater      Survey of Manufacturing   for small domestic firms: 41% (16%) relative
                   Jakarta, and a grouping of          Jakarta area         Firms (1990-1996);        employment loss from 1991 (1992) to 1996 in
                   districts, Botabek, across the                           Indonesian Labor Force    Botabek, which experienced sharper
                   border between adjacent                                  Survey (1990-1996)        minimum wage increase; effect no longer
                   provinces                                                                          significant when restricted to a narrow strip
                                                                                                      along the border; large foreign firms show
                                                                                                      insignificant negative effects; large domestic
                                                                                                      firm estimates are insignificant and
                                                                                                      inconclusive
Results from studies we regard as more reliable tests of employment effects of minimum wages for subset of workers are highlighted.
