                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TRADING AND ThE TAX SHELTER VALUE
                   OF DEPRECIABLE REAL ESTATE



                      Patric   H. Hendershott

                          David C. Ling




                      Working Paper No. 1261




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                         January 1981k




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #1267
                                                   January 1984




        Trading and the Tax Shelter Value of Depreciable Real Estate



                                  ABSTRACT




      For well-diversified investors in depreciable real estate, the trading

decision may be made with the sole objective of maximizing the property's

depreciation tax shelter net of all capital gain taxes and transaction costs.

This paper develops a dynamic programming model in which the optimal trading

strategies and depreciation methods of all investors in a property are

simultaneously determined. The effects of inflation, depreciation, recapture

and choice of depreciation method are analyzed, and the costs of suboptimal

trading are measured. The model is applied to both conventional residential

and commercial income properties under post-ERTA tax rules. At single digit

inflation rates, properties are traded multiple times, and the costs of

suboptimal trading are significant.




Patric H. Hendershott                             David C. Ling
Hagerty Hall                                      Faculty of Finance
Ohio State University                             University of Florida
1775 college Road                                 Gainesville, Florida 32611
Columbus, OH 43210                                (904) 392—1330
(614) 422—0552
             Trading and the Tax Shelter Value of Income Properties

                    Patric H. Hendershott and David C. Ling



       In a taxiess, riskless world with no transactions costs, all investments

would earn the same before-tax equilibrium real rate of return. Furthermore,

this competitive return would be earned regardless of how long the asset was

held. In a world characterized by the current federal income tax system,

scarce capital resources in the economy are allocated between sectors on the

basis of expected posttax rates of return. Capital will move between sectors

of the economy, and relative prices will adjust, until real, risk-adjusted

posttax yields are the same, at the margin, for all capital goods. Taxing the

income from one type of capital, say income-producing real estate, less

heavily than other types of capital will simply result in more of the tax

preferred income being supplied. Market prices, and hence supply, will

reflect the extent to which income-producing real estate is a tax preferred

asset. Additionally, the investment value of real estate income property will

no longer be independent of how long the asset was held. Any differential

benefits that are expected from trading the asset at the optimal time are

capitalized into the initial value. Because competitive market prices reflect

the optimal holding period of the marginal investor, any theory of real estate

asset prices in the presence of federal income taxes must contain a theory of

optimal holding periods.

      Another issue of importance is the relationship between tax law and

capital gain realizations. Because capital gain taxes are only paid in the

year the asset is sold, investors may be "locked—in" to assets that do not

offer the best available return. Surely Congressmen had this phenomenon in

mind when they claimed that tax revenues will not decline as a result of a cut
                                         —2—




in the capital gain tax rate. The additional transactions induced by the tax

cut would, it has been argued, offset the impact of a decline in the rate at

which such realizations are taxed. Any analysis that addresses the question

of how changes in tax law affect realizations must be built upon a theory of

optimal holding periods.

         Recent research dealing with the selection of depreciation methods and

optimal holding periods has emphasized the importance of tax considerations.

Depreciation deductions allowed the current owner are based on his original

acquisition cost of the property, while those of a potential new owner are

based on the current market value. For this reason, the new owner will, in an

inflationary environment, place a higher value on the remaining stream of

depreciation deductions available from the property than will the existing

owner. However, for the new owner to establish the current market price of

the property as his initial depreciation base, the current owner must sell the

property and thereby realize, in most cases, a taxable capital gain. If

accelerated depreciation had been employed, then a portion of the gain will be

recaptured at ordinary income tax rates. This recapture of excess

depreciation reduces dollar for dollar the amount of the gain that is

converted from ordinary income to capital gain income. Aside from these tax

considerations, brokerage transaction costs are also incurred when the

property is sold. All of these costs of achieving the higher depreciation

base, which we label "selling" costs, discourage the realization of capital

gains.

         The holding period model developed by Brueggeman, Fisher and Stern

(1981) (1982) explicitly considers the impact of these selling costs on

optimal trading strategies, but the model assumes that the second owner never

sells the property.1 This paper extends their analysis by developing a
                                         —3—




holding period model in which both the optimal trading strategies and

depreciation methods of all investors in a property are simultaneously

determined. Application of our model suggests that one-time trading is

generally suboptimal under ERTA tax law and a wide range of assumed expected

inflation and discount rates and leads to a significant under valuation of the

net tax shelter component of the return to income properties.

      The paper is organized as follows. Section I reviews the earlier

literature for determining the optimal trading strategy of the initial

investor under the assumption that the real estate will only be sold once

during its economic life. In Section II a dynamic programming model is

developed to account for the multistage nature of the "sell or hold" decision

making process. Section III applies the model to properties purchased after

the passage of the Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA) of 1981. The effects of

inflation, recapture and choice of depreciation method are analyzed and the

costs of suboptimal trading are measured. Both residential and commercial

properties are considered. The paper concludes with a brief summary.



                    THE SINGLE TRADE HOLDING PERIOD MODEL2

      When evaluating an income producing property, the investor must

determine, ex ante, the optimal investment holding period. One possible

strategy is to hold the property to the end of its economic life. The value

of the depreciable portion of the property (the "improvements") to the first

owner, assuming all-equity finance, is




       V     E
                   °' t01,
                        D
             n (l—t )I. +
                                                                   (1)
        0
            i=1             1
                    (1+K)
                                                    —4—




where V - the initial value of property
      I. -        net   income from operations in year i

      to -        marginal tax rate on ordinary income
      D. -        tax   depreciation allowed the investor in year i

      K — required           after—tax rate of return

      n -         number of years of economic life.



      During periods of rising property values, the depreciation tax shelter

benefits associated with the property can be increased by trading the

property. However, in order to achieve this increase in tax shelter value,

the seller must realize a taxable capital gain, pay any recapture penalties,

and incur transaction costs. The initial value of the property assuming sale

in the year s is




                   n (l-t )I.i +     t   D.   P -   (tgg
                                                       G + tR +
                                                            OS    $P S
      v=                 o           01+       S
                                                                         ,   (2)
                            (l+K)1                   (l+K)S



where P       -    market price in year s

      tg — marginal tax rate on capital gain income
              -
      G
          g
                   gain upon sale in year s that is taxed at the capital gains
                   tax rate

      R       -
                   gain upon sale in year s that is "recaptured" at the ordinary
                   income tax rate

              -
                   proportional   transaction costs incurred at the time of sale.

Similarly, the value of the property in year s to the second investor,

assuming he holds it for its remaining life, is equal to
                                               —5—




                  n      (l—t)I. +      tD
                                                                       (3)
                 i=s+l            i—s
                          (l+K)




where D is the tax depreciation allowed the second investor in year i.

      If it is assumed that the property will be traded only once during its

economic life, the initial investor will plan to sell in the year that

maximizes the net marginal tax benefits from selling the property relative to

the tax benefits that accrue to the owner if the property is never sold. That

is, investors will choose, ex ante, the holding period s that maximizes




                      n t(D—
                         01 D)
                             1
        =    1
                                             -(tG
                                                g s
                                                    +tR
                                                      0 S +P)
                                                            5       (4)
            (l+K) i=s+l            (l+K)15



where 1v is the increase in the present value of the property that results

from a sale in year s, instead of holding the property for the remainder of

its economic life. Equation (4) is derived by subtracting (1) from (2) after

substitution of (3). The summation within the brackets is the present value,

in year s, of the incremental depreciation deductions that will result from

the trade, assuming the second investor never sells the property. The

remaining terms within the brackets represent the total selling costs that

would be incurred as a result of a sale in year s.

      Expression (4) computes the amount that investors gain from or lose to

the Treasury as a result of a sale in year s.3 Note that net operating income

does not appear in the expression; maximization of the property's net tax

shelter benefits is a sufficient condition for maximization of total

investment value. The gain from the Treasury varies with the
                                            -6—




           year of sale in two ways. First, capital gains are taxed only upon

realization, not as they accrue. The government effectively lends investors

the amount of their accrued tax liability (assuming positive gains) at a zero

rate of interest. Second, the nominal, rather than the real, gain is taxed at

the time of sale. With positive inflation, the former benefits investors and

the latter penalizes them.

      While the "one-time trade" model explicitly considers the costs incurred

in establishing a new depreciation base, the model rests upon the assumption

that the second owner never sells the property. Define the variable



                     2        1
           n     t(D. -D.)
    B =
                            i—s
                                  -      G + t Os
                                      (tgs      R +   P5   )          (5)
                    (l+K)


and note that B>O is a necessary condition for trading in any year s. That

is, the present value of the incremental tax depreciation that would result

from a trade must at least exceed the selling costs that would be incurred.

However, B>O is not a sufficient condition for a trade to occur. In fact, the

one—time trade model assumes, ex ante, that the trade will not be made until

the discounted value of B reaches its maximum. In this formulation, then, the

trade decision depends upon both the sign and the magnitude of B. By assuming

that the property is only traded once, the model places a minimum value on the

incremental tax depreciation (and hence B) that would result from a sale.

Consequently, the initial holding period will tend to be overstated, and the

tax shelter value will definitely be understated (unless only one trade is

optimal)
                                      —7—




                         THE DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING MODEL4

      An economic life of 70 years is assumed for the improvements

 (depreciable portion of the property) , based on earlier work by Taubman and

Rasche (1969) and Hulten and Wykoff (1978). This means that the decision

making process contains 70 "stages" with a sell or hold decision required at

each stage. Specifically, the owner in each stage must determine, given the

tax "age" of the asset, whether to sell the property in that year or hold it

for an additional year. The tax age of the improvements, in any stage, equals

the number of years since the property was last traded. The decisions are

interrelated in that tax age depends upon whether or not a trade was made in

the previous stage (year). Stages run in descending numerical order so that,

for example, 10 years after the start of the process, there are 60 stages

remaining.

      In broad outline the method of solution is as follows. The value of the

tax shelter is determined at stage 1 (the last stage of the process) for each

possible tax age (69 in all) state assuming the property is sold to a

developer at the end of this last stage for the prevailing market price of the

land. The optimal decision and the resulting tax shelter value are then

determined for each possible tax age at stages 1,2, etc., working backwards

through time until all stages have been dealt with. The computer algorithm

stores optimal decisions and tax shelter values for each possible stage and

tax age. The value at stage 70 is the current present value of the tax

shelter net of all selling costs. The optimal holding period for the first

investor is determined by starting at this initial stage and following the

optimal plan just determined until the stage is reached where the optimal

decision is to sell.

      The depreciation deduction on a property of tax age s taken in stage t

[d(t,s)] is
                                                       —8—



                                      d(t,s) =   f(s)b(t+s—l),                            (6)




where s is the current tax age of the improvements, f(s) is the applicable

depreciation factor5, and b(t+s—l) is the original depreciation base of the

property. It is assumed that the depreciation deduction is taken at the end

of the stage. If the property is sold in stage t and straight-line

depreciation had been employed, the seller incurs a cash outflow [c(t,s)] of



                         =   RP           + - f(1—P s— ha (1-s1                           (7
                                  S         g

where tg is the marginal capital gains tax rate and b(t,S) is the adjusted
                     6
depreciable basis.           Sales are also assumed to occur at the end of the stage.

The net cash inflow from the tax shelter equals the after-tax value of the

depreciation deduction (minus selling costs if the decision is made to sell)

Thus this inflow in stage t [r(t,s,a)] is


                                    t 0d(t,s)
                                      (                         for a1
            r(t,s,a)         =    (
                                      I
                                                                                          (8)
                                    td(t,s)
                                      J%
                                                   -
                                                       c(t,s)   for a=2



where a is an element of the decision set A (1 =                   hold,   2 =   sell).
      An investor holding a property of tax age s in stage t will make the

decision (sell or hold) that maximizes




      V(t,s) = MAX        r(t,s,a)           + V(t-l,j)                                   (9)
               a€A   [                                    ]
                                      -9--




where V(t,s) is the present value of the tax shelter at the beginning of stage

t and K is the after-tax discount rate. V(t-l,j) is the value of the tax

shelter at the beginning of the next stage. This value depends upon the tax

age of the asset which, in turn, depends upon the action that is taken at the

end of the current stage. If the property is not sold, js+l. If a sale

occurs, j=l.

      A sufficient condition for a trade to occur in stage t is



                       V(t—l,l) —   V(t—l,s+l)   >   c(t,s).

That is, both the current owner and a potential buyer will gain relative to

the Treasury if the incremental value of the tax shelter resulting from a sale

exceeds the total selling costs incurred by the current owner. In a

competitive market, such opportunities will be exploited at the expense of the

Treasury.



                                 THE RESULTS

      The simulations are based upon the ERTA tax law which offers identical

tax depreciation options to investors in conventional residential and

commercial income properties -— 175 percent declining balance or straight—line

with a 15 year cost recovery period. Two patterns of economic depreciation

for the improvements are employed in the simulations --        reverse   sum of years

(RSY) and straight-line (SL), both over the 70 year economic life. The former

assumption is implied by the work of Taubman and Rasche (1969), while the

latter is consistent with the more recent findings of Hulten and Wykoff

(1978). The land portion of the property constitutes 20 percent of the
                                                                      —10—



initial purchase price and is assumed to grow in nominal value at the rate of

inflation. This implies that the percentage of the nominal property price

that represents depreciable improvements decreases through time.

          Expected inflation rates (it's) of 3, 6, 9, and 12 percent ar

considered. To arrive at the nominal price pattern under each inflation rate

scenario, the estimated real value of the land plus improvements in each year

is compounded by the appropriate inflation rate factor.

          For investors in low to medium tax brackets a reasonable required rate

                 4.-. .i—1-..-
J.L L = L LLL XL 4.0
,-..c                          -..-_4—.
                      LLLC aL LC.L ._.a4      -...-.,—.-.-.,-..-
                                           LLLLJL            C     Lii4 LCL CO L La,---.-.-. -..--.-...,.-.-.
                                                                                     LC JJCL.a     U OW c,.-,     1.. .4--....—.1-.1
                                                                                                              .L US                  ,-. LJLJuiLLO
                                                                                                                           LaALa..L/.LC


and mortgages are reasonable investment alternatives for such investors. For

higher tax bracket individuals, however, tax exempt securities provide a

better after-tax rate of return. Because the long-term municipal bond rate

has generally been 70 percent of the fully taxable rate, the after—tax

discount rate (K) is assumed to be 70 percent of the nominal mortgage interest

rate. This assumption implies that the depreciation tax shelter is in the

same risk class as long-term municipal debt. The justification for this

assumption is that the tax shelter portion of the investor's return is fairly

certain. It is the cash flows from operations that are quite risky.

          The nominal mortgage rate (R) is assumed to be equal to the product of

the assumed constant real rate of return (.03) and the expected inflation rate

(it) or R(l.03) (l+ir)—1. Because K0.7R, it declines with increases in

anticipated inflation, Consequently, this is labeled the low discount rate

case. To test the sensitivity of the results to the specification of K, the

nominal mortgage interest rate will also be assumed to rise by a multiple of

iT.     More specifically, 0.7R=(l.03) (l+ir)-l. Given that K0.7R, this assumption
                                     -11—



is equivalent to assuming that the after-tax discount rate rises flone—for—one"

with expected inflation, rather than declining. This specification of R and K

is labeled the high discount rate case.9

      We assume that investors are able to costlessly maintain optimal loan-

to-value ratios so that, at the margin, they are indifferent to the method of

financing.10 Finally, transactions costs are assumed to be equal to 5 percent

of the nominal sales price.11



Residential Property

      Results for residential property are displayed in Table 1. Two

statistics are reported: (1) the present value of the depreciation tax

shelter, net of all selling costs, per dollar of the original purchase price,

and (2) the holding period of each investor assuming the exclusive use of

accelerated depreciation throughout the life of the property. The latter is

assumed because under any set of parameter values the use of accelerated

depreciation maximizes the value of the tax shelter and therefore dominates

the straight-line alternative (compare the SL and ACC columns in Table 1) 12

      The frequency of trading declines with increases in the expected rate of

inflation. With RSY economic depreciation, a relatively low discount rate

(aR/ir=l.o3), and 3 percent inflation, the property is held by 5 different

investors. This number decreases as the expected inflation rate increases; at

12 percent inflation, the original purchaser never sells. Under these

circumstances, the increase in tax shelter value that would result from a sale

in any year is never sufficient to offset the selling (tax and realtors fees)

costs that would be incurred because inflated nominal gains, rather than real

gains, are taxed at the time of sale. Clearly, inflation—induced taxes can

cause investors to be locked-in to properties.
                                         —12—



                                       TABLE 1
                                RES IDENTIAL PROPERTY


OPTIMAL HOLDING PERIODS AND THE INITIAL VALUE OF THE TAX SHELTER PER DOLLAR OF
                      ORIGINAL PURCHASE PRICE [V(70,1)/PJ


          BR       ECONOMIC         V(70,1)/P      HOLDING PERIOD BY INVESTOR*
          Bit    DEPRECIATION      SL     ACC           1    2    3    4    5

          1.03        SL           .36     .39          15   15   15   25

          1.03       RSY           .40     .44          15   15   15   15   10

          1.03/0.7   RSY           .30     .34          15   15   15   25

          1.03       SL            .23     .28          15   15   15   25

          1.03       RSY           .27     .33      15       15   15   25

          1.03/0.7   RSY           .21     .24      15       15   40

          1.03       SL            .16     .18      15       55

          1.03       RSY           .16     .20      15       15   40

          1.03/0.7   RSY           .17     .20      70

          1.03       SL            .09     .11      70

ir=12%   1.03        RSY           .09     .11      70

         1.03/0.7    RSY           .15    .17       70




         Other assumptions: 0.05, t0.5, tO.2, and K=0.7R.

         *The optimal holding periods are based on use of accelerated
          depreciation, which is always optimal [yields a higher value of
          V(70,l)/P than does straight line depreciation].
                                        —13—



         More rapid rates of deterioration in the real value of the improvements

decrease tax shelter values and, to a certain extent, the frequency of trading

 (compare the SL and RSY lines with aR/air=l.03). Faster rates of economic

depreciation cause the ratio of depreciable improvements to the total pur-

chase price to fall more rapidly which, in turn, reduces the incremental

depreciation that would be gained by a trade.

         At single digit inflation rates the use of the high discount rate

specification reduces the number of trades and decreases the tax shelter

value. The present value of the depreciation deductions fails relative to the

present value of the capital gains tax when the discount rate rises one—for-

one with the expected inflation rate. At 12 percent inflation, where the

property is never traded, increasing the discount rate relative to expected

inflation increases the value of the tax shelter by reducing the present value

of the capital gains tax paid on the inflated nominal gain. Finally, note

that a single trade is optimal in only a single case (9%, and low discount

rate).




Commercial Property

         If accelerated depreciation is used for commercial property, all

depreciation (up to th'iñarket value of the improvements) is recaptured as

ordinary income at the time of sale. Thus, investors who choose accelerated

depreciation, while able to defer ordinary income are unable to convert such

income into capital gain income via depreciation. As can be seen by comparing

the ACC columns in Tables land 2, this severe recapture substantially reduces

the value of the tax shelter for commercial relative to residential properties

at low inflation rates. For ir=O.03, aR/ir=l.O3 and RSY economic depreciation,

the reduction is nearly 40 percent [(.44-.27)/.44]. In fact, the value of
                                           -14—



                                          TABLE 2

                                 COMMERCIAL PROPERTY



                OPTIMAL HOLDING PERIODS AND THE INITIAL VALUE OF THE

         TAX SHELTER PER DOLLAR OF ORIGINAL PURCHASE PRICE [V(70,1)/PJ




                                                                                 *
                    ECONOMIC          V(70,1)/P        HOLDING PERIOD BY INVESTOR
         3ir     DEPRECIATION        SL     ACC         1     2     3     4     5

         1.03          SL           .36       .27       15    15    15    25

ir=3%    1.03         RSY           .40       .27       15    15    15   15     10

         1.03/0.7     RSY           .30       .27       15    15    15   25

         1.03          SL           .23       .22       15    15    15   25

         1.03         RSY           .27       .23       15   15    15    25

         1.03/0.7     RSY           .21       .23       70

         1.03         SL            .16       .18       70

         1.03         RSY           .16       .20       70

         1.03/0.7     RSY           .17       .20       70

         1.03         SL            .09       .11      70

ir=12%   1.03         RSY           .09       .11      70

         1.03/0.7     RSY           .15       .17      70


Other assumptions :   =0.O5,    t0=0.51 tg=O•21 and K0.7R.

*
 The holding optimal periods are based on use of the optimal depreciation
method.
                                     —15-



accelerated depreciation is so reduced at low inflation rates that straight-

line depreciation is preferred. The selection of the straight-line method

reduces the above—noted 40 percent disadvantage of commercial property

relative to residential property to about 10 percent {(.44—.40)/.44]. At 6

percent inflation (and aR/rl.03 with RSY), the relative disadvantage is

reduced from 30 percent to 18 percent.

      At high inflation rates, the property is never traded. When the land is

sold, the market value of the improvements is zero. Thus the recapture

provision does not penalize the use of accelerated depreciation. As a result,

its greater deferral benefits cause it to be preferred to straight—line

depreciation.



The Cost of Suboptimal Trading

      Marginal investors will earn the required rate of return on equity only

if they follow the optimal trading strategy. In this section, the cost of

suboptimal trading is deduced. The cost has been computed in two ways.

First, we calculate the percentage decrease in the initial wealth of the

initial investor owing to his use of various suboptimal strategies. This

percentage decrease equals the reduction in the value of the tax shelter

caused by suboptimal trading of this investor only divided by the investor's

initial equity investment which is assumed to be 20 percent of the purchase

price. Second, we compute the difference between the required and actual

rates of return on equity for each suboptimal trading strategy.13 Results are

reported for residential and commercial property in a world with 6 percent

expected inflation.

      Consider the costs of suboptimal trading for residential property

displayed in Table 3. The penalty for early trading decreases through the
                                                                  TABLE   3
                               Losses From Suboptimal Trading When the Inflation Rate is          6   Percent
                                               Residential                                                       Commercial
                       Low Discount Rate (a)                                     (a)
                                                              High Discount Rate                           Low    Discount Rate
      Year       % Decrease          Required Less      %   Decrease          Required Less       % Decrease             Required Less
      of Trade   In Initial Wealth   Actual %Return     In Initial Wealth     Actual %Return     In Initial Wealth      Actual %Return
         1            19.7              20.97                  21.3              23.26                  20.0                  21.33
'-I      5            13.8               3.11                  17.6               4.15                  16.8                   3.83
        10             5.0               0.54                   8.3               0.94                     9.0                 1.00
        15
        20             8.2               0.45                   2.6               0.14                     5.5                 0.30
        25            16.4               0.76                   4.5               0.20                     9.2                 0.41
        30            25.0               1.01                   5.4               0.20                  11.7                   0.44
        40            35.5               1.16                   6.3               0.18                  15.4                   0.44
        50            43.5               1.21                   6.5               0.15                  17.2                   0.40
      (a)The low discount rate is K=0.7(l.03) (1.06); the high discount rate is          K(l.03) (1.06).
                                     —17-



cost recovery period; conversely, the penalty for late trading increases the

longer the property is suboptimally held. The losses are substantial either

for trading too early or too late, except when the discount rate is high and

the trade is late. Trading 10 years too early under either discount rate

specification or 10 years too late in the low discount rate case gives losses

of initial wealth on the order of 15 percent. In contrast, with a high

discount rate, waiting too long costs little in present value terms. The 15

percent losses for trading too early translate into very large differences

between required and actual annual rates of return (3 or 4 percent) because

the losses are spread out over so few years. While the loss is significantly

smaller on an annual basis, even for the low discount rate case, for trading

in the 30th year instead of the 15th -- one percent, the below-market return

is earned for a full thirty years.

      The results for suboptimal trading of commercial properties are shown in

the right side panels of Table 3. The losses for trading early are greater

for commercial than residential property (at the same low discount rate) but

the losses for trading late are less. Both follow from the fact that

straight-line tax depreciation is optimal for commercial property while

accelerated tax depreciation is for residential property. By not trading at

the end of the cost recovery period, investors postpone the realization of

accrued capital gains but they also delay the establishment of a new

depreciable basis. This delay is more costly, in present value terms, when

accelerated depreciation is employed, i.e., for residential property.

Conversely, by trading prior to year 15, investors realize capital gains

prematurely. The cost of this strategy, however, is partially offset by the

establishment of a new depreciable basis, the value of which is greater if

accelerated depreciation is used.
                                      -18—



A Degression: The Impact of Inflation

      Comparisons of tax shelter values in Tables 1 and 2 across inflation

rates, holding the discount rate and pattern of economic depreciation

constant, suggest that inflation reduces returns to income property. More

specifically, net tax shelter values for residential properties with RSY

depreciation,   reproduced in Columns (1) and (3) of Table 4, decline

monotonically with increases in the inflation rate. In the low discount rate

case, an increase in expected inflation from 3 to 12 percent cuts the tax

shelter value by three—quarters; in the high discount rate case, the tax

shelter value is halved. But this does not necessarily mean a lower total

return. While increases in expected inflation decrease tax shelter values

owing to the use of historic cost depreciation and the taxation of nominal

capital gains, these increases tend to raise the terminal value of the

property (the land value in the 70th year), although not necessarily in

present value terms.14

      The combined present value (per dollar of initial price) of the tax

shelter and terminal land sale for residential properties is listed in columns

2 and 4 of Table 4 for different levels of expected inflation under the low

and high discount rate scenarios. Because land is assumed to be 20 percent of

the initial purchase price and land is assumed to rise in value at the general

inflation rate, these data are computed as




                       V(70,l) +   (l)700.2
                         p          (1+K)7°
                                                     —19-



                                                   TABLE 4


                                            The Impact of Inflation



                       Low Discount Rate                              High Discount Rate

iT        Tax Shelter Value Tax Shelter Plus Land            Tax Shelter Value Tax Shelter Plus Land

     3%          .44                       .53                        .34                  .36

     6%          .33                       .48                        .24                  .26

     9%          .20                       .46                        .20                  .22

12%              .11                       .55                        .17                  .20
                                     —20—



      At low discount rates [K/r =   0.7(1.03)1,   greater inflation increases

the terminal land value; when inflation enters the double digit range, this

increase is sufficient to raise the combined value of the tax shelter and land

(compare columns 1 and 2). In the high discount rate case (K/B7r =    1.03),   the

inclusion of land has a negligible effect on tax shelter values over the

entire range of inflation rate scenarios (compare columns 3 and 4) because the

inflation and discount factors applied to the land effectively cancel.



                           SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

      For well-diversified investors the trading decision for investment

properties will be made with the sole objective of maximizing the value of the

property's depreciation tax shelter (net of all selling costs). Sales will be

timed to achieve the best compromise between postponing capital gain tax

payments (and sales costs) and the cost of keeping the old depreciation base

in the face of rising nominal property prices. A dynamic programming model is

developed to reflect the fact that all owners of the property will pursue

optimal trading and depreciation strategies. When multiple trades occur, a

more accurate, higher estimate is obtained of the value of incremental

depreciation deductions resulting from a sale. The model is applied in the

post-ERTA environment.

      Several major conclusions follow. First, accelerated depreciation will

always be chosen on residential properties, while its use is optimal for

commercial properties only if trades never occur. This is due to the severe

recapture penalities on commercial property. Second, optimal trading

strategies on all properties will vary with the expected inflation rate and

its impact on the discount rate. At low to moderate levels of anticipated

inflation (3% and 6%), tax-induced holding periods will be 15 years for the
                                        21




initial and a number of subsequent investors, i.e., the property will be

traded when depreciation deductions are exhausted. At high levels of

inflation (12%), tax shelter benefits, net of all selling costs, will be

maximized if the initial investor holds the property for its entire economic

life. With high inflation, the value of postponing capital gain tax

liabilities is obviously substantial.

      The cost of suboptimal trading appears to be quite large. For example,

in a 6 percent inflation environment an initial investor who trades a

residential property 10 years too early (in the fifth year rather than the

15th) losses 13.8 percent of his initial equity investment or, equivalently,

earns an annual rate of return 3 percentage points below the market return.

The corresponding figures for trading 10 years too late are 16.4 percent and 1

percentage point (note that this point is lost for a full 25 years). Finally,

in only one of 14 cases analyzed in which trading occurs is a single trade

optimal.
                                       —22—

                                     Footnotes

1Brueggeman, Fisher and Stern extend the model that was developed by Brannon

and Sunley (1976) to investigate the various rationales for recapture.

Alberts and Castanias (1982) consider how frequently an infinite-lived

investor would trade identical properties. Their analysis does not address

the issues of how often a given property is traded or what is the value of its

tax shelter characteristics.

        Before passage of the Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA) ,   cost   recovery

periods ranged from 30 to 45 years, significantly longer than the 15 years

allowed under ERTA. For this reason, the single-trade model understated total

tax benefits less under pre—ERTA tax law than under the new law.


2The development in this section follows Brueggeman, Fisher, and Stern (1981).

Implicit in their analysis, and ours also, is that investors can separate the

management of the real estate tax shelter portion of their portfolio from

their overall portfolio allocation problem.


3As Brueggeman, Fisher, and Stern (1981) point out, the distribution of

between buyer and seller is not important for our purposes. Note that the

model could also be applied to a single investor who anticipates the

simultaneous purchase of a perfect substitute at the time of sale. In this

case,      would represent the amount that this same investor would gain or

lose relative to the Treasury if he traded for a perfect substitute in year s.


4Dynamic Programming is a simulation optimization technique well established

in the decision science literature [see, for example, Bellman and Kalaba

(1965) and Gluss (1972)]. This technique is employed because the interaction

between the tax code and real estate investment behavior is difficult to

address in a purely theoretical framework. The simplifying assumptions that

must be made in order to derive analytical solutions can severely limit the
                                                —23—




applicability of the results. For example, when analyzing the effect of

inflation on the real value of tax depreciation, it is typically assumed that

the asset is never traded in order to derive an analytical expression [see,

for example, the appendix in Feldstein, Green, and Sheshinski (1976)]. Such

an assumption overstates the negative impact of inflation on the real value of

tax depreciation over the life of the property if it would be optimal for a

trade to occur.


5For straight-line depreciation, the factor is a constant throughout the

recovery period equal to 6.7%. For accelerated depreciation the ACRS factors

are: 12% in year 1, 10% in year 2, 9% in year 3, 8% in year 4, 7% in year 5,

6% in years 6 through 9, and 5% in years 10 through 15.


61f accelerated depreciation is employed, then


         LBPs +
         v
                tg [(l-)P    s
                                 - b
                                      a
                                          (t,s) - EXC] +   to   EXC              for residential
c(t,s)
         (BP5 + t [(l-)P         - b
                                      a
                                          (t+s-l)J +   t0 [b0 (t+s-l)—   ba (t,s) for commercial,
                 g           S


where EXC is excess depreciation. Note that in all cases the terms multiplied by

tg correspond to G in equation (4) and those multiplied by to to R.


7The value of the depreciation deduction to the marginal investor is assumed

to be unaffected by minimum tax considerations. [On the operation of this

tax, see Sirmans (1980) .]


8To clarify the notation, consider the form of equation (9) in the first year

of the decision making process:

              V(70,l) =   MAX 1(70,l,a)         +   V(69,j)
                                  L    (1+K)        (l+K)
The net return to the first investor in stage 70 and the tax age of the

improvements in the next stage (69) are a function of the trading decision
                                         —24—



made in stage 70. If the property is sold (a = 2 and j =      1),   then the tax age

of the improvements in stage 69 will be 1.      If the property is not sold (a = 1

and j = s +   1),   then the tax age of the improvements in stage 69 will be 2.

Note the recursive nature of the problem. The optimal trading decision and

the resulting tax shelter value depend on the value of the tax shelter in

stage 69 which, in turn, depends on the (optimal) trading decisions of all

future investors.


9Alberts and Castanias (1982) simulate the effects of inflation on investment

value and optimal holding periods, but they do not allow nominal mortgage

rates and after-tax discount rates to vary with the level of inflation. As a

result, increases in inflation greatly increase value.


10Loan amortization and rising nominal asset prices reduce loan-to—value

ratios through time, implying larger equity investments and smaller interest

deductions. If an investor can costlessly maintain an optimal loan-to-value

ratio, then financing will not affect trading because, at the margin, the cost

of debt and equity capital are the same. If refinancing is costly more

expensive than initiating a new loan on a similar property, then financing

considerations may induce more frequent trading because of the gains from

reestablishing the optimal loan-to-value ratio.


11Transactions costs levels of 3 and 7 percent were also considered. Results

were insensitive to these variations because these costs are small relative to

capital gains taxes, the other component of selling costs.


121n the simulations, all investors over the life of the property have been

assumed to employ the same depreciation method (either accelerated or

straight-line) .    The relative advantage of accelerated depreciation is

understated if it is optimal for a later investor to switch to straight-line.
                                     —25—




'3The actual average rate of return on the 20% equity investment was obtained

by solving


                r(l+K) 1 —        - 1,

where r is the average annual return, RV is the reduction in the value of the

tax shelter caused by suboptimal trading, EQ is the equity investment, t is

the holding period, and K is the required rate of return.


'4The present value of net operating rents, too, could well be affected by the

level of expected inflation, but this response depends on general equilibrium

considerations that are far beyond the scope of the present paper.
                                 References

William W. Alberts and Richard P. Castanias, II, "The Impact of Changes in Tax
Depreciation Rates on Holding Periods for Real Estate Investments," National
Tax Journal, Vol. XXXV (March 1982).

R. E. Bellman and R. Kalaba, Dynamic Programming and Modern Control Theory
 (New York: Academic Press, 1965)

Gerald M. Brannon and Emil M. Sunley, "The Recapture of Excess Depreciation on
the Sale of Real Estate," National Tax Journal, Vol. XXIX, No. 4 (December
1976)

William B. Brueggeman, Jeffrey D. Fisher and Jerold J. Stern, "Federal
Income Taxes, Inflation and Holding Periods for Income Producing Property,"
AREUEA Journal, Vol. 9, No. 2. (Summer 1981)

William B. Brueggeman, Jeffrey D. Fisher, and Jerold J. Stern, "Rental Housing
and the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public Finance Quarterly, Vol. 10
(April 1982)

Martin Feldstein, Jerry Green and Eytan Sheshinski, "Inflation and Taxes in a
Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 86, No. 2 (1978)

Brian Gluss, An Elementary Introduction to Dynamic Programming (Boston: Allyn
and Bacon Inc., 1972).

C. R. Hulten and F. C. Wycoff, "Empirical Evidence on Economic Depreciation of
Structures," 1978 Compendium of Tax Research, Washington, D.C., Treasury
Department.

C. F. Sirmans, "Minimum Tax, Recapture and Choice of Depreciation Methods,"
AREUEA Journal, Vol. 8, No. 3 (Fall 1980).

Paul Taubman and Robert H. Rasche, "Economic and Tax Depreciation of Office
Buildings," National Tax Journal, Vol. XXII (September 1969).
