                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 JUDICIAL FACT DISCRETION

                                         Nicola Gennaioli
                                         Andrei Shleifer

                                       Working Paper 12679
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12679


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2006




We are extremely grateful to Richard Craswell, Louis Kaplow, and Mathew Stephenson for extensive
advice, and to Gary Becker, John Coates, Jack Goldsmith, Christine Jolls, Daryl Levinson, Giacomo
Ponzetto, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Steven Shavell, and Adrian Veremeule for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Judicial Fact Discretion
Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 12679
November 2006
JEL No. K13,K4,K41

                                               ABSTRACT

Does it matter for the outcome of a trial who the judge is? Legal practitioners typically believe that
the answer is yes, yet legal scholarship sees trial judges as predictably enforcing established law. Following
Frank (1951), we suggest here that trial judges exercise considerable discretion in finding facts, which
explains the practitioners perspective and other aspects of trials. We identify two motivations for
the exercise of such discretion: judicial policy preferences and judges aversion to reversal on appeal
when the law is unsettled. In the latter case, judges exercising fact discretion find the facts that fit
the settled precedents, even when they have no policy preferences. In a standard model of a tort, judicial
fact discretion leads to setting of damages unpredictable from true facts of the case but predictable
from knowledge of judicial preferences, it distorts the number and severity of accidents, and generates
welfare losses. It also raises the incidence of litigation relative to settlement, and encourages litigants
to take extreme positions in court, especially in new and complex disputes where the law is unsettled.

Nicola Gennaioli
Stockholm University
Institute for International Economic Studies
SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
Nicola.Gennaioli@iies.su.se

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

        Does the identity of a judge matter for the outcome of a trial?                       Among practicing

attorneys, including those teaching at law schools, as well as popular writers on the law (e.g.,

Feige 2006), the answer is a resounding yes. The sympathies, the mood, the attitudes, and the

psychology of a judge are of utmost importance for what happens in the courtroom.                                 A

distinguished trial judge writes that “there is a terrific importance in the trial court, never equaled

in any appellate court, of knowing who is the judge” (Wyzanski 1972, p. 208).

        Legal scholarship, in contrast, while increasingly recognizing the importance of political

preferences and attitudes of appellate judges, sees trial courts as exercising a much more

mechanical and predictable role of applying the established law to facts. Although sometimes

trial courts make errors, at least some of those are corrected on appeal, further reducing the scope

for trial court discretion (Kaplow 1994, Kaplow and Shavell 1994, 1996, Shavell 2006).

        How can these views be reconciled? In this paper, we argue that the practitioners’

position is closer to reality, because it acknowledges the considerable discretion that trial courts

have in finding fact. While constrained by law, trial courts can select, describe, and characterize

the facts to which the law is applied with some freedom. When a judge exercises such fact

discretion, his identity begins to matter2.

        In his “Courts on Trial,” the distinguished American legal realist Jerome Frank defined

this concept of judicial fact discretion:

When the oral testimony is in conflict as to a pivotal fact-issue, the trial judge is at liberty to
choose to believe one witness rather than another. In other words, in most cases the trial judges
have an amazingly wide “discretion” in finding the facts, a discretion with which upper courts, on
appeals, seldom interfere, so that, in most instances, this “fact discretion” is almost boundless. …
As one court put it , “the word ‘discretion’ is properly enough used to express the judicial
judgment in discriminating as to weight and cogency between different witnesses… which must
be exercised in reaching any conclusion of fact from evidence.” (Frank 1951, p. 57).


2
 According to Brunetti (1998, p. 1493) “much has been written about judicial philosophy and almost nothing has
been written about the fact-finding aspect of trial court decision making… An entire bibliography published in 1993
of every book and article ever written about judicial decision-making contains no source on fact-finding by trial
courts.”


                                                         2
         Frank recognized that some fact discretion is unavoidable, since judges necessarily have to

decide which witness accounts to trust. But Frank (and later Posner 2005) also recognized that

fact discretion creates significant leeways for the expression of judicial preferences, which derive

from political, social, or economic views, or even from a judge’s career concerns.                              Such

expression need not even be conscious. Judges may unconsciously interpret the evidence, or

disregard some inconvenient truths, through the lens of their experiences, beliefs, or ideologies, or

perhaps even something as mundane as attitudes toward specific litigants or lawyers3.                          These

practices are entirely human and usually not unethical.                         Yet they lead to significant

unpredictability of judicial decisions from the objective facts of a case, and elevate the importance

of knowing “who the judge is” for predicting the outcome of a trial.

         In this paper, we introduce judicial fact discretion into a formal analysis of trial court

decision making, and examine its consequences4. To this end, we identify two distinct motives

for the exercise of judicial fact discretion. The first, emphasized by legal realists, is judicial bias5.

As Posner (2005, p. 14) – echoing Frank (1930, 1932) – writes about federal district (i.e., trial)

judges: “But [deciding a particular case in a particular way might increase the judge’s utility] by

advancing a political or ideological goal, economizing on the judge’s time and effort, inviting

commendation from people whom the judge admires, benefiting the local community, getting the

judge’s name in the newspaper, please a spouse or other family member or a friend, galling a

lawyer whom the judge dislikes, expressing affection for or hostility toward one of the parties –

the list goes on and on.”

3
  In the words of Karl Llewellyn (1951, p. 45) “[A judge is] a lawyer, and as such skilled in manipulating the
resources of persuasion at his hand. A lawyer, and as such prone without thought to twist analogies, and rules, and
instances, to his conclusion. … More, as a practiced exponent of the art of exposition, he has learned that one must
prepare the way for argument. You set the mood, the tone, and you lay the intellectual foundation – all with case in
mind, with the conclusion – all, because those who hear you also have the case in mind, without the niggling
criticism which may later follow. You wind up, as a pitcher will wind up – as in the pitcher’s case, the wind-up often
is superfluous. As in the pitcher’s case, it has been known to be intentionally misleading.”
4
  Although our model focuses on judges, much of the discussion – particularly the sections focused on judicial bias --
is applicable to juries as well. Strictly speaking, our model deals with fact-finder fact discretion.
5
  Gennaioli (2004) formally introduces judicial bias into a model of adjudication. Gennaioli and Shleifer (2007) and
Ponzetto and Fernandez (2006) examine the consequences of appellate courts’ bias for the evolution of the law.
Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005) model a similar kind of “fact discretion” by the media in its reporting of the news.


                                                          3
         The second motive, specific to trial judges, is the dislike of being overruled by appellate

courts. As Posner (2005, p.16) comments: “Judges also don’t like to be reversed, even though a

reversal has no tangible effect on a judge’s career if he is unlikely to be promoted to the court of

appeals in any event.” Appellate courts typically do not revisit facts found by trial courts, but only

the application of the existing law to those facts6. When such application is uncertain, a trial court

has an incentive to “fit” the facts into the settled precedent, so that from the point of view of the

appellate court, the application of the law to the facts is uncontroversial.

         We consider each of these motives for the exercise of judicial fact discretion in a standard

model of a tort. In this model, the first best efficient legal rule is strict liability with all harms

being legally cognizable for the calculation of damages. In section 3 we assume that trial courts

follow this rule, but can distort facts about harm. We show that the damages awarded by judges

are unpredictable from true facts of the case, but predictable from knowledge of judicial

preferences. Depending on the distribution of judicial biases, damages may be too flat or too

steep as a function of true harm, which reduces welfare by affecting the number and the severity

of accidents. Section 4 shows that the same results hold when trial court decisions are appealed.

Trial courts avoid reversal by simply finding the level of harm triggering their preferred damages.

         When the law is unsettled, appellate review increases trial courts’ incentive to distort

harm. This is due to trial courts’ uncertainty over appellate bias. Because different appellate

courts resolve new cases differently, trial courts can avoid being overruled by fitting their finding

of harm into a settled precedent. Crucially, this implies that under unsettled law even unbiased

judges distort harm so as to avoid reversal by biased appellate courts.

         In section 5, we introduce fact discretion into a model of litigation. We find that the

possibility of fact discretion encourages litigants to take extreme positions in court and increases



6
  In some rare instances, such as “clear error” or “constitutional facts” (Hoffman 2001), federal appeals courts review
facts. The rarity and special features of these instances only justify our basic assumption of no factual review. If in
addition appellate courts are biased (as in our model), it is unlikely that a review of facts reduces fact discretion.


                                                           4
the amount of litigation, as opposed to settlement, especially in the instances where the law is

unsettled and judges are motivated to find facts that avoid reversal.

       In sum, fact discretion not only creates leeways for the expression of judicial biases, but

also undermines the appeals process and adversarial litigation. Although these mechanisms are

sometimes believed to put a beneficial check on trial courts, under fact discretion they lose their

effectiveness. Taken together, our results suggest that trials are likely to perform poorly in the

areas of law that are fact-intensive, relatively new (so precedents are undeveloped), and

vulnerable to judicial bias. The controversial product accident litigation may fit this description.



An Example of Judicial Fact Discretion

       Before turning to the formal analysis, we present an example of the exercise of judicial

fact discretion in one famous case. We note, first, that fact discretion has been studied in the

context of appellate courts, where the idea has been that appellate judges sometimes “simplify”

the facts to elucidate a legal principle. A very clean example of this is Cardozo’s extreme

mischaracterization of facts in MacPherson v. Buick (Henderson 2003), but Cardozo appears to

have altered the facts at least marginally in Palsgraf as well (Posner 1990). Dershowitz and Ely

1971) denounce the Burger Supreme Court for its extreme mischaracterization of facts in Harris v

New York, an exercise of fact discretion that the authors call “the failure of candor.”

       Our example of judicial fact discretion in action comes from one of the first cases in the

standard torts textbook (Keeton, Sargentich, and Keating 2004), Garratt v. Dailey. In textbooks,

the case stands for the proposition that knowledge of possible harm is sufficient to find intent in

battery, so the plaintiff does not need to show purpose to harm to establish the defendant’s

liability. But the case is also a clear instance of judicial fact discretion. Although it does not deal

with the exact situation we study, Garratt v. Dailey shows a trial judge completely changing his

fact finding after an appellate court remands the case to him on a matter of law.



                                                  5
       Brian Dailey, a five year old boy, accompanied his mother on a visit to his aunt, Ruth

Garratt, in the garden of Garratt’s house. The boy allegedly pulled a chair from under his aunt as

she started to sit down, she fell and injured herself, and subsequently sued Brian. According to

the appellate court review of the evidence, “the trial court accepted the boy’s statement that he

had moved chair and seated himself therein, but, when he discovered that plaintiff was about to sit

at place where chair had been, attempted to move chair toward plaintiff, and was unable to get it

under plaintiff in time.” (cite, italics added) Having accepted the boy’s view that he was trying to

help his aunt rather than hurt her, the trial court ruled for the boy on the grounds that he did not

have the purpose – and therefore intent – to harm her.

       The appellate court ruled that purpose to harm is not required to prove intent in battery,

and that knowledge of possible harm is sufficient, and remanded the case to the trial judge (in this

case, superior court). “Upon remand for clarification on the issue of the defendant’s knowledge,

the superior court reviewed the evidence, listened to additional arguments and studied briefs of

counsel, and entered a finding to the effect that the defendant knew, with substantial certainty, at

the time he removed the chair, that the plaintiff would attempt to sit down where the chair had

been, since she was in the act of seating herself when he removed the chair.” (cite, italics added)

The trial court shifted all the way from the finding that the boy was moving the chair toward the

aunt as she was sitting down to the finding that he was pulling it from under her.

       There may be a number of explanations, some innocent, for how the trial court found such

entirely different facts after the case was remanded. But there are two simple stories. First, the

judge might have been initially annoyed with the aunt for bringing a case against her 5 year old

nephew, presumably to collect insurance, and so accepted the boy’s somewhat bizarre testimony

to reach his initial verdict. He could have, and of course eventually did, accept the other

testimony instead. This judicial bias view of fact discretion is analyzed in Section 3.




                                                 6
           Alternatively, the trial judge might have feared reversal.                   When he thought that the

standard of intent in battery was purpose, he found the facts under which the boy could have

hardly had the purpose to harm his aunt, namely that he was moving the chair toward her. Under

the legal rule the judge believed, the factual finding that the boy was pulling the chair from under

his aunt would have raised the question of his purpose, and exposed the judge to the risk of

reversal if the appeals court ruled that pranks are not purposeful. To the judge’s surprise, the

appellate court took a radically different view of the standard of intent in battery. So when the

trial judge learned that the standard of intent was merely knowledge of possible harm, and not

purpose to harm, he found the facts under which knowledge was pretty much obvious, even to a 5

year old. Had he stuck to his old finding of facts that he boy was trying to put the chair back, the

question of knowledge would have been legally controversial. In both of his decisions, the trial

judge found the facts that render the application of the law that he believed to be in place utterly

straightforward. We consider this motivation for fact discretion in Section 4.



2. The Model

           Consider a tort where injurer I harms victim V. I could be a company using explosives

and V a resident whose person or property is damaged in an accident with explosives. V’s harm

from the injury, denoted by h , is uniformly distributed on [0,1] . We assume that I knows the

victim’s harm h before he engages in the potentially harmful action.7

           At a cost c( p) = (1 / 2) p 2 , I can take precautions p ∈ [0,1] and avoid the injury with

probability p. For example, p could represent the company’s effort to transport explosives more

securely or to store them further away from V’s property. Since the level of harm h is known in

advance to I, expected social losses from taking precautions p are given by:

                                                        (1 − p )h + (1 / 2) p 2                                          (1)

7
    If h is unknown to I, the problem becomes trivial. The analysis goes through if I is imperfectly informed about h.


                                                             7
        First best precautions are then equal to p fb (h) = h . Aggregate social losses in the first best

( L fb ) when I takes optimal precautions are equal to:

                                              1
                                                  [                 ]
                                      L fb = ∫ (1 − h)h + (1 / 2)h 2 dh = 1 / 3
                                              0
                                                                                                                (2)

        We study torts where there is no contract, or alternatively where it is too costly for the

parties to specify precautions contractually. As in the standard model of torts (Posner 1972,

Shavell 1987), I’s precautions are shaped by the damages set by courts in light of the prevailing

legal rule. For simplicity and in line with the explosives example, we study the strict liability

regime, but distinguish two situations within that regime. The first, “settled law,” is defined as

d (h) = h for all possible kinds or levels of harm.8 This definition of settled law includes both

strict liability and the assumption that all harms are legally cognizable – the situation that yields

first best precautions under standard assumptions. In the second situation we consider, “unsettled

law,” not all factual scenarios have been previously considered by courts, so the function d (h) has

been defined only for some fact situations h. In the explosives example, it might not have been

settled by precedent whether mental anguish is a legally cognizable form of harm. Unsettled law

tends to be the standard situation in new or complex areas of law (Llewellyn 1960, Stone 1985).

        The timing of the model is as follows: at t = 0, I observes h and takes precautions; at t =

1/2, V is injured; at t = 1, a trial judge is randomly selected from the population of judges. The

selected judge observes h (we drop this assumption in Section 5), finds h’ that is potentially

different from h, and awards damages d (h' ) to the victim.

        A judge’s fact finding policy is thus summarized by the function h' (h) assigning to every

true harm level h the utility maximizing harm level actually found by the judge. In our definition,

the judge engages in fact discretion when the facts found h' (h) differ from those revealed at trial

h. There are several ways in which judges may be able to “work on the facts” of a case. Some of

8
  Studying fact discretion under negligence rules would complicate the analysis because in that case precautions may
jump rather then change smoothly with judicial error. We leave the study of negligence rules for future research.


                                                         8
the evidence presented to them may be oral, and so they may choose whom to believe. The

documents in the evidence may include ambiguous language, which judges are free to interpret.

The victim’s harm may depend on a multitude of conflicting factors. By emphasizing certain

pieces of evidence and neglecting others, a judge may discretionally alter the facts of the case to

meet his desired level of harm.

       To find h’ when true harm is h, the judge bears the cost c(h'−h) 2 / 2 . A larger discrepancy

between estimated and true harm is more costly to the judge. A smaller c reflects a lower cost of

fact discretion. Empirically, a low c may capture factual complexity. The higher is the number of

material dimensions determining h, the greater is judicial discretion in estimating it.

       A study of fact discretion requires that we specify judicial preferences. We define judicial

preferences over damages, so that judge j’s loss from setting damages d in case h is equal to:

                                           [           ]2
                                      L j = d − d *j (h) / 2 .                                     (3)

Here d *j (h) is the judge’s ideal level of damages when true harm is h. A measure one of judges

is distributed according to their ideal damages. Share u of judges is unbiased and has d *j (h) = h ,

share ι of judges is biased for the injurer (pro-I) and has d *j (h) < h , share ν of judges is biased

for the victim (pro-V) and has d *j (h) > h . Notice that u measures the polarization of judicial

preferences: the smaller is u , the greater is the share of biased judges in the population.

Empirically, u may measure the political or social sensitivity of a dispute.              For example,

environmental torts or discrimination disputes are likely to have a smaller u .



3. Enforcement of Settled Law under Judicial Fact Discretion

       In this section, we consider how, under settled law, judicial fact discretion affects the

predictability of damages from case facts, precautions, welfare, and the pattern of accidents.




                                                   9
        Consider how trial courts enforce settled law. At any harm level h, judge j finds h' j and


                                   [           ]2
sets d j = h' j so as to minimize d − d *j (h) / 2 + c(h'− h) 2 / 2 . This judge j sets:

                                                     d *j (h) + ch
                                        d j ( h) =                   .                             (4)
                                                        1+ c

Judge j’s choice of damages is a weighted average of his ideal damages d *j (h) and true harm h.

Unbiased judges set the first best damages, the damages of pro-I (pro-V) judges are lower

(higher) than true harm h. The discrepancy between biased judges’ damages and true harm

decreases in c. If judges can freely distort facts (c = 0), they set their ideal damages. If instead

fact discretion is impossible ( c = ∞ ), adjudication is entirely driven by the case facts.



3.1 Unpredictability of Damages and Social Welfare

        Before moving to the observable implications of fact discretion for trial courts’ behavior,

expression (4) allows to examine how fact discretion affects precautions and welfare. Since I

chooses p before knowing the judge’s type, his choice of precautions at h is:


                                  p sl (h) = E (d j (h) h) =
                                                                     [      ]
                                                                E d *j (h) + ch
                                                                                  ,                (5)
                                                                         1+ c

which is an average of the damages set by pro-V, pro-I, and unbiased judges. The pattern of

precautions at a given harm h depends entirely on the average judicial bias at h.                    If

E j (d *j (h)) > h , judges are on average pro-V and the injurer takes over-precautions.             If

E j (d *j (h)) < h , judges are on average pro-I and the injurer takes under-precautions. Correct

precautions are only taken if judges are on average unbiased, i.e. when E j (d *j (h)) = h . We find:


Proposition 1: Under settled law, if for some h, E j (d *j (h)) ≠ h , then first best social welfare is

attained if and only if c → ∞ . Social losses relative to the first best fall as c or u increase. The

marginal social cost of a decrease in c is larger when u is smaller.


                                                        10
        Intuitively, judicial bias is responsible for the welfare loss from fact discretion. As

pointed out by Kaplow and Shavell (1996), if damages are on average equal to true harm, then the

first best is attained irrespective of judicial errors. If instead average damages are sometimes

different from true harm, the first best is no longer attained. The deviation of precautions (and

welfare) from the first best depends on c and u. An increase in judges’ ability to misrepresent

harm (i.e., a decrease in c) distorts precautions, thereby reducing welfare. A similar effect is

triggered, for a given c, by an increase in the proportion of biased judges (a decrease in u). The

extent of fact discretion and judicial bias interact: as c falls, biased judges are better able to distort

the setting of damages, so judicial polarization has a more detrimental impact on precautions.

        Aside from the welfare cost of fact discretion, what might be some of the observed

consequences of this behavior of trial judges? First, the outcome of a dispute in this model is

obviously determined by who the judge is. More specifically, the analysis has implications for

statistical predictability of judicial decisions from case facts. By “unpredictability” we mean the

variability of damages for given facts (i.e., true harm h). That is, at harm h we define:

                                                                 V j (d *j (h))
                        unpredictability (h) ≡ V j (d j (h)) =                    ,                   (6)
                                                                   (1 + c) 2

where V j (d j (h)) is the variance of damages at harm level h and V j (d *j (h)) is the variance of

judicial ideal damages at harm h. We have:


Corollary 1: Under settled law, unpredictability increases with V j (d *j (h)) and falls with c.


        Under fact discretion (i.e., if c < ∞ ), dispersion of judicial views fosters unpredictability

in damages, even when legal rules are fixed.             We expect more variability of outcomes in

politically sensitive cases where the dispersion of judicial biases is large.               In addition,

unpredictability falls when it is harder for judges to engage in fact discretion (when c is higher).




                                                    11
3.2 Average Damages and the Number and Severity of Accidents

       To obtain predictions on average damages and on the number and severity of accidents,

we must consider how E j (d *j (h)) varies with harm.             We do so by presenting a flexible

specification of judicial biases that allows us to stress the role of two key factors: the relative

proportion of pro-I and pro-V judges and the slope of bias with respect to harm. We assume that

all pro-V and pro-I judges have ideal damage schedules d V* (h) and d I* (h) respectively, given by:

                           d V* (h) = h + hα (1 − h) and d I* (h) = h − h(1 − h)α ,                (7)

with α ≥ 0 . To understand these expressions, consider the pro-V bias hα (1 − h) . The term h α

says that a pro-V judge is tougher with I when harm is higher. The term (1 − h ) implies that the

pro-V bias cannot exceed (1 − h) , namely the distance between current and maximum harm. This

last term simply ensures that the ideal damages of pro-V judges are in [0,1] . The term (1 − h)α

correspondingly captures the idea that a pro-I judge is more lenient when harm is lower, while h

is the maximal leniency he is allowed to entertain. In this specification, parameter α captures the

sensitivity of judicial bias to the facts of the case. When α is high, a judge’s bias is higher the

more the evidence favors his preferred party. Pro-V judges are especially biased when harm is

high, pro-I judges are especially biased when harm is low. If instead α is small, then judicial

bias is insensitive to evidence. At any harm level h, then, the pro-V bias mainly depends on the

maximum harshness (1-h) a judge is allowed to entertain, the pro-I bias on the maximum leniency

h a judge is allowed to entertain.

       One can interpret α as the judge’s moral restraint (Bauer 1933). When α is low, the

judge is morally unrestrained and his decision is very biased even if the facts of the case strongly

disfavor his preferred party. For example, when α = 0 , ideal damages do not depend on actual

harm: d V* (h) = 1 , d I* (h) = 0 . In this case, at low levels of harm, pro-V judges have the greatest

leeway to distort damages and the pro-V bias is stronger; at high levels of harm, pro-I judges have


                                                   12
the greatest leeway to distort damages and the pro-I bias is stronger. When instead α is high,

judges are morally restrained and bias their decisions only if the evidence favors their preferred

party. As a consequence, at low levels of harm the pro-I bias is stronger, while at high levels of

harm the pro-V bias is stronger. Notice that α determines the extent of moral fault: at higher

levels of harm, adjudication is more pro-V precisely when judges are morally restrained ( α is

high), and more pro-I when instead judges are unrestrained ( α is low). In the intermediate case

of α = 1 , pro-I and pro-V biases are exactly equal at every level of harm.

       Consider the slope of average damages with respect to harm under the functional forms in

(7). In the interest of analytical simplicity, Sections 4 and 5 focus on the case where α = 0

(judges are morally unrestrained). We then have:

Corollary 2. When α > 1 , average damages are too steep in h. When α ≤ 1 , average damages

are too flat in h. When α = 1 and ι = ν , average damages are first best.

       The key parameter determining the slope of average damages is “moral restraint” α .

When α > 1 , average damages are too steep. Figure 1 below plots the case with α = 2 :



                 E ( d h)




                                             ι /(ι + ν )              h

                                           Figure 1




                                                 13
       The bold line plots average damages under fact discretion (for α = 2) , the diagonal plots

the first best level of damages. The two curves intersect at h = ι /(ι + ν ) , but average damages are

generally not optimal.        In particular, judges’ moral restraint implies that the pro-V bias is

relatively stronger at high levels of harm. As a result, average damages are too steep as a function

of harm, being too low at low h and too high at high h.

       What about the opposite case where α < 1 ? Figure 2 below plots the case where α = 0 :


                   E ( d h)




                                                                    h

                                              h = ν /(ι + ν )
                                            Figure 2.

       The bold line plots average damages under fact discretion (for α = 0) against first best

damages (the diagonal). Unlike in the previous case, now expected damages are too flat. The

reason is that, for α = 0 , the damages set by biased judges are insensitive to harm: the ideal

damages of pro-V judges are equal to 1, those of pro-I judges are equal to 0, regardless of h. As a

result, when h < ν /(ι + ν ) average damages are too high; when h > ν /(ι + ν ) , they are too low.

       This flexible formulation of judicial biases also allows for the possibility that pro-V and

pro-I biases exactly cancel out, so that average damages are unbiased and the first best is attained.

This knife edge case arises when α = 1 provided that ι = ν , namely that there is an equal

proportion of pro-I and pro-V judges. This result shows that when legal errors are not purely




                                                   14
random, as in Kaplow and Shavell (1996), but rather a product of the deliberate decisions of

utility maximizing judges, it is unlikely that opposite errors cancel out on average.

          Because in this model average damages determine I’s precautions, fact discretion also

affects the observed severity of accidents. If average damages are too flat (i.e., if α < 1 ), under-

precautions and thus accidents prevail at high levels of h. For a given total number of accidents,

there are too many major accidents. If instead average damages are too steep (i.e., if α > 1 ),

under-precautions and thus accidents prevail at low levels of h. For a given total number of

accidents, there are too many minor accidents. Judges’ “moral restraint” (Bauer 1933) determines

the severity of accidents. If moral restraint is low, there are many major accidents because, at

high levels of harm, the low damages set by pro-I judges induce under-precautions. If instead

moral restraint is high, there are many minor accidents because, at high levels of harm, not only

are pro-V judges very harsh with I, but pro-I judges are not sympathetic to him either.9

          Consider next the impact of judicial biases on the total number of accidents. In this

model, the total number of accidents is pinned down by average damages, and is equal to

      [             ]
1 − E E (d j (h) h) . In the first best, the number of accidents is 1/2. Under fact discretion, we find:


Corollary 3. Under settled law, the number of accidents is first best if and only if ι = ν . The

number of accidents increases in the relative proportion of pro-I judges, ι / ν .

          The number of accidents depends on the relative proportion of pro-I and pro-V judges. If

pro-I judges are relatively more prevalent, the average level of damages and thus precautions are

too low, and there are too many accidents. The converse is true if pro-V judges are relatively

more prevalent. The number of accidents should be higher in the areas of law where relatively

more judges are biased in favor of the injurer.
9
  These results relate to the research on accuracy in adjudication (e.g., Kaplow 1994), which stresses that legal error
may exert two opposite effects on precautions: false liability (excessive damages) induce over-precautions, false non-
liability (or insufficient damages) induces under-precautions (Craswell and Calfee 1986). By modeling legal error as
the deliberate decision of utility maximizing judges, we find that one key determinant of which of these two errors is
more prevalent is the number of pro-V and pro-I judges. But we also find that whether over-precautions prevail at
higher or lower levels of harm depends on the judge’s moral restraint.


                                                          15
        More broadly, while fact discretion makes facts less helpful in predicting trial outcomes, it

makes judicial preferences more helpful for so doing. Independent measures of judicial bias

should predict resolution of identical disputes. Knowing who the judge is should be useful to

researchers, and not just to litigants. There is by now an enormous literature indicating that race,

gender, and the party of the nominating President affects the decisions of appellate judges,

especially in politically sensitive cases. Some of the key studies are George and Epstein (1992),

Brenner and Spaeth (1995), Revesz (1997), Pinello (1999), Klein (2002), Sunstein, Schkade and

Ellman (2004), and Hansford and Spriggs (2006). For trial courts, the evidence is more limited,

although some studies find significant exercise of discretion in criminal sentencing (Partridge and

Eldridge 1974, Abrams et al. 2006) and in bankruptcy decisions (Chang and Schoar 2006).



4. Fact Discretion and Appellate Review

        A second possible determinant of fact discretion – pertinent to judges but not juries -- is

appellate review. Our model of appellate review relies on the generally accepted idea that

appellate courts take the trial courts’ fact finding as given (except in the cases of “clear error”),

but can reverse trial courts if the law was misapplied to the found facts. Although there are some

exceptions, the acceptance of trial court’s fact finding by appellate courts is a central feature of

common law, which distinguishes it from the civil law tradition. One explanation is the greater

reliance of common law adjudication on open trials and on oral examination of witnesses at trial

as a strategy of gathering evidence, which is not easily compatible with appellate review of fact

finding (see Merryman 1985, Glaeser and Shleifer 2002).

        For concreteness, suppose that a (randomly selected) trial court solves dispute h by

choosing (d’,h’( h )), where h’( h ) ∈ [0,1] is the trial court’s (potentially distorted) finding of facts

and d’ ∈ [0,1] is the corresponding level of damages set by the judge. After the trial, the case is

automatically appealed. The appellate court can either affirm or reverse the trial court’s ruling.



                                                   16
We assume that trial judges dislike being reversed and incur a psychic or reputational loss r > 0

when this happens. We also assume that α = 0 , so that ideal damages are equal to 0 for pro-I

judges, and 1 for pro-V judges, regardless of h.         As before, the exercise of fact discretion is

assumed to be costly to the trial judge.

        An appeals court is randomly selected from the population of such courts. Crucially,

appeals courts’ preferences are identically distributed to those of the trial courts. In contrast to

Bueno de Mesquita and Stephenson (2002) and Shavell (2006), we thus allow appellate courts to

also be biased. The selected appeals court verifies whether the facts h’( h ) found by the trial court

warrant the applied level of damages d’. If they do, the appellate court affirms the trial court’s

ruling. Otherwise, the appellate court reverses the ruling. Since the appeals court does not need

to work on the facts, it can costlessly set any damage level, i.e., faces c = 0.

        In deciding whether to affirm or to reverse, the appellate court maximizes its utility but is

compelled to apply the prevailing legal rule. If – given the trial court’s fact finding h’( h ) – the

trial court’s damages d’ are consistent with the prevailing legal rule, then the appellate court must

affirm, even if its bias tempts it to set a different level of damages. In contrast, if the law specifies

that a level of damages d ' ' ≠ d ' should be set at h’( h ), then – irrespective of its preferences – the

appellate court must reverse and award d ' ' . The more interesting case arises when the law is

unsettled, in that for some facts h’( h ) the prevailing legal rule does not specify what level of

damages should be correctly applied. In the explosion example, suppose that precedents have not

settled whether victims should be compensated for mental suffering. As we show in Section 4.2,

in that case the decision to affirm or to reverse crucially depends on the appellate court’s bias.



4.1 Appellate Review under Settled Law

    An immediate consequence of the working of judicial review in our model is that, under

settled law, judicial review is irrelevant: trial courts can avoid reversal and still be able to set their



                                                   17
preferred damages by simply distorting the facts. For example, when harm is h0 but the trial

judge wants to set d ' = h1 ≠ h0 , he just needs to find h' (h0 ) = h1 . Because the appellate court

takes h1 as given, it cannot reverse d ' = h1 : this ruling is precisely the one mandated by strict

liability for the facts found. Reversal would only occur if the trial court finds h0 but sets d = h1 ,

since then d = h1 is a misapplication of the law to the facts. Yet, the trial court never chooses the

latter strategy: reversal can be simply avoided by engaging in fact discretion. We are back to the

findings of Section 3. Note that, because in our model appellate courts are just as biased as trial

courts, allowing the former to review the latter’s fact finding would not change our results: it

would only transfer to the appellate courts the ultimate control over fact discretion.



4.2 Appellate Review under Unsettled Law

       Trial courts often deal with cases in which the mapping from true harm to damages

remains unsettled by previous legal rulings. Because such gaps in the law are filled by appellate

courts, a trial judge’s freedom to set damages is limited by the appellate review of his decision.

       This situation, which we call unsettled law, is typical in common law, where legal rules

are a by-product of judges resolving specific disputes. When existing precedents fail to exhaust

all factual circumstances, and new facts arise in a case, a trial judge who reports these facts

truthfully must consider which precedent is controlling. After he renders his decision, the losing

party may appeal his ruling by insisting that a more favorable precedent should be applied to the

facts found by the trial court. An appellate court must then decide whether, given these facts, the

current case as a matter of law is “closer” to the plaintiff’s or the defendant’s preferred precedent.

       We capture the idea of unsettled law by studying the case with two precedents governing

damages in the tort between I and V: one of them is the case (h=0, d=0); the other is the case

(h=1, d=1). For harm levels away from the existing precedents, i.e. for h'∈ (0,1) , the law is

silent. This situation is represented below, with the two precedents highlighted in bold.


                                                  18
                                                     h'


                           0                                                    1
                                                  Figure 3.

       To choose damages, an appellate court interprets the current case in light of existing

precedents. It may deem h’ sufficiently analogous to h=0 and resolve the legal ambiguity in favor

of d=0. Alternatively, the appellate court may deem h’ analogous to the precedent h=1 and set

d=1. Finally, the appellate court may distinguish h from both precedents and award a third (new)

level of damages. As an example, suppose that a trial court finds that to properly estimate the

total harm h ∈ (0,1) , a new influence on harm must be introduced (e.g., mental anguish in an

explosion),   which was not considered in existing precedents. An appeals court may deem the

new aspect of harm immaterial and set damages by analogy with existing precedents, or it may

distinguish the current case from precedents based on mental anguish, and deliver a new ruling.

       The choice of different appeals courts among these alternatives is key to understanding

how judicial review affects trial judges’ incentives to engage in fact discretion. To avoid reversal,

a trial court considering reporting facts h ∈ (0,1) (i.e., considering whether to introduce the new

influence on harm) must also consider what level of damages an appellate court will itself choose

at h ∈ (0,1) . When all appellate courts are unbiased, the matter is simple. The trial court simply

reports h and sets d = h, and the appellate court affirms by distinguishing the case from the

precedents. In this case, unsettled law does not matter. Matters differ when some appellate courts

are biased. Consider the appellate courts’ reaction to a generic trial ruling (d’,h’( h )).

Lemma 1: At h’=0 and h’=1, the trial court is affirmed if and only if d’=0 and d’=1, respectively.

If h’ ∈ (0,1), pro-V appeals courts reverse any d’<1, pro-I appeals courts reverse any d’>0, while

unbiased appeals courts reverse any d’ ≠ h' .

       Not surprisingly, appellate courts exploit legal ambiguities to affirm their biases. If the

facts fit into existing precedents (i.e., h’=0 or 1), there is no legal ambiguity and appellate courts


                                                   19
affirm trial court rulings, consistent with those precedents (i.e., d’=0 or 1, respectively). But if

h'∈ (0,1) , the resolution of legal uncertainty over damages depends on the bias of the appellate

court reviewing the case. A trial court’s finding of no mental anguish is radically different from

the finding that mental anguish should be excluded from the damage calculation. The former

decision simply cannot be reversed, but the latter one can. Indeed, suppose the only harm at stake

is mental anguish h, and the trial court rules that it is not cognizable for the damage calculation,

so d=0. In this case, a Pro-I appellate court affirms the ruling that mental anguish is not

cognizable, a Pro-V reverses and sets d=1, by analogy with the existing precedent of severe

harm.10 An unbiased appellate court also reverses, rules that mental anguish is an admissible

harm, but sets damages d = h. The trial court can avoid this appellate scrutiny, and possible

reversal, by simply distorting the facts of the case so that one of the precedents applies exactly. In

this case, fact discretion is no longer a prerogative of biased judges (cf. Garratt v. Dailey).

           To see that, consider how judicial review affects an unbiased trial judge’s fact finding

policy h' (h) ? Suppose that h ∈ (0,1) . If the unbiased trial judge engages in fact discretion and

rules (d ' = 0, h' = 0) , he loses (1 + c)h 2 / 2 ; if he rules (d ' = 1, h' = 1) , he loses (1 + c)(1 − h) 2 / 2 . In

neither case he gets reversed. If instead the unbiased trial judge finds h' (h) ∈ (0,1) , by Lemma 1

he optimally finds the truth and rules (d ' = h, h' = h) . In this case, his expected loss is:

                                     ι (h 2 / 2 + r ) + u 0 + ν ((1 − h) 2 / 2 + r )                                      (8)

The first term is the trial judge’s loss from reversal by a Pro-I appeals court that sets d’=0. The

third term is the trial judges’ loss from reversal by a Pro-V appeals court that sets d’=1. If the

appeals court is unbiased, it affirms the unbiased trial judge’s ruling, who then loses nothing.

           By comparing a trial court’s loss from alternative strategies, we see that unbiased judges

trade off the gain from setting first best damages against the total reversal cost. Reversal is costly

to the trial judge for two reasons. First, the appellate court may set damages too far away from

10
     The assumption that precedents are equivalent to the biased judges’ ideal points is not important for our results.


                                                               20
the trial judge’s ideal points. Second, the trial judge bears the psychic or reputational cost r.

Taking into account the behavior of all trial courts, we find:


Proposition 2: If c ≤ 1 and r ≥ 1 , there are two thresholds hV , h I such that pro-I trial judges set

(h’=d’=0) for h ≤ h I and ( h' = d ' = ch /(u + c) ) otherwise, pro-V judges set (h’=d’=1) for h ≥ hV

and ( h' = d ' = (u + ch) /(u + c) ) otherwise. There are two thresholds h U , h U ( h U ≤ 1 / 2 ≤ h U ) such

that unbiased judges set (h’=d’=0) for h < hU , (h’= d’= 1) for h > h U and (h’=d’=h) otherwise.


        As long as the cost of fact discretion is not too high (i.e., if c ≤ 1 ) and the reversal cost is

sufficiently high (i.e., if r ≥ 1 ), biased trial courts try to follow the precedent that is closest to

their bias. They refrain from doing so (and moderate their exercise of fact discretion) only if the

current facts are sufficiently far from their preferred precedent (relative to the reversal cost r).

        More importantly, and in contrast with the previous section, under unsettled law even

unbiased judges engage in fact discretion. Unbiased judges would ideally avoid fact discretion.

However, with unsettled law, fear of reversal by a biased appellate court encourages them to

distort fact finding so as to fit the current case into settled precedents. Since unbiased appeals

courts never reverse (d’=h,h’(h)=h), unbiased trial courts facing no risk of appellate bias would

always find h' (h) = h . Figure 4 depicts adjudication by unbiased trial courts in terms of the

cutoff points h , h for various decisions.

                     (d ' = 0, h' (h) = 0) (d ' = h, h' (h) = h)    (d ' = 1, h' (h) = 1)


                                           hU                      hU                       h

                                                   Figure 4.


Corollary 4: h U − h U increases in u, c and decreases in r. There exists a û such that, for u ≤ uˆ ,

h U = h U = 1 / 2 and h V = 0, h I = 1 .



                                                       21
        The size of the region where unbiased trial courts do not engage in fact discretion

increases in c, falls in the proportion of biased judges and in the pain of reversal r. The same is

true for the region where biased courts prefer not to fit the case in their preferred precedents. In

particular, when u ≤ uˆ , the cost of reversal is so high that trial courts always fit the case into

existing precedents and even unbiased judges always engage in fact discretion.

        What is the impact of unbiased courts’ fact discretion on precautions and welfare? We
                                                                     )
answer this question by focusing on the case of Corollay 4 where u ≤ u .                   Besides being

analytically more tractable, this case allows a sharper evaluation of how judicial review affects

fact discretion. Figure 5 below plots average damages in this case.


                E ( d h)

                                                                               u +ν




                    ν                           Figure 4.




                                                Figure 5.                  h

        Compared to settled law, where average damages smoothly increase with harm, under

unsettled law damages jump sharply at h = 1/2. Now biased judges rule, irrespective of harm,

according to their preferred precedent, while unbiased judges only condition adjudication on

whether h is above or below 1/2. In this case, social welfare has the following properties:

Proposition 3: Under unsettled law, if c ≤ 1, r ≥ 1 and u ≤ uˆ , welfare is lower than in the first

best. There exists a u * ∈ [uˆ ,1] such that social welfare increases in u if and only if u < u * .




                                                    22
        Under unsettled law, fact discretion lowers social welfare relative to the first best. When

u < u * , as with settled law, judicial bias reduces the extent to which damages vary with harm,

thereby inducing over and under-precautions. Yet, in contrast to settled law, under unsettled law

greater polarization is beneficial for u ≥ u * . Intuitively, an increase in the share of biased judges

reduces the jump in damages and thus in precautions at h = 1/2. Because the marginal cost of

precautions is increasing, this beneficially reduces the average cost of precautions by smoothing

them across harm levels. In contrast to Proposition 2, under the assumed parametric conditions

the cost of fact discretion c does not affect social welfare at the margin.

        More importantly, the main observable implications of fact discretion arising from judicial

review line up with those arising from judicial bias. It is obviously still the case that the identity

of the trial judge matters, and that measurable judicial bias affects trial outcomes, though now

even unbiased judges make biased decisions. It is still the case that damages are unpredictable

from true harm, the more so the greater the polarization of judicial biases. Specifically, we have:

Corollary 5: If c ≤ 1, r ≥ 1 and u ≤ uˆ , under unsettled law V j (d j (h)) = ν (1 − ν ) for h ≤ 1 / 2 , and

V j (d j (h)) = ι (1 − ι ) otherwise. Unpredictability increases as ι and ν increase.


        With respect to the number of accidents, it is still the case that too many accidents occur if

and only if ι > ν . With respect to the severity of accidents, it is still the case that at very high

levels of harm damages are flat and there are too many bad accidents. However, the sharp jump

in damages occurring at intermediate levels of harm implies that there are also too many moderate

accidents, which is consistent with the steepness of incentives in that region.

        One predicted consequence of judicial fact discretion arising from judicial review is new.

Specifically, we expect that in complex and unsettled areas of law, where determination of

liability requires answers to a variety of factual questions, the exercise of fact discretion would be

more pronounced. If a researcher had an independent ability to observe the facts (perhaps from



                                                    23
the documentary record), and compare them to the judge’s summary of the evidence, it is

precisely in these complex fact-intensive areas of law that we expect the greatest mismatch

between the true facts and the judge’s representation of those facts. For it is precisely in these

areas of law that mischaracterization of the evidence best protects the judge from reversal.



5. Fact Discretion and Litigation

           So far we have focused on the behavior of trial judges, and treated the conduct of the

litigants mechanically. In this section, we focus on the interaction between fact discretion and the

behavior of litigants.11 In particular, we examine the consequences of allowing judges both to

invest in finding out the true harm and to rely on the information supplied by the litigants if they

so choose. We compare the outcomes obtained under settled law, with those obtained under

unsettled law. We show that with fact discretion: a) litigants take partisan positions during trial as

opposed to presenting the truth, even with settled law but especially with unsettled law, and b)

litigants may go to trial even when they agree on the facts of the case, because fact discretion

introduces extra-factual uncertainty about the trial outcome, especially under unsettled law.

           Consider the following game played by the litigants and the judge. Suppose the parties

failed to settle and end up in a trial before a judge with a known bias (we discuss settlement later).

Each party P = I, V sends to the judge a message hP concerning the level of harm. A litigant’s

message about harm represents his position in court and conveniently summarizes a possibly

extensive characterization of evidence that the litigant submits to the judge. In this respect, a

litigant’s position is the more partisan, the closer it is to his desired level of damages.

           We continue to assume that judicial preferences are given by (7), with α = 0 . Instead of

assuming that the judge finds out h costlessly, we assume that, after receiving the parties’




11
     For simplicity, we abstract from I’s choice of precautions and only study the choice of litigation vs. settlement.


                                                             24
messages, the judge decides whether to find out h at the cost of k (hV − hI ) 2 / 2 , with 0<k<1/3.12

If the judge does not find out the truth, he rules according to one of the parties’ messages (the cost

of that is assumed to be zero). If the judge becomes informed, he has the additional possibility of

finding a new level of harm that is a combination of true harm and the judge’s preferred message

among hI , hV . For algebraic simplicity, we study the case where the weight attributed to the

preferred party’s message is positive but negligible.



5.1. Fact Discretion and Litigation under Settled Law

The Litigants’ Positions under Settled Law

           When appearing before a judge with a known bias, the party that judge favors sends a

message equal to the judge’s ideal damages. The other party’s message is irrelevant: in front of a

Pro-V judge, V sends h = 1 and the judge sets d = 1, irrespective of I’s message; in front of a Pro-

I judge, I presents h = 0 and the judge sets d = 0. In this setting, the cost of fact discretion does

not affect adjudication because the litigants themselves provide distorted facts to biased judges.

           Suppose, in contrast, that the judge is unbiased. Let the litigants’ messages be hI , hV , with

hI ≤ h ≤ hv , where h is true harm. (This is always true in equilibrium.) Then, if the judge decides

to find out the truth, he rules ( d ' = h, h' = h ), bearing a loss of k (hV − hI ) 2 / 2 . If instead the judge

does not find out h, his loss is identical if he sets either d = hI or d = hV and is equal to

(hV − hI ) 2 / 6 . Because k<1/3, the judge is always better off finding h. What is the impact of

such judicial strategy on the parties’ optimal choice of hI , hV ?


Proposition 4: Under settled law, if the judge is unbiased hI = hV = h for any h, and d = h. If



12
     The cost is assumed to increases in hI − hV because the parties’ messages are barely informative when they are
far apart and the judge must collect more data on his own and bear a higher cost. This assumption simplifies the
analysis but our main results also hold with a fixed cost.


                                                          25
the judge is pro-V, then hV = 1 , hI can take any value and d = 1. If the judge is pro-I, then

hI = 0 , hV can take any value and d = 0.


       By allowing unbiased judges to accurately fine tune damages to harm, settled law gives

unbiased judges a strong incentive to verify harm. As a result, each litigant tries to move closer

and closer to the actual h so as to avoid having the judge shade damages against him. Settled law

dampens partisanship by giving unbiased judges a strong incentive to scrutinize the litigants’

positions in court. When k > 1 / 3 , judges never find out the truth and Proposition 4 no longer

holds. We assume that k ≤ 1 / 3 to illustrate the difference between settled and unsettled law in

shaping litigants’ partisanship.



Litigation vs. Settlement under Settled Law

       Suppose now that, before learning the judge’s type, the disputants have an opportunity to

settle. What is the impact of fact discretion for the incidence of litigation under settled law? If

settlement is cheaper than litigation, then parties litigate only in the presence of bargaining

frictions, which may result from litigants’ over-optimism (Landes 1971, Posner 1972) or private

information (Bebchuk 1984) about the merits of the case. Although in our model the parties fully

agree on the facts of the case, they may still fail to settle if each party is optimistic about the

possibility of getting a favorable judge. This latter scenario is even more plausible when, as

argued by Frank (1930), a judge’s bias reflects his idiosyncratic sympathy or antipathy toward

specific litigants rather than more stable, and therefore predictable in advance, policy preferences.

A judge may be annoyed with a lawyer from an earlier case, sympathetic to one who previously

clerked for him, or deferential to a government attorney who works in the same building.

       Consider the parties’ decision to settle or litigate a case h. For simplicity, we follow

Yildiz (2004) and study the situation where the parties’ failure to settle is due to heterogeneous

beliefs rather than to asymmetric information. Suppose that there is an equal proportion of pro-I


                                                 26
and pro-V judges and that I believes that the share of Pro-I judges is inflated by a factor (1 + δ )

and that of Pro-V judges is deflated by a factor (1 − δ ) , while V misperceives the share of Pro-I

and Pro-V judges the other way around. δ ≥ 0 captures the divergence in litigants’ beliefs: when

δ is higher, both parties are more optimistic about the case being tried by a favorable judge. If

the individual litigation cost is C > 0, litigants’ expected payoffs from litigating case h are:

            Eu injurer = −(1 / 2)(1 − u )(1 + δ )0 − (1 − u )h − (1 / 2)(1 − u )(1 − δ ) − C
                                                                                                       (9)
            Eu victim = (1 / 2)(1 − u )(1 − δ )0 + (1 − u )h + (1 / 2)(1 − u )(1 + δ ) − C

With these payoffs, the parties fail to find a mutually profitable settlement amount paid by the

injurer to the victim and thus litigate if and only if:

                                         (1 / 2)(1 − u )δ ≥ C                                         (10)

From this expression, we immediately obtain:

Proposition 5: Under fact discretion, there exists a δ ∈ [0,1] such that the parties litigate if and

only if δ > δ . δ increases in u.


        Because under fact discretion judicial bias affects the setting of damages, the parties

litigate when they are sufficiently optimistic about the chance of getting a favorable judge (i.e.,

when δ is high enough). The required level of optimism is smaller when the proportion of biased

judges is higher. By introducing extrinsic factors such as judicial bias into trials, judicial fact

discretion may lead to wasteful litigation.

        This analysis of litigation under fact discretion yields two empirical predictions. First,

litigation should be more prevalent in the politically or socially charged areas of law, where

judicial views are more likely to be polarized. Likewise, litigation should be more prevalent in

more complex areas of law, where the application of legal rules requires the verification of many

factual issues, even if the legal rules themselves are clear and unambiguous.

        Second, when parties hold similar beliefs on the distribution of judicial bias and litigation




                                                         27
does not occur, we predict that – due to fact discretion – pre-trial (or more precisely, pre

revelation of judge’s type) settlement amounts in different cases would cluster around the mean

settlement, especially if judicial polarization is high. This finding stands in contrast with the

standard prediction of Priest and Klein (1984) that pre-trial settlements are especially likely to

occur when the facts of a dispute are clear. In their model, settlement amounts should reflect the

disparate facts of individual cases and presumably display considerable variance rather than

converge to the mean. On the other hand, as do Priest and Klein, our model predicts that

settlement amounts should spread out once the identity of the judge, and therefore presumably his

type, is revealed.   In such settlements, the party whose position the judge is expected to favor

should receive most of the benefit in the settlement.



5.2. Fact Discretion and Litigation under Unsettled Law

The Litigants’ Positions under Unsettled Law

       As we showed in Section 4, when the law is unsettled, even unbiased judges may set

damages at the extremes. In our model of litigation, this fact has two key implications. First,

unbiased judges may prefer to remain uninformed, because – in contrast to settled law – unsettled

law does not allow them to set their preferred damages anyway. Second, litigants may take

partisan positions to cater to even an unbiased judge’s need to fit the facts into the existing law.

       To see how this works, suppose that u ≤ uˆ , so unbiased judges only consider whether

harm is larger or smaller than 1/2 to choose between d=0 and d=1 (see Corollary 4). Then, if the

parties send h I = 0 , hV = 1 , and the judge becomes informed, he obtains:


                                                 ∫ [(1 − h)         ]
                               1/ 2              1
                                                                                     1 k
                                ∫ (h / 2)dh +                     / 2 dh + k / 2 =     +
                                    2                         2
                                                                                                  (11)
                                0               1/ 2
                                                                                     24 2

This expected loss equals the judge’s average loss from setting d=0 when h ≤ 1 / 2 and d=1 when

h > 1/2, plus the search cost k/2. Although the judge is fully informed, he rules according to the



                                                       28
parties’ extreme messages to avoid reversal. If instead the judge does not find out harm, his

expected loss is the same if he sets d=0 and d=1 and is equal to 1/6. Overall, we find:

Proposition 6: If k>1/4, under unsettled law even if the judge is unbiased the parties’ messages

are hI = 0 , hV = 1 and the judge randomizes between d = 0 and d = 1. If the judge is biased, then

the outcome is the same as under settled law.


       The key difference between settled and unsettled law concerns trials before an unbiased

judge. With unsettled law, unbiased judges sometimes remain uninformed and choose to fit the

case into an existing precedent. As a consequence, competition between parties is radically

different from that prevailing under settled law. Now competition leads to extreme partisanship,

not to convergence to the truth. To avoid reversal, even an unbiased judge may (randomly)

endorse a partisan message such as hI = 0 or hV = 1 as opposed to a message claiming that h is in

the middle. Litigants then compete by proposing extreme views so as to cater to the judge’s

demand for precedent-fitting narratives that render reversal less likely.        In court, plaintiffs

overreach and over-claim, while defendants refuse to acknowledge even the slightest liability for

harm, each hoping that the judge simply buys their story. One feature of this equilibrium is that

no information trickles up to appellate courts, which slows down legal evolution.



Litigation vs. Settlement under Unsettled Law

       In Section 5.1 we saw that, under settled law, one determinant of the decision to settle was

over-optimism about judicial bias. We now show that under unsettled law, litigation is more

likely, as disagreement over the judge’s bias is not even necessary to obtain litigation.

       Key to this finding is the result (Proposition 7) that, under unsettled law, even unbiased

judges might remain uninformed and thus indifferent among extreme outcomes (as long as u is

low enough). In such a case, litigants can hope to sway adjudication to their side through



                                                 29
courtroom tactics, persuasion techniques, and so on. As a consequence, litigants’ optimism about

their ability to sway and influence the decision of an indifferent judge can lead them to litigate,

irrespective of their optimism about judicial favour.

       For concreteness, parameterize the parties’ overconfidence about their ability to sway an

unbiased judge with σ > 0 . The injurer (victim) believes that he will be able to influence

unbiased judges to set d=0 (d=1) with probability (1 / 2 + σ ) . Then, much in the spirit of

expression (10), settlement fails when:

                                      [(1 / 2)(1 − u )δ + uσ ] ≥ C                             (12)

Just as under settled law, divergence in beliefs as to the proportion of biased judges ( δ ) in the

population fosters litigation. However, under unsettled law, the litigants’ optimism ( σ ) about

their ability to move an unbiased and therefore indifferent judge to their side also promotes

litigation. Under settled law, the impact of σ is downplayed because unbiased judges become

informed and have strict preferences over damages. While under settled law, then, the parties

readily settle after knowing the judge’s type, under unsettled law they may fail to do so even if the

judge is unbiased because disagreement remains until the ruling is released. Fact discretion

promotes litigation to a greater extent when the law is unsettled.

       Taken together, the results in sections 3-5 suggest that the common law system of dispute

resolution will perform particularly poorly when the cases are factually complex, the law is

unsettled, and fact-finder preferences are important for the determination of damages (or for that

matter of liability). These conditions seem to describe adequately the determination of damages

for pain and suffering, as well as of punitive damages, in product accident cases. Law and

economics scholarship has been highly critical of how damages are set in these situations (Viscusi

1988, 1998, Cooter 1988), blaming the randomness of observed outcomes on the lack of clarity in

the law, the sentiments of judges and juries, and the actual complexity of finding the correct

answer. These conditions are, of course, a recipe for trouble in our model.



                                                 30
6. Conclusion

       We have presented two models of judicial fact discretion. In the first, the motivation for

the exercise of fact discretion is a trial judge’s preference over the outcomes of litigation. This

model is probably most relevant for politicized or otherwise emotionally charged disputes. In the

second model, the motivation for the exercise of fact discretion is trial judges’ aversion to reversal

by appellate courts, which leads them to fit the facts of the current dispute into available

precedents. This model is probably most relevant for new and developing areas of law, with

significant factual complexity and relatively few precedents. For both models, we have shown

that, consistent with the standard view of practicing attorneys, the outcome of a trial is determined

at least in part by who the judge is. Fact discretion leads to judicial behavior that is unpredictable

from the facts of the case, but predictable from the knowledge of judicial preferences. We have

also shown that the exercise of fact discretion leads to systematic distortions in individual

behavior, to excessive and acrimonious litigation, as well as to welfare losses.

       In conclusion, we briefly mention some issues suggested by our model that we did not

analyze. First, the model implies clearly and perhaps significantly that summaries of relevant

facts that accompany written judicial opinions cannot be trusted. As we saw in Garratt v Dailey

and discussed throughout the paper, when judges summarize the facts, they do so to justify their

legal conclusions. When a judge exercises fact discretion, this summary need not reflect the true

facts of the case, even as seen and believed by the judge. In some instances, the summary of the

facts might be possible to check against other available documents. Unfortunately, from the

viewpoint of a researcher, a journalist, or a law student, the judge’s summary is often all that is

available. This aspect of judicial opinions does not necessarily undermine the study of legal

principles, but may shed only a dim light on the actual facts of any given case.

       Second, without conducting a full analysis, our model suggests some possible strategies

for using legal procedure to contain the effects of fact discretion. One strategy is to limit the



                                                 31
range of legally cognizable harms.        The economic loss doctrine might be one important

manifestation of this general principle.      Another strategy is to introduce procedural rules

concerning admissibility of evidence or even, as in civil law systems, more extensive appellate

review of fact finding. When judicial fact discretion becomes extreme, dispute resolution in court

may become socially inefficient. In those instances, adjudication can be replaced by ex ante

regulation that does not rely on fact finding (Glaeser and Shleifer 2003).

       Third, we have focused our analysis on the exercise of fact discretion by judges, although

of course the same phenomenon might be as or more prevalent among juries (Kalven and Zeisel

1966). In the case of juries, legal strategies aiming to control fact discretion tend to focus on the

rules of evidence rather than on re-specifications of legal rules that might not impress juries.

       As a final point, we note that this paper is part of a growing body of research that suggests

that the consequences and the efficiency of alternative legal arrangements cannot be evaluated

without an explicit discussion of preferences and incentives of law enforcers.             Rules and

arrangements that appear highly desirable with benevolent and unbiased law enforcers, such as

strict liability with all harms being legally cognizable, lose at least part of their appeal when

enforced opportunistically. Judicial fact discretion is but one, although possibly very important,

manifestation of this broader problem.




                                                 32
Proofs


                                                              ∫ [(1 − p                            ]
                                                              1
Proof of Proposition 1. Social losses are                                  sl   (h))h + p sl (h) 2 / 2 dh . For each h, optimal
                                                              0

precautions are p fb (h) = h . If for some h, p sl (h) ≠ h , social losses are larger than in the first
                                       [           ]
best. Hence, if for some h E d *j (h) ≠ h , the first best is attained iff c → ∞ . A marginal change
                                           1
p sl ' (h) triggers a change L' = ∫ p sl ' (h)[ p sl (h) − h]dh in social losses. It is immediate to find that
                                           0

∂p sl ' (h) / ∂c = [h − p sl (h)] /(1 + c)        and ∂p sl ' (h) / ∂u = [h − p sl (h)] /(1 − u ) .      This implies that
∂L / ∂c < 0, ∂L / ∂u < 0, ∂ 2 L / ∂c∂u > 0 .♠

Proof of Corollary 1. By inspection. ♠
Proof of Corollary 2. Consider α > 1. Damages are first best at h = 0, h = 1 and at
                        [                  ]
h * = (ι /ν )1 /(α −1) / 1 + (ι /ν )1 /(α −1) . Damages are too steep iff ∂Ed *j (h * ) / ∂h > 1 because damages
are too low iff h < h * . This is always true for α > 1 . Consider α < 1 . Damages are first best at h
                                                    [                  ]
= 0, h = 1 and at h * = (ν / ι )1 /(1−α ) / 1 + (ν / ι )1 /(1−α ) . Damages are too flat iff ∂Ed *j (h * ) / ∂h < 1
because damages are too low iff h > h * . This is always true iff α < 1 . Consider α = 1 . If ι = ν
damages are optimal at any h. If ι ≠ ν damages are only optimal at h = 0 and h = 1. For h ∈ (0,1)
damages are too low if ι > ν and too high ι < ν .♠

                                                                                         [
Proof of Corollary 3. First of all, note that Ed j (h) = h + νh α (1 − h) − ιh(1 − h) α . In addition,        ]
                                                                                                      (ν − ι )
 1
∫h
 0
       α                1
           (1 − h)dh = ∫ h(1 − h) α dh =
                        0
                                                      1
                                               (α + 1)(α + 2)
                                                                                     [
                                                              . Thus, 1 − E d j (h) = 1 / 2 −](1 + c)(α + 1)(α + 2)
                                                                                                                    .♠

Proof of Lemma 1. A trial ruling (h’=d’= 0) or (h’=d’= 0) is not reversed: appeals courts must
follow precedent. In any other case, and for h’ ∈ (0,1), appeals courts can reverse. pro-V appeals
courts reverse any d’<1, pro-I appeals courts any d’>0, unbiased appeals courts any d’ ≠ h' .♠
Proof of Proposition 2. We must consider three cases. A) Unbiased judges. For h = 0 and h = 1
the trial judge finds the truth, sets d = 0 and d = 1 respectively, and is not reversed. If h ∈ (0,1)
and the trial judge rules (d ' = 0, h' = 0) , he loses (1 + c)h 2 / 2 ; if he rules (d ' = 1, h' = 1) , he loses
(1 + c)(1 − h) 2 / 2 . If the judge rules (d ' = h, h' = h) , his loss is (1 − u )r + ιh 2 / 2 + ν (1 − h) 2 / 2 . Call
              ν 2 + 2(u + c)[(1 − u )r + ν / 2] − ν
hU * ≡                                   and hU = min[1 / 2, hU * ] . If h ≤ 1 / 2 , the judge find the
                   u+c
truth for h > hU , (d ' = 0, h' = 0) otherwise. If h > 1 / 2 , the judge finds the truth for
h < h U ≡ 1 − h U , (d ' = 1, h' = 1) otherwise.             B) Pro-I judges. If the judge rules (d ' = 1, h' = 1) he
loses 1 / 2 + c(1 − h) 2 / 2 , if he rules (d ' = 0, h' = 0) he loses ch 2 / 2 . For c ≤ 1 the pro-I trial judge
always prefers (d ' = 0, h' = 0) to (d ' = 1, h' = 1) . If the judge sets d ' = h'∈ (0,1) , he solves
 min (1 − u )r + ν / 2 + u (h' ) 2 / 2 + c(h − h' ) 2 / 2 , thereby setting h' = ch /(u + c) and bearing a loss of
  h'

                                                     1
(1 − u )r + ν / 2 + uch 2 / 2(u + c) .                  2(u + c)[(1 − u )r + ν / 2] and h I = min[1, hI * ] .
                                                 Define hI * ≡
                                                     c
Then, the judge rules (d ' = 0, h' = 0) for h < h I and sets d ' = h' = ch /(u + c) otherwise. C) Pro-V


                                                                  33
judges. If the judge rules (d ' = 1, h' = 1) he loses c(1 − h) 2 / 2 , if he rules (d ' = 0, h' = 0) he loses
1 / 2 + ch 2 / 2 . For c ≤ 1 the pro-I trial judge always prefers (d ' = 1, h' = 1) to (d ' = 0, h' = 0) . For
 d ' = h'∈ (0,1) the judge solves min (1 − u )r + ι / 2 + u (1 − h' ) 2 / 2 + c(h − h' ) 2 / 2 , thereby setting
                                            h'

h' = (u + ch) /(u + c) and bearing a loss of (1 − u )r + ι / 2 + uc(1 − h) 2 / 2(u + c) .               Define
           1
hV * ≡ 1 −     2(u + c)[(1 − u )r + ι / 2] and h V = max[0, hV * ]. Then, the judge rules (d ' = 1, h' = 1) for
           c
h > hV and sets d ' = h' = (u + ch) /(u + c) otherwise. r ≥ 1 implies that h I > 0, h V < 1 .♠

Proof of Corollary 4.          h U − h U = 1 − 2h U , where hU = min[1 / 2, hU * ] and hU * is defined by
(1 − u )r + ιhU2 * / 2 + ν (1 − hU * ) 2 / 2 = (1 + c)hU2 * / 2 . By using the implicit function theorem, one can
verify that hU * (and thus h U ) decreases in u, c and increases in r. Similarly, one can prove that
hV * (and thus h V ) increases in u, c and decreases in r while hI * (and thus h I ) decreases in u, c
and increases in r. If u ≤ &u&& ≡ (8r − c) /(1 + 8r ) , then hU * ≥ 1 / 2 which implies hU = 1 / 2 .
Furthermore, there exists a u~ such that, for u ≤ u~ , h I = 1, h = 0 . Define uˆ = min[u~, &u&&] .♠
                                                                           V


Proof of Proposition 3. If c ≤ 1, r ≥ 1, u ≤ uˆ , precautions are p(h) = ν for h ≤ 1 / 2 , p(h) = 1 − ι
                                        [                                 ]
otherwise. Social losses are L = 1 − ν + 2ν 2 + 3ι + 2(1 − ι ) 2 / 8 , which is always larger than 1/3,
i.e. social losses in the first best.              Set ι /ν = θ and rewrite ι (u ) = (1 − u )θ /(1 + θ ) ,
ν (u ) = (1 − u ) /(1 + θ ) . Then, ∂L / ∂u = (−1 + 4ν )v' (u ) / 8 + [3 − 4(1 − ι )]ι ' (u ) / 8 . It is easy to see
                              r                                                         v
that ∂L / ∂u ≤ 0 iff u ≤ u = (3 + 3θ 2 − 2θ ) / 4(1 + θ 2 ) . Define u * = max[u , uˆ ] .♠

Proof of Corollary 5. By inspection.♠
Proof of Proposition 4. If the trial judge is pro-V, hV < 1 is not an equilibrium. If hV < 1 and
 hI < 1 , for any “search” strategy of the judge, V deviates to hV = 1 as the judge endorses (at least
partly) such higher message. If hV < 1 and hI = 1 , then – for any “search” strategy of the judge -
I deviates to a lower hI to prevent the judge from increasing damages. Hence, a pro-V judge
induces hV = 1 , hI ∈ [0,1] , d = 1. The judge does not search. Similarly, the equilibrium in front of
a pro-V judge has hV ∈ [0,1] , hI = 0 , d = 0 and the judge does not search. In front of an unbiased
judge, for any two reports hI , hV , with hI ≤ h ≤ hv , if the judge searches he rules ( d ' = h, h' = h ),
bearing cost k (hV − hI ) 2 / 2 . If the judge does not search, his loss is identical if he sets either

                                                 ∫ [(d − h)         ]
                                                                  / 2 [1 /(hV − hI )] = (hV − hI ) 2 / 6 , d = hI , hV .
                                                   hI
d = hI or d = hV         and is equal to                      2
                                                  hV

Because k<1/3, the judge always searches. When the unbiased judge searches, he negligibly
shades damages towards the message that was closer to h. What about the parties’ messages?
First, parties’ messages are never worse than the truth, i.e. hI ≤ h ≤ hv . Second, if the judge
searches, the parties’ competition to win the shading induces hI = hv = h for every h. As a result,
the equilibrium in front of an unbiased judge has hV = hI = h and d = h.♠

Proof of Proposition 5. By inspection.♠
Proof of Proposition 6. In front of biased judges, the behavior of the parties does not change.
Suppose the judge is unbiased and u ≤ uˆ . Even after observing the truth, an unbiased judge


                                                         34
chooses between d=0 and d=1 depending on whether h is larger or smaller than 1/2. Thus, if the
parties expect the judge to search, it is optimal for them to send h I = 0 , hV = 1 . By searching,
the judge obtains
                    1/ 2
                    ∫
                    0
                                         1
                           (h 2 / 2)dh + ∫
                                         1/ 2
                                                [(1 − h) / 2]dh + k / 2 = 1 / 24 + k / 2 .
                                                        2
                                                                                             If the judge does not
observe h, he is indifferent between d=0 and d=1: his expected loss is 1/6 in both cases. Thus,
even if the judge is unbiased, under unsettled law the parties send h I = 0 , hV = 1 . Furthermore,
for k ∈ [1 / 4,1 / 3] , under unsettled law unbiased judges decide not to observe harm. As a result,
the parties send h I = 0 , hV = 1 and the judge randomizes between d=0 and d=1.♠




                                                            35
                                           References

Abrams, David, Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2006), “Do Judges Vary in their

       Treatment of Race?,” Mimeo.

Bauer, Ralph (1933), “The Degree of Moral Fault as Affecting Defendant’s Liability,” University

       of Pennsylvania Law Review 81, 586-596.

Bebchuk, Lucian (1984), “Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information,” RAND

       Journal of Economics 15, 404-415.

Brenner, Saul, and Harold Spaeth (1995), Stare Indecisis: The Alteration of Precedent on the U.S.

       Supreme Court, 1946-1992, New York: Cambridge University Press.

Brunetti, John (1998), “Searching for Methods of Trial Court Fact-Finding and Decision

       Making,” Hastings Law Journal 49, 1491-1509.

Bueno de Mesquita, Ethan, and Mathew Stephenson, 2002, “Informative Precedent and

       Intrajudicial Communication,” American Political Science Review 90, 1-12.

Chang, Tom, and Schoar, Antoinette (2006), “The Effect of Judicial Bias in Chapter 11

       Reorganization,” MIT Mimeo

Cooter, Robert (1988), “Punitive Damages for Deterrence: When and How Much?,” Alabama

       Law Review 40, 1143-1196.

Craswell, Richard, and John Calfee (1986), “Deterrence and Uncertain Legal Standards,” Journal

       of Law, Economics, and Organization 2, 279-303.

Dershowitz, Alan, and John Hart Ely (1971), “Harris v. New York: Some Anxious Observations

       on the Candor and Logic of the Emerging Nixon Majority,” Yale Law Journal 80, 1198-

       1227.

Feige, David (2006), Indefensible, Boston: Little Brown.

Frank, Jerome (1930), Law and the Modern Mind, New York: Brentano’s.

Frank, Jerome (1932), “What Courts Do in Fact,” University of Illinois Law Review 26, 645.



                                               36
Frank, Jerome (1951), Courts on Trial, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Gennaioli, Nicola (2004), “Contracting in the Shadow of the Law,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Gennaioli Nicola, and Andrei Shleifer (2007), “The Evolution of Common Law,” Journal of

       Political Economy, forthcoming.

George, Tracey, and Lee Epstein (1992), “On the Nature of Supreme Court Decision Making,”

       American Political Science Review 86, 323-337.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer (2002), “Legal Origins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       117, 1193-1229.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer (2003), “The Rise of the Regulatory State,” Journal of

       Economic Literature 16, 401-425.

Hansford, Thomas, and James Spriggs, II (2006), The Politics of Precedent in the U.S. Supreme

        Court, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, forthcoming.

Hay, Jonathan, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1996), “Toward a Theory of Legal Reform,”

       European Economic Review 40, 559-567.

Henderson, James (2003), “MacPherson v. Buick Motor Company: Simplifying the Facts While

       Reshaping the Law,” in Robert Rabin and Stephen Sugarman, eds., Torts Stories, New

       York, NY: Foundation Press.

Hoffman, Adam (2001), “Coralling Constitutional Fact: De Novo Fact Review in the Federal

       Appellate Courts,” Duke Law Journal 50, 1427-1466.

Kalven, Harry, and Hans Zeisel (1966), The American Jury, Chicago, IL: The University of

       Chicago Press.

Kaplow, Louis (1992), “Rules versus Standards: An Economics Analysis,” Duke Law Journal 42,

       557-629.

Kaplow, Louis (1994), “The Value of Accuracy in Adjudication: An Economic Analysis,”

       Journal of Legal Studies 23, 307-401.



                                               37
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell (1994), “Accuracy in the Determination of Liability,” Journal

       of Law and Economics 37, 1-15.

Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell (1996), “Accuracy in the Assessment of Damages,” Journal

       of Law and Economics 39, 191-210.

Keeton, Robert, Lewis Sargentich, and Gregory Keating (2004), Tort and Accident Law, 4th ed.,

       St. Paul, MN: West.

Klein, David (2002), Making Law in the United States Courts of Appeals, Cambridge, U.K.:

       Cambridge University Press.

Landes, William (1971), “An Economic Analysis of the Courts,” Journal of Law and Economics

       14, 61-107.

Llewellyn, Karl (1951), The Bramble Bush, New York: Oceana, 1951.

Llewellyn, Karl (1960), The Common Law Tradition, Boston, MA: Little Brown.

Merryman, John (1985), The Civil Law Tradition, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer (2005), “The Market for News,” American Economic

       Review 95, 1031-1053.

Partridge, Anthony, and William Eldridge (1974), The Second Circuit Sentencing Study, Federal

       Judicial Center.

Pinello, Daniel (1999), “Linking Party to Judicial Ideology in American Courts: A Meta-

       analysis,” The Justice System Journal 3, 219-254.

Ponzetto, Giacomo and Patricio Fernandez (2006), “Case Law vs. Statute Law: An Evolutionary

       Comparison,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Posner, Richard (1972), “A Theory of Negligence,” Journal of Legal Studies 1, 29-96.

Posner, Richard (1990), Cardozo: A Study in Reputation, Chicago: the University of Chicago

       Press.




                                              38
Posner, Richard (2005), “Judicial Behavior and Performance: an Economic Approach,” Florida

       State University Law Review 32, 1259-1279.

Priest, George, and Benjamin Klein (1984), “The Selection of Disputes for Litigation,” Journal of

       Legal Studies 13, 31-50.

Revesz, Richard (1997), “Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the D.C. Circuit,” Virginia

       Law Review 83, 1717-1772.

Shavell, Steven (1987), Economic Analysis of Accident Law, Cambridge, MA: Harvard

       University Press.

Shavell, Steven (2005), “Optimal Discretion in the Application of Rules,” Mimeo.

Shavell, Steven (2006), “The Appeals Process and Adjudicator Incentives,” Journal of Legal

       Studies 35, 1-29

Stone, Julius (1985), Precedent and the Law: Dynamics of Common Law Growth, Sydney:

       Butterworths.

Sunstein, Cass, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman (2004), “Ideological Voting on Federal

       Courts of Appeals: a Preliminary Investigation,” Stanford Law Review 90, 301-354.

Viscusi, Kip (1988), “Pain and Suffering in Product Liability Cases: Systematic Compensation or

       Capricious Awards?,” International Review of Law and Economics 8, 203-220.

Viscusi, Kip (1998), “The Social Costs of Punitive Damages Against Corporations in

       Environmental and Safety Torts,” Georgetown Law Journal 87, 285-345.

Wyzanski, Charles (1972), “An Activist Judge: Mea Maxima Culpa, Apologia Pro Vita Mea,”

       Georgia Law Review 7, 202-225.

Yildiz, Muhamet (2004), “Waiting to Persuade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 223-248.




                                               39
