NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPLEX OWNERSHIP STRUCTURES AND CORPORATE VALUATIONS
Luc Laeven
Ross Levine
Working Paper 12675
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12675

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006

We thank Robert McDonald, an anonymous referee, Mike Burkart, Stijn Claessens, Armando Gomes,
Luc Renneboog, Karl Lins, Ivo Welch, Daniel Wolfenzon, and seminar participants at the University
of Minnesota and Tilburg University for helpful comments. Ying Lin provided expert research assistance.
This research was initiated while Laeven was at the World Bank. This paper's findings, interpretations,
and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not represent the views of the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank, their Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Luc Laeven and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Complex Ownership Structures and Corporate Valuations
Luc Laeven and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 12675
November 2006
JEL No. G3,G32,G34
ABSTRACT
The bulk of corporate governance theory examines the agency problems that arise from two extreme
ownership structures: 100 percent small shareholders or one large, controlling owner combined with
small shareholders. In this paper, we question the empirical validity of this dichotomy. In fact, one-third
of publicly listed firms in Europe have multiple large owners, and the market value of firms with multiple
blockholders differs from firms with a single large owner and from widely-held firms. Moreover, the
relationship between corporate valuations and the distribution of cash-flow rights across multiple large
owners is consistent with the predictions of recent theoretical models.
Luc Laeven
Senior Economist
International Monetary Fund and CEPR
700 19th Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
Llaeven@imf.org
Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu

The bulk of corporate governance theory examines the agency problems that arise from two
extreme ownership structures: (1) 100 percent small shareholders or (2) one large, controlling
owner combined with many small shareholders (see Shleifer and Vishny (1997) for a review). In the
first case, each small shareholder lacks the incentives or contractual mechanisms to align the
interests of managers with those of shareholders. Consequently, managers may exert substantial
discretion over firm decisions and divert corporate resources for private gain (Jensen and Meckling,
1976; Grossman and Hart, 1980). At the other extreme, the large shareholder either directly
manages the firm or internalizes the benefits from monitoring managers, which aligns managerial
interests with those of the large shareholder. This, however, creates a different agency problem. The
controlling owner may expropriate private benefits at the expense of other shareholders (e.g.,
Shleifer and Vishny, 1986; Stulz, 1988; and Burkart et al., 1997, 1998).
In this paper, we question the empirical validity of this dichotomy and assess theories of
more complex ownership structures involving multiple large owners. We first compute the
prevalence of complex ownership structures in a sample of 1,657 publicly traded firms in Europe.
We then examine whether investors value firms with multiple blockholders differently from widelyheld firms or those with a single large owner. Finally, we evaluate the predictions from theoretical
models regarding the valuation of firms with multiple blockholders.
In particular, a handful of theoretical models investigate the association between corporate
valuations and the distribution of cash-flow rights across large owners. In Bennedsen and
Wolfenzon (2000) large owners compete to form controlling coalitions because there are private
benefits from control. If the winning coalition has small cash-flow rights, then expropriation of
corporate resources involves only a small reduction in the controlling coalition’s cash-flows (Jensen
and Meckling, 1976; Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002). Thus, controlling coalitions with small cash-

1

flow rights have the incentives (small cash-flow rights) and ability (sufficient voting rights) to
divert corporate resources for private gain. The model further demonstrates that when cash-flow
rights are distributed unevenly across shareholders, this increases the likelihood of a winning
coalition with small cash-flow rights. Therefore, the model predicts a negative relationship between
the dispersion of cash-flow rights across large shareholders and corporate valuations.1 Rather than
focusing on coalition formation, Pagano and Roell (1998) specify conditions under which multiple
large shareholders cross-monitor each other, reducing expropriation and boosting valuations. Bloch
and Hege (2001) further show that enhanced monitoring is less likely when ownership is unevenly
distributed, which again implies a negative relationship between cash-flow rights dispersion and
valuations.
To assess the relationship between ownership structure and corporate valuations, we
compile data on voting and cash-flow rights for a cross-section of firms in Western Europe.
Following La Porta et al. (2002), a large owner is a legal entity that directly or indirectly controls at
least 10% of the voting rights. For each large owner, we also compute the cash-flow rights, which
may differ substantively from control rights when there are indirect chains of control. Large owners
frequently structure their shareholding so that they have large control rights, but comparatively
small cash-flow rights. We find the type of each large owner, i.e., whether each large owner is a
family, a widely-held financial institution, a widely-held corporation, or the state. This allows us to
test whether the formation and operation of coalitions depends on the types of large shareholders.

1

Zwiebel (1995) presents a model in which the dispersion of ownership across large shareholders is negatively

associated with the number of blockholders sharing the benefits of control. Gomes and Novaes (2001) study the ex-post
bargaining among large shareholders and how this affects small shareholders. Winton (1993) emphasizes the free-rider
problem in monitoring with multiple blockholders.

2

As a preliminary step, we document that many firms have multiple large owners.2 Of the
1,657 firms in our sample, 34 percent have at least two large owners. Faccio and Lang (2002), who
do not restrict their analyses to publicly traded firms, find that 39 percent of the 5,232 firms in their
sample have at least two large owners. When examining 600 of the largest publicly-traded firms
across 27 countries, La Porta et al. (1999) find that one-quarter have more than one large owner.
Hence, multiple blockholders are a common component of the corporate landscape.
We then show the limitations of maintaining an almost exclusive focus on either widely-held
firms or firms with a single large owner. The market value of firms with multiple large owners
differs substantially from other firms. Moreover, even within the class of firms with multiple large
owners, the market value of firms with high dispersion of cash-flow rights differs from firms with
small dispersion. Firms with multiple blockholders do not fit neatly into a single category.
Next, we find that the empirical relationship between corporate valuations and the
distribution of cash-flow rights across large owners is consistent with some recent theoretical
models. There is a strong negative relationship between cash-flow rights dispersion and future
valuations as measured by Tobin’s q. These results hold when conditioning on country and industry
fixed effects, as well as on firm size, growth opportunities, capital expenditures, asset tangibility,
leverage, the type of each large owner, and whether the firm’s founder is still on the board.
Moreover, the results are robust to controlling for characteristics of the largest owner that have

2

Substantial work documents the predominance of firms with at least one large owner around the world (La Porta et al.,

1999). Claessens et al. (2000) show that only 3% of the Asian firms in their sample lack a controlling owner. Faccio and
Lang (2002) show that 86% of companies in Europe have a large owner. Even in the United States, research
demonstrates the importance of concentrated ownership (Eisenberg, 1976; Demsetz, 1983; Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny,
1988; Holderness and Sheehan, 1988; and Holderness, Kroszner, and Sheehan, 1999).

3

recently received considerable empirical attention. In particular, La Porta et al. (2002), Joh (2003),
Lemmon and Lins (2003), and Lins (2003) find a positive relationship between corporate valuations
and the cash-flow rights of the biggest owner, suggesting that concentrated cash-flow rights
discourages expropriation of corporate assets. Claessens et al. (2002) also find a negative
relationship between corporate valuations and the difference between voting and cash-flow rights of
the largest owner, suggesting that entrenched owners with few cash-flow rights have the power and
incentives to divert corporate resources. Even when controlling for these traits of the largest owner,
however, there is a negative relationship between the dispersion of cash-flow rights across large
owners and corporate valuations.
Finally, we move beyond the explicit predictions of individual models. Models that focus on
private benefits of control assume that legal systems are unable to prevent insiders from
expropriating corporate resources. Thus, La Porta et al. (2002) argue that as the legal system
improves, the cash-flow rights of the controlling owner will become a less important governance
mechanism. With multiple blockholders, this suggests that the negative relationship between
corporate valuations and the dispersion of cash-flow rights will become less pronounced in
economies with stronger shareholder protection laws. This is exactly what we find. Furthermore, we
find that the negative association between valuations and the dispersion of cash-flow rights becomes
more pronounced when the holders of the largest cash-flow rights are of different types (family,
financial institution, widely-held firm, or the state). This suggests that large shareholders are less
likely to cooperate and form ruling coalitions when they are of different types. These extensions
advertise the need for further theoretical and empirical analyses of corporate governance in firms
with multiple blockholders.

4

It is important to emphasize this paper’s limitations. One concern is that our results are
driven by an omitted variable. For example, in an optimizing model of the firm, ownership structure
and valuation might be jointly determined by the contracting environment, so that any empirical
relationship between ownership structure and valuation might simply reflect differences in the
contracting regime. Given the absence of time-series data on firm ownership across Europe and
hence the inability to use firm-fixed effects or dynamic panel procedures, we attempt to reduce
concerns regarding potential omitted variable bias by (i) including country-fixed effects to control
for international differences in legal systems and other national traits, (ii) including industry fixed
effects since contracting costs may differ across industries, and (iii) conditioning on a wide array of
firm specific traits. While not eliminating the possibility of omitted variable bias, we find an
independent, negative association between corporate valuations and the dispersion of cash-flow
rights when controlling for these country, industry, and firms traits. A second concern focuses on
causality. Coles, Lemmon, and Meschke (2006) present a pessimistic critique of the ability of
instrumental variables to identify the impact of ownership on valuations. Although they do not
consider multiple blockholders, this complexity is likely to make identification more difficult, not
less. Our objectives are more modest than demonstrating that exogenous fluctuations in ownership
structure cause alterations in corporate valuations. Rather, we show that the relationship between
corporate valuations and the dispersion of cash-flow rights is consistent with new theoretical models
that emphasize the distinct corporate governance characteristics of firms with multiple
blockholders. The results are inconsistent with the view that complex ownership structures
involving more than one large shareholder are an unimportant feature of corporate governance. The
findings advertise the need for additional theoretical and empirical research on complex ownership
structures.

5

Our work contributes to recent empirical research examining multiple blockholders.
Lehmann and Weigand (2000) show that the existence of a second large owner is positively
associated with the profitability of German firms. Faccio, Lang, and Young (2001) find that the
existence of multiple large shareholders increases dividend payouts in Europe, but lowers them in
Asia. In an examination of Finnish firms, Maury and Pajuste (2005) show that the relationship
between corporate valuations and the presence of multiple large shareholders depends on the
comparative sizes of the large shareholders. We instead examine the relationship between
valuations and ownership structure in publicly listed firms across Europe. Moreover, since theory
stresses that (i) cash-flow rights are central in determining the incentives of owners to expropriate
corporate resources and (ii) the dispersion of cash-flow rights affects the composition and operation
of ruling coalitions, we examine the relationship between each of these factors and corporate
valuations. Furthermore, distinct from past research, we test whether the types of large shareholders
and national investor protection laws affect the relationship between valuations and the dispersion
of cash-flow rights in ways suggested by the broader corporate governance literature.3
The paper is organized as follows. After defining key variables in Section 1, Section 2
advertises the value of explicitly analyzing firms with multiple blockholders. Section 3 tests
whether the relationship between corporate valuations and ownership structure is consistent with
recent theoretical models of multiple blockholders. Section 4 concludes.

3

Our work also relates to recent findings that nepotism within family-controlled firms hurts firm performance (Perez-

Gonzalez, 2006, and Bennedsen et al., 2006). In firms where the largest shareholder is a family, we find that the
presence and type of other large shareholders is closely associated with the dispersion of cash-flow rights, which
suggests that all family firms are not the same and advertises the potential value of controlling for the types of other
large owners when assessing the performance of family firms.

6

1. Data
To examine the relationship between ownership structure and valuations, we use data on
1657 firms across 13 countries in Western Europe (Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany,
Ireland, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom). The
ownership data are from Faccio and Lang (2002). Ownership for each firm is computed at some
point during the period 1996-1999. Faccio and Lang (2002) and La Porta et al. (1999) note that
ownership structure changes very little over time. In terms of our analyses, this suggests that annual
fluctuations in corporate valuations are unlikely to affect ownership structure. Moreover, we
examine valuations at the end of 2000, which is at least one year after the ownership data. We
augment the Faccio and Lang (2002) data and discuss this below.
1.1 Control Rights and Types of Large Owners
A shareholder is defined as “large” if direct and indirect voting rights sum to 10 percent or
more (La Porta et al. 1999). If no shareholder holds 10 percent of the voting rights, the firm is
classified as widely-held. When using a 20 percent criterion, the same conclusions hold.
While direct ownership involves shares registered in the shareholder’s name, indirect
ownership involves shares held by entities that the ultimate shareholder controls. Since the large
shareholders of corporations are sometimes corporations themselves, we identify the large
shareholders in these corporations. This indirect ownership chain is traced backwards through
numerous corporations to identify the ultimate vote holders. For example, a shareholder has x
percent indirect control over firm A if she controls directly firm C that, in turn, controls directly
firm B, which directly controls x percent of the votes of firm A. The control chain from firm A to
firm C can be a long sequence of firms, each of which has control (greater than 10 percent voting
rights) over the next one.

7

Control-1 equals the control rights of the largest shareholder with control of ten percent or
more of the voting rights and zero if the corporation is widely held.
Control-2 equals the control rights of the second largest shareholder with control of ten
percent or more of the voting rights and zero if the corporation is widely held, or if there is only one
shareholder with control of ten percent or more of the voting rights. We create similar variables for
the third largest shareholder and so forth.
There are five types of large owners. By far the most common type of large owner is a
“family,” which consists of legal persons and unlisted firms (typically owned and managed by a
person). For example, a family is one of the large owners in about 86% of the firms with multiple
blockholders. Another category of large owners is widely-held financial institutions (banks and
other financial intermediaries for which there are no large owners). Widely-held financial
institutions are large owners in almost 30% of firms with multiple blockholders. In addition, the
state (i.e., national government, local government, or government agency), widely-held nonfinancial
corporations, and a category of miscellaneous entities (foundations, trusts, charities, employees,
cooperatives, cross-holdings, etc.) represent a small fraction of the large owners.
1.2 Cash-Flow Rights
We also compute the direct and indirect cash-flow rights of each of the large shareholders.
To compute indirect cash-flow rights, we use the products of the cash-flow rights along the
ownership chain. For example, if a large shareholder of firm A holds the fraction y of cash-flow
rights in firm B and firm B in turn holds the fraction x of the cash-flow rights in firm C, then the
large shareholder’s indirect cash-flow rights in firm C equal the product of x and y. To compute a
shareholder’s total cash-flow rights we sum direct and all indirect cash-flow rights.

8

Cash-flow-1 equals the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder that has control of ten
percent or more of the voting rights and zero if the corporation is widely held.
Cash-flow-2 equals the cash-flow rights of the second largest shareholder that has control of
ten percent or more of the voting rights and zero if the corporation is widely held, or if there is only
one shareholder with control of ten percent or more of the voting rights. We create similar variables
for the third largest shareholder and so forth.
There are important differences between cash-flow rights and control rights when there are
indirect chains of control. As a simple example, consider a shareholder who owns 10 percent of the
voting rights and cash-flow rights of firm A, and firm A in turn holds 20 percent of the voting rights
and cash-flow rights of firm B. Assume that this shareholder (i) does not own direct shares in firm B
and does not have control or cash-flow rights of firm B through other indirect chains of control and
(ii) is the largest equity holder of firm A. In our calculations, this shareholder has 20 percent control
rights of firm B because the shareholder controls firm A and firm A has 20 percent of the voting
rights of the firm B. This shareholder’s cash-flow rights, however, equals 2 percent because the
shareholder only receives 2 percent of the firm’s dividends (20% * 10%). This may provide
perverse incentives. The large owner maybe able to use her controlling position to expropriate 1$,
while only losing $0.02 in lower dividends.
Consequently, we also measure the difference between control rights and cash-flow rights as
in Claessens et al. (2002). If an owner has substantial control rights, this increases the ability of the
owner to divert corporate resource for private gain. But, this diversion reduces dividends (and may
entail other costs as well). If this owner has small cash-flow rights, however, then the costs of
diversion are lower. Thus, the difference between control and cash-flow rights provides information

9

on the ability and incentives to expropriate firm resources. We obtain similar results when using the
ratio of cash-flow to control rights instead.
Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1 equals the control rights of the largest shareholder minus the
cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder and is sometimes referred to as the “wedge.” The wedge
equals zero when no shareholder controls at least ten percent of the voting rights. Higher values
signal a greater inclination to divert corporate resources.
To evaluate theories of the governance of firms with multiple blockholders, we also
compute the dispersion of cash-flow rights. They argue that ruling coalitions with large total cashflow rights are less likely when cash-flow rights are widely dispersed across large shareholders.
Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 equals the difference between the cash-flow rights of the
two largest shareholders. This variable equals zero when the firms does not have two shareholders
with at least ten percent of the voting rights.
1.3 Valuations
To measure corporate valuations, we calculate Tobin’s q at the end of 2000. The data are
taken from the Worldscope database maintained by Bureau Van Dijk and matched with the
ownership data. Thus, we relate observations on ownership during the period 1996-1999 to
valuations measured at the end of 2000.
Tobin’s q is the traditional measure of valuation and is calculated as the ratio of the book
value of assets minus the book value of common equity and deferred taxes plus the market value of
common equity to the book value of assets. Table 1 presents summary statistics by country of
Tobin’s q. The average Tobin’s q across the 1,657 firms in the sample is 1.78, and varies from 1.06
on average in Austria to 2.11 in Ireland.

10

2. Are Complex Ownership Structures Relevant?
2.1. Importance and Classification of Ownership Structures
A prerequisite for a study of complex ownership structures is the existence of complex
ownership structures. If publicly-traded firms are overwhelmingly characterized by either
completely dispersed ownership or the existence of a single large owner, then this reduces the
importance of examining firms with multiple large owners.
Table 2 indicates that complex ownership structures are common: 34% of the firms have
more than one shareholder with greater than ten percent of the voting rights. Furthermore, firms
with multiple large shareholders account for 18% of market capitalization. This suggests that
multiple large shareholders are less common in the largest corporations. Since La Porta et al. (1999)
use a sample of the largest firms in each country, this helps explain their comparative skepticism of
the importance of firms with multiple blockholders. Also, more than 40% of firms with at least one
large shareholder have multiple large owners.
Given the substantial body of corporate governance theory on either widely-held firms or
those with a controlling owner, the mere presence of many firms with multiple blockholders is a
necessary but insufficient condition for embracing models of complex ownership structures. We
need to further demonstrate that firms with multiple blockholders cannot be simply classified as
either widely-held or as having a controlling owner for analytical convenience.
Table 3 shows that firms with multiple blockholders have significantly different values of
Tobin’s q from other firms. In the table, we compare medians to reduce the effect of outliers, but
obtain qualitatively similar findings when using averages. In light of the theories discussed earlier,
we distinguish blockholder firms with small cash-flow rights dispersion (firms with below the

11

median cash-flow dispersion) from those with large dispersion (firms with above the median cashflow rights dispersion).
As shown in Panel B of Table 3, firms with multiple blockholders and small dispersion of
cash-flow rights have significantly higher valuations than firms with a single (non-majority) large
shareholder. Furthermore, multiple blockholder firms with large dispersion of cash-flows have
significantly smaller valuations than multiple blockholder firms with small dispersion. Thus, it is
inappropriate to categorize firms with multiple blockholders as either widely-held or as having a
single controlling owner. The data also indicate that widely-held firms have the highest valuations.
As argued by La Porta et al. (2002), the unconditionally high valuations of widely-held firms could
reflect country-specific factors. If strong shareholder protection laws both boost valuations and
increase the percentage of widely-held firms, then simple correlations will reveal a positive
correlation between Tobin’s q and a dummy variable of whether the firm is widely-held or not.
Below, we explore whether the strength of shareholder protection laws influences the relationship
between corporate valuations and ownership structure. Panel C shows that the existence of multiple
blockholders is less likely in large firms, but is not highly correlated with sales growth, the ratio of
tangible to total assets, the ratio of capital expenditures to total assets, debt relative to total assets, or
whether the founder of the company is on the board of directors.
2.2. Complex Ownership Patterns: Types and Firm Size
To further illustrate the patterns of complex ownership structures across firms, Table 4
presents information on the types of the two largest owners in firms with more than one large owner
but with no owner holding more than 50% of the voting rights. We focus on the two largest owners
since only 12% of the firms in our sample have three or more large shareholders and this makes
simple comparisons easier. Panel A reports the number and percentage of firms for each

12

combination of large shareholders. Thus, the column headings provide information on the type of
the largest shareholder, while the row headings indicate the identities of the second largest
shareholder.
Families compose the bulk of large shareholders. In 405 out of the 553 firms with complex
ownership structures (ownership structures involving two or more large shareholders with none
holding a majority of the voting rights), a family is the largest shareholder. A family is also the
second largest shareholder in 70 of these firms. Furthermore, in 86% of the firms with complex
ownership structures, a family is either the largest or second largest shareholder.
Families, however, are not the only large owners in firms with complex ownership
structures. Widely-held financial institutions are the largest owner in 12% of such firms.
Furthermore, in almost 16% of the firms where the family is the largest owner, the second largest
owner is a widely-held financial institution. We also find that the type of the second largest
shareholder is not systematically different in firms where the largest shareholder is a family from
firms where the largest shareholder is not a family. Specifically, the pattern of ownership of the
second largest shareholder in the first column of Panel A where the largest owner is a family is not
significantly different from the pattern of ownership in the second column of Panel A where the
largest owner is not a family. Logit regressions confirm this finding: The type of the largest
shareholder has no predictive content over the type of the second largest shareholder.
In seeking to examine the relationship between the dispersion of cash-flow rights and
corporate valuations, we were concerned that the prevalence of family ownership might lead to
spurious conclusions. Specifically, if family ownership is closely associated with the dispersion of

13

cash-flow rights and corporate valuations, then any relationship between dispersion of cash-flow
rights and valuations might simply reflect the role of ownership.4
As shown in Panel B of Table 4, there is not a simple relationship between family ownership
and cash-flow rights dispersion; indeed, the results emphasize the importance of looking beyond the
largest shareholder. For the sample of firms with complex ownership structures, Panel B presents
the regression coefficients from a series of regressions of cash-flow dispersion (Cash-flow-1 minus
Cash-flow-2) on dummy variables that identify particular ownership structures. Each entry in Panel
B represents a separate regression where we only condition on country and industry fixed effects.
The first entry simply includes a dummy variable of whether the largest shareholder is a family or
not. The results indicate that cash-flow dispersion is larger in firms where a family is the largest
owner. However, the remainder of Panel B indicates that the relationship between cash-flow
dispersion and family ownership depends on the types of other large shareholders. For example, if
both the first and second largest shareholders are families, then the cash-flow rights are not larger
than other firms with complex ownership structures. It is only in firms where the largest shareholder
is a family and the second largest owner is not a family that cash-flow dispersion is significantly
greater than other firms. In sum, all family owned firms are not the same in terms of cash-flow
dispersion; it depends on the identities of the other large shareholders. Below, we examine whether
the relationship between ownership structure and corporate valuations depends on the identities of
large owners.

4

In terms of corporate valuations, there is strong evidence that family-owned firms under-perform after ownership is

handed over to the second generation of the family – the so-called succession problem (see, for example, Bennedsen et
al. 2006; and Pérez-González, 2006), but there is mixed evidence on the performance of family-owned firms in general
(see, for example, Morck et al. 1988; and Anderson and Reeb, 2003).

14

Before examining the relationship between corporate valuations and complex ownership
structures, we present evidence on the relationship between firm size and ownership structure.
Bennedsen and Wolfenzon (2000) predict that firms will tend to have either a single large owner
that holds a majority of the voting rights, or multiple owners with small dispersion. If it is also
easier for small firms to have a majority owner than for large firms due to wealth constraints of the
owner (see Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Bitler et al. 2005), then (a) small firms should have a higher
probability of having a majority owner than large firms and (b) large firms should have a higher
probability of having complex ownership structures with low dispersion. This is what we find.
Again, we present the coefficients from a series of simple regressions of ownership structure on
firm size, as measured by the logarithm of firm assets, while conditioning only on country and
industry fixed effects. For the first entry in Panel C, the dependent variable is a dummy variable that
equals one if there is an owner with more than 50% of the voting rights and zero otherwise, so we
use a logit regression. In the other columns of Panel C, the dependent variable is cash-flow
dispersion and we use the same method as in Panel B to compute the reported statistics. Consistent
with theory, small firms are more likely to have a majority owner, and large firms are more likely to
have small cash-flow dispersion. In the regression analyses below, we control for firm size to assess
the independent relationship between corporate valuations and cash-flow dispersion.

3. Regression Results
3.1 Theoretical Framework and Econometric Specification
Bennedsen and Wolfenzon (2000) predict that in equilibrium there will be a negative
relationship between corporate valuations and the dispersion of cash-flow rights across large

15

shareholders.5 This prediction emerges from two characteristics of their model: (1) ruling coalitions
with high cash-flow rights have lower incentives to expropriate corporate resources for private gain
and (2) ruling coalitions with high cash-flow rights are less likely to form when the dispersion of
cash-flow rights is high. More specifically, an initial owner chooses an ownership structure with
multiple blockholders to maximize firm value subject to a wealth constraint. Blockholders fight to
form ruling coalitions so that they can extract private benefits. The benefits of control to the ruling
coalition are negatively associated with its cash-flow rights. Consequently, the winning coalition is
that combination of blockholders with more than 50% of the votes and the minimum cash-flow
rights. Bennedsen and Wolfenzon (2000) show that greater dispersion of cash-flow rights makes it
easier to form ruling coalitions with small cash-flow rights, which reduces the value of the firm.
In terms of our empirical examination, this class of models of the corporate governance of
firms with multiple large shareholders has a potentially serious limitation. It does not allow for the
trading of equity shares in a liquid secondary market. Thus, it is unclear whether the number and
size of the initial blockholders selected by the original owner will remain an equilibrium ownership
structure with a liquid equity market.
Nevertheless, the initial models by Bennedsen and Wolfenzon (2000) and Bloch and Hege
(2001) help motivate and guide our empirical examination. They motivate the research by
emphasizing the potential importance of large owners beyond the biggest. They guide the work by
making specific predictions that we evaluate. Thus, although there are relevant limitations to these
models, we use their insights to examine the relationship between the dispersion of cash-flow rights

5

Similarly, in Bloch and Hege (2001), the dispersion of cash-flow rights reduces corporate performance because other

large shareholders will monitor the largest shareholder more intensively when the dispersion of cash-flow rights is
small.

16

and future values of Tobin’s q. In turn, our empirical findings emphasize the value of extending the
theory of complex ownership structures.
We build our basic regression specification on the foundations of a well-established
corporate governance literature and then add variables to proxy for predictions from theoretical
models of complex ownership structures. Considerable theoretical research predicts a negative
relationship between the cash-flow rights of a large, controlling owner and her incentives to
expropriate corporate resources (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; and Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002).
Empirical research confirms this prediction by finding a positive relationship between the cash-flow
rights of the largest owners and firm value (La Porta et al., 2002; Lemmon and Lins, 2003). Thus,
we include Cash-flow-1 (the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder). We also include Control-1
minus Cash-flow-1 (the difference between the control and cash-flow rights of the largest
shareholder). As discussed in the Introduction, theory predicts, and empirical evidence confirms,
that as the gap between voting and cash-flow rights widens, the ability and incentives to expropriate
corporate resources grow with negative ramifications on Tobin’s q (Claessens et al., 2002). Finally,
since Tobin’s q will reflect the market’s assessment of the firm’s future profitability, empirical
examinations of Tobin’s q include proxies for the firm’s future growth opportunities. Thus, we
include the variable Growth, which equals the firm’s average sales growth rate over the past three
years (1997-2000) as a proxy for growth opportunities.
Thus, for the cross-section of firms, we use the following regression specification and
estimation procedure.

(1)

Tobin’s q = α*X1 + β*[Cash-flow-1] + γ*[Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1] + δ*[Growth] +
+ θ*[Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2] + u,

17

where u is the error term. X1 is a matrix that includes a constant term and a wide assortment of firmspecific traits discussed below. We control for country and industry fixed effects.6
We primarily focus on the dispersion of cash-flow rights across the largest two owners,
Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2, because the bulk of firms with more than one large owner have
two large owners. In terms of the theory, we test whether the dispersion of cash-flow rights is
negatively associated with future values of Tobin’s q after controlling for many other features of the
firm’s ownership structure and its growth opportunities.
3.2 Estimation and Inference
The estimation errors in equation (1) may be correlated across firms within the same
country. This would bias the estimated coefficient standard errors downwards. Consequently, we
allow for clustering at the country level and correct standard errors accordingly.
Estimation of equation (1) provides information on the relationship between valuations and
dispersion, but there may be concerns about simultaneity and omitted variable bias. Let X represent
the matrix of all regressors in equation (1) (i.e., X1 and all the ownership variables). OLS estimation
of the coefficients in model (1) is consistent only if Cov{u, Xi} = 0 for each regressor i in X. Since
we are including country and industry fixed effects, consistency requires that there are no
unobservable firm characteristics that affect both ownership and Tobin’s q. If Cov{u, Xi} ≠ 0, then

6

We were concerned that the slope coefficients might vary across industries. So, we also included the interactions

between Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 and a dummy variable for each industry. The results hold across the different
industries, though the link with valuations is less pronounced in the financial and general services industries.

18

the estimated OLS coefficients will be biased and the model no longer describes the conditional
expectation of Tobin’s q given X.7
To reduce this possibility, we (a) “saturate” the regression with a large number of firm
characteristics to capture as much of the error term u as possible (see also Demsetz and Lehn, 1985,
and Bitler et al., 2005) and (b) use ownership data computed at least one year before Tobin’s q to
reduce the possibilities that short-run disturbances to valuations drive ownership structure and our
findings. Along these lines, La Porta et al (1999, 2002) and Faccio and Lang (2002) argue that
ownership changes very slowly over time.8
Consequently, we interpret our analyses as assessing whether there is an independent,
negative relationship between the dispersion of cash-flow rights across large shareholders and
subsequent valuations. As in much of the corporate governance literature, we do not have a
sufficient number of valid instrumental variables to resolve questions about the direction of
causality (see Coles, Lemmon, and Meschke, 2006, for an insightful discussion of the endogeneity
concerns in this literature). That is, we do not have instrumental variables that both (i) explain the
dispersion of cash-flow rights and (ii) only account for corporation valuations through their impact
on the dispersion of cash-flow rights.9 Our contribution is to assess whether the empirical

7

Another reason why X and u may be correlated is the existence of measurement error in X.

8

Another approach would be to use firm-fixed effects estimation to difference out the unobservable characteristics (see,

for example, Himmelberg et al., 1999). However, this approach assumes that unobservable characteristics are timeinvariant and requires time-series data on firm ownership, which we do not have. Also, see Palia (2001).
9

In unreported regressions, we use the dummy variable Founder, which equals one if the company’s founder is on the

board of directors and zero otherwise, as an instrument for the cash-flow rights of the largest owner. Bitler et al. (2005)
find that Founder explains the largest shareholders ownership stake. Endogeneity of one regressor may influence the

19

relationship between ownership and valuations is robust and consistent with recent theoretical
models.

3.3. Valuations and Complex Ownership Structures
3.3.1. Basic results
The regression results in Table 5 indicate a large negative relationship between Tobin’s q
and the dispersion of cash-flow rights across large shareholders. We focus on the two largest
owners because the sample of firms with three or more shareholders is very limited (about 10
percent of the firms), making it difficult to isolate the incremental effect of having more than two
blockholders. In the basic equation provided in column (1), Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 enters
negatively and significantly at the five percent level. Consistent with earlier work on the valuation
of firms with a large shareholder, we find that Cash-flow-1 enters positively and significantly, while
Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1 enters negatively and significantly. Thus, our findings on the
valuation of firms with complex ownership structures augment, rather than replace, earlier work on
the valuation of firms with large shareholders.
The economic size of the relationship is non-negligible. The estimated coefficient implies
that a one standard deviation (24) increase in Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 is associated with a
decrease in Tobin’s q of 0.22 (-0.22= -0.009*24), which is about 18% of the median value of
Tobin’s q in the sample.

estimated coefficients on the other regressors. When using Founder as an instrument for cash-flow rights of the largest
owner, our findings on dispersion do not change.

20

3.3.2. Robustness: Sub-samples of firms
The results hold when examining sub-samples of firms. In particular, the theories we are
evaluating do not apply to firms with a single large owner, firms where one blockholder holds a
majority of the shares, or firms that are widely-held. As a preliminary robustness test, column (2) of
Table 5 simply includes a dummy variable for whether the firm has an owner with more than 50%
of the voting rights (Majority) and a dummy variable for whether the firm has no large shareholders
(Widely-held). The dispersion index continues to enter negatively and significantly. Then, we
estimate different subsamples.
Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 continues to enter the valuation equation negatively and
significantly when excluding the 405 firms with a majority shareholder (column 4). Then, we
exclude widely-held firms (column 5) and again confirm the results. Finally, we conduct the
analyses only on the firms with multiple blockholders where none of the large owners holds a
majority of the voting rights (column 6). The results hold.
Furthermore, the estimated coefficient on the dispersion indicator changes in a predictable
manner across the different subsamples. We expect the estimated coefficient on the dispersion
indicator to increase in absolute value terms when restricting the sample to only those firms where
dispersion might vary with valuations. Specifically, when using firms with multiple blockholders
and no majority owner, the estimated coefficient on the dispersion of cash-flow rights jumps from 0.01 to -0.04. Economically, a one standard deviation (24) increase in Cash-flow-1 minus Cashflow-2 is associated with a decrease in Tobin's q of 0.96 (-0.96 = -0.04*24), which is about 72% of
the median value of Tobin’s q in the sample.
Finally, since firms from the United Kingdom account for more than one-third of the
sample, we test whether they drive the results. Since we are already including country fixed-effects,

21

we test whether U.K. firms enter with a different slope coefficient on cash-flow dispersion.
Specifically, we include an interaction term between cash-flow dispersion and a dummy variable
that equals one if the firm is from the U.K. and zero otherwise. As shown in column 8, the
coefficient on cash-flow dispersion does not change and the interaction term does not enter
significantly.10 There is no evidence that U.K. firms are driving the findings.
3.3.3. Robustness: Controlling for firm traits
The results are also robust to including a wide array of firm specific characteristics that may
be associated with both firm performance and ownership structure (see Demsetz and Lehn, 1985).
Besides sales growth over the previous three years to proxy for growth opportunities, we control for
the size of the firm (Log of total assets), the ratio of fixed assets to total assets (Asset tangibility),
the ratio of capital expenditures to total assets (Investment ratio), and the ratio of total debt to total
assets (Leverage). Israel (1992), among others, shows that firm values depend on both ownership
structure and financial leverage. Furthermore, we include a dummy variable that equals one if the
founder of the company is on the management or supervisory board (Founder). Founders may have
unobserved entrepreneurial skills that affect firm performance, and founding firms are more likely
to have concentrated ownership as founders retain ownership claims to the firm (Andersen and
Reeb, 2003; Burkart et al., 2003, and Bitler et al., 2005). When considering the full sample of firms
and after controlling for these additional firm characteristics, the dispersion of cash-flow rights
among the large shareholders enters negatively and significantly with a p-value of 0.06 (Table 5
column 3).

10

Including this interaction term in all the other regressions in Table 5 has no appreciable effect on the cash-flow

dispersion coefficient.

22

The results are even stronger when examining the sub-sample of firms with multiple
blockholders and no majority owner (Table 5 column 7). Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 enters
negatively and significantly at the five percent level and the economic size of the estimated
coefficient doubles as discussed above. Thus, even when controlling for many firm-level
characteristics, as well as country and industry fixed effects, there is a negative association between
valuations and the dispersion of cash-flow rights.
3.3.4. Alternative Dispersion Measures
The results also hold when using alternative measures of dispersion. Table 6 reports results
using two alternative dispersion measures based on ratios rather than differences. First, instead of
examining the difference in cash-flow rights of the largest owners, we examine this difference
relative to the total cash-flow rights of the largest owners, i.e., [cash-flow-1 – cash-flow-2] / [cashflow-1 + cash-flow-2]. Second, we compute the “Cash-flow ratio” as 1 – [cash-flow-2/cash-flow-1].
We compute the cash-flow ratio in this form so that larger values correspond to greater dispersion.
These two dispersion ratio can only be computed for firms with at least one large owner.11 The
correlation between these two ratios and Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 are 0.55 and 0.57
respectively. As reported in Table 6, the results are robust to using these alternative measures of the
dispersion of cash flow rights among the largest shareholders.
In unreported regressions, we also obtain very similar results when using the simple
standard deviation of cash-flow-1 and cash-flow-2, when expanding the analyses to include other
large owners, or when using a Shapley-type index of the comparative power of the large
shareholders. Specifically, we examined the difference between the Shapley values (in terms of cash

11

We also exclude firms with a majority owner from the Table 6 regressions to focus only on firms with complex

ownership structures, but obtain similar results when these firms are included.

23

flow rights) for the principal shareholder and the second largest shareholder as an alternative
measure of dispersion. The Shapley value is the Milnor and Shapley (1978) power index for oceanic
games of a given shareholder. The oceanic voting game has a finite number of atomic players (i.e.,
all large shareholders) and an “ocean” of players with infinitesimal weight (small shareholders).
The Shapley value measures the extent to which each large owner is pivotal to the voted decision
(see also Zingales, 1994, and Nenova, 2003). When using the Shapley value to measure the
dispersion of power across large shareholders, we obtain qualitatively similar and statistically
significant results.
3.4. Extensions: Ownership Types and Shareholder Rights
Finally, we assess whether the relationship between valuations and the dispersion of cashflow rights varies in predictable ways. Strong shareholder rights might mitigate the problem
associated with dispersed cash-flow rights. In particular, Bennedsen and Wolfenzon (2000) predict
that ruling coalitions with large cash-flow rights are less likely to form when dispersion is high. In
turn, theory suggests that ruling coalitions with low cash-flow rights have the ability (sufficient
voting rights) and incentives (low cash-flow rights) to expropriate corporate resources for private
benefit at the expense of small shareholders. One implication is that strong shareholder protection
laws will mitigate the ability of the ruling coalition to expropriate corporate resources. This implies
that the relationship between valuation and dispersion will be less pronounced in countries with
strong shareholder protection laws.
The results in Table 7 support the prediction that the association between valuations and
cash-flow rights dispersion will weaken with stronger shareholder protection laws. We include an
interaction term, the product of Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 times Shareholder rights. As shown
in Table 7, the interaction term, [Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2] * [Shareholder rights], enters

24

positively and significantly for different conditioning information sets. The dispersion variable,
Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2, continues to enter negatively and significantly. Thus, the
relationship between valuations and ownership dispersion weakens as shareholder protection laws
strengthen.
Next, we assess whether the types of the largest owners influence the association between
corporate valuations and cash-flow dispersion. Coalition formation models stress that owners with
very different cash-flow rights find it difficult to cooperate and form ruling coalitions. If these
difficulties are exacerbated when the owners are of different types (families, financial institutions,
widely-held corporations, or the state), then the negative association between valuations and cashflow rights dispersion will increase when the holders of the largest cash-flow rights are of different
types.
The Table 7 results support this view. We first compute a dummy variable, Different type,
which equals one if the largest owners are of different types and zero otherwise. Then, we include
the following interaction term in the basic regression specification: [Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow2] * [Different types]. Following La Porta et al. (1999), we distinguish between five categories of
ultimate ownership: families, state, widely-held financial institution, widely-held corporation, and
other (which includes foundations and cross-holdings). As shown, the interaction term, [Cash-flow1 minus Cash-flow-2] * [Different types], enters negatively and significantly. The results confirm
that the relationship between valuations and ownership dispersion intensifies when the large
shareholders are of different types.

25

4. Conclusions
The empirical evidence in this paper challenges the conventional dichotomy of either
examining widely-held firms or firms with a single controlling owner. We find that (1) over onethird of the publicly listed firms in Europe have more than one large owner, (2) the market value of
firms with multiple large owners differs from other firms, and (3) the relationship between
corporate valuations and the distribution of cash-flow rights across multiple large owners is
consistent with predictions form recent theoretical models.
There is a strong negative relationship between corporate valuations and the dispersion of
cash-flow rights across multiple large shareholders. These findings advertise the value of devoting
considerably more research to examining the special corporate governance features of publiclytraded firms with multiple large owners.

26

Appendix 1. Description of Main Variables
Variable
Tobin’s Q

Description
Tobin’s Q measured as (total assets – book value of equity – deferred taxes + market value of equity) divided by (total
assets). Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Worldscope.

Control-1

Control rights of largest controlling shareholder using 10% cutoff for control. Zero if no controlling shareholder. Source:
Authors’ calculations based on data from Faccio and Lang (2002).

Cash-flow-1

Cash flow rights of largest controlling shareholder using 10% cutoff for control. Zero if no controlling shareholder. Source:
Authors’ calculations based on data from Faccio and Lang (2002).

Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1

The difference between the control rights and the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder. Zero if no controlling
shareholder. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Faccio and Lang (2002).

Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2

The difference between the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder and the cash-flow rights of the second largest
shareholder. Zero if no controlling shareholder. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Faccio and Lang (2002).

Dispersion ratio

The difference between the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder and the cash-flow rights of the second largest
shareholder divided by the sum of the cash-flow rights of the two largest shareholders. Missing value if no controlling
shareholder. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Faccio and Lang (2002).

Cash-flow ratio

One minus the ratio of the cash-flow rights of the second largest shareholder to the cash-flow rights of the largest
shareholder. Missing value if no controlling shareholder. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Faccio and Lang
(2002).

Majority

Dummy variable indicating whether the firm has a majority shareholder. This variable takes value of one if the controlling
shareholder has a majority stake, defined as Control-1 greater than 50%, and zero otherwise.

Widely-held

Dummy variable indicating whether the firm’s shares are widely-held. This variable takes value of one if no shareholder
owns more than 10% of control rights.

Founder

Dummy variable that takes a value of one if the founder of the company is on the (management or supervisory) board of the
company. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from company websites, annual reports, and Worldscope.

Sales growth

Average real growth rate in sales over the last 3 years. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Worldscope.

Asset tangibility

The ratio of fixed assets to total assets. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Worldscope.

Investment ratio

The ratio of capital expenditure to total assets. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Worldscope.

Leverage

The ratio of total debt to total assets of the firm. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Worldscope.

27

Appendix 2. Summary statistics of main regression variables for regression sample
Tobin’s Q is the market to book value of the assets of the firm. Cash-flow-1 is the cash-flow rights of largest controlling shareholder. Control-1 minus Cashflow-1 is the difference between the control rights and the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder. Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 is the difference between
the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder and the cash-flow rights of the second largest shareholder. Sales growth is the average real growth rate in sales
over the preceding 3 years
Variable
Tobin’s q
Cash-flow-1
Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1
Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2
Sales growth

Number of firms
1638
1638
1638
1638
1638

Mean
1.77
27.52
3.59
22.72
0.13

28

Standard deviation
2.27
23.33
8.68
23.73
0.31

Minimum
0.44
0.00
-18.70
0.00
-0.50

Maximum
37.62
100.00
68.46
100.00
0.50

References
Anderson, R. C. and D. M. Reeb, 2003, “Founding-Family Ownership and Firm Performance:
Evidence from the S&P 500,” Journal of Finance, 58, 1301-1328.
Bennedsen, M., K. Nielsen, F. Perez-Gonzalez, and D. Wolfenzon, 2006 “Inside the Family Firm:
The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Bennedsen, M. and D. Wolfenzon, 2000, “The Balance of Power in Closely Held Corporations,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 113-139.
Bitler, M. P., T. Moskowitz, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2005, “Testing Agency Theory with
Entrepreneur Effort and Wealth,” Journal of Finance, 60, 539-576.
Bloch, F. and U. Hege, 2001, “Multiple Large Shareholders and Control Contests,” mimeo, HEC.
Bolton, P. and E. von Thadden, 1998, “Blocks, Liquidity, and Corporate Control,” Journal of
Finance, 53, 1-25.
Burkart, M., D. Gromb, and F. Panunzi, 1997, “Large Shareholders, Monitoring, and the Value of
the Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 693-728.
Burkart, M., D. Gromb, and F. Panunzi, 1998, “Why Higher Takeover Premia Protect Minority
Shareholders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 172-204.
Claessens, S., S. Djankov, and L. Lang, 2000, “The Separation of Ownership and Control in East
Asian Corporations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 81-112.
Claessens, S., S. Djankov, J. Fan, and L. Lang, 2002, “Disentangling the Incentive and
Entrenchment Effects of Large Shareholdings,” Journal of Finance, 57, 2741-2771.
Coase, R. H., 1937, “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, 4, 386-405.

29

Coles, J. L., M. Lemmon, and J. F. Meschke, 2006, “Structural Models and Endogeneity in
Corporate Finance: The Link between Managerial Ownership and Corporate Performance,”
Arizona State University, mimeo.
Demsetz, H. and K. Lehn, 1985, “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and
Consequences,” Journal of Political Economy, 93, 1155-1177.
Eisenberg, M., 1976, The Structure of the Corporation: A Legal Analysis (Little, Brown and Co.,
Boston, MA).
Faccio, M., L. H. P. Lang, and L. Young, 2001, “Dividends and Expropriation,” American
Economic Review, 91, 54-78.
Faccio, M. and L. H. P. Lang, 2002, “The Ultimate Ownership of Western European Corporations,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 65, 365-395.
Gomes, A. R. and W. Novaes, 2001, “Sharing of Control as a Corporate Governance Mechanism,”
mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
Grossman, S. J. and O. Hart, 1980, “Takeover Bids, the Free-Rider Problem, and the Theory of the
Corporation,” Bell Journal of Economics, 11, 42-64.
Grossman, S. J. and O. Hart, 1988, “One Share-One Vote and the Market for Corporate Control,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 175-202.
Harris, M. and A. Raviv, 1988, “Corporate Governance: Voting Rights and Majority Rules,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 203-235.
Himmelberg, C., R. G. Hubbard, and D. Palia, 1999, “Understanding the Determinants of
Managerial Ownership and the Link between Ownership and Performance,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 53, 353-384.

30

Holderness, C., and D. Sheehan, 1988, “The Role of Majority Shareholders in Publicly Held
Corporations: An Exploratory Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 317-347.
Holderness, C., R. S. Kroszner, and D. Sheehan, 1999, “Were the Good Old Days That Good?:
Changes in Managerial Stock Ownership Since the Great Depression,” Journal of Finance,
54, 435-469.
Israel, R., 1992, “Capital and Ownership Structures, and the Market for Corporate Control,” Review
of Financial Studies, 5, 181-198.
Jensen, M. C. and W. H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Cost,
and Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305-360.
Joh, S. W., 2003, “Corporate Governance and Firm Profitability: Evidence from Korea Before the
Economic Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 287-322.
Johnson, S., P. Boone, A. Breach, and E. Friedman, 2000, “Corporate Governance in the Asian
Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 141-186.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, “Corporate Ownership Around the
World,” Journal of Finance, 54, 471-517.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R.Vishny, 1998, “Law and Finance,” Journal of
Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002, “Investor Protection and
Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance, 57, 1147-1170.
Lehmann, E. and J. Weigand, 2000, “Does the Governed Corporation Perform Better? Governance
Structures and Corporate Performance in Germany,” European Finance Review, 4, 157-195.
Lemmon, M. L. and K. Lins, 2003, “Ownership Structure, Corporate Governance, and Firm Value:
Evidence from the East Asian Financial Crisis,” Journal of Finance, 58, 1445-1468.

31

Lins, K., 2003, “Equity Ownership and Firm Value in Emerging Markets,” Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 159-184.
Maug, E., 1998, “Large Shareholders as Monitors: Is There a Trade-Off between Liquidity and
Control?” Journal of Finance, 53, 65-98.
Maury, B. and A. Pajuste, 2005, “Multiple Controlling Shareholders and Firm Value,” Journal of
Banking and Finance, 29, 1813-1834.
Milnor, J. and L. Shapley, 1978, “Values of Large Games II: Oceanic Games,” Mathematics of
Operations Research, 3, 290-307.
Morck, R., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1988, “Management Ownership and Market Valuation:
An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 293-315.
Nenova, T., 2003, “The Value of Corporate Voting Rights and Control: A Cross-Country Analysis,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 325-351.
Noe, T. H., 2002, “Investor Activism and Financial Market Structure,” Review of Financial Studies,
15, 289-318.
Pagano, M. and A. Roell, 1998, “The Choice of Stock Ownership Structure: Agency Costs,
Monitoring, and the Decision to Go Public,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 187-225.
Palia, D., 2001, “The Endogeneity of Managerial Compensation in Firm Valuation: A Solution,”
Review of Financial Studies, 14, 735-764.
Perez-Gonzalez, F., 2006, “Inherited Control and Firm Performance”, American Economic Review,
Forthcoming.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny, 1986, “Large Shareholders and Corporate Control,” Journal of
Political Economy, 94, 461-488.

32

Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny, 1997, “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, 52,
737-783.
Shleifer, A. and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, “Investor Protection and Equity Markets,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 66, 3-27.
Stulz, R., 1988, “Managerial Control of Voting Rights: Financing Policies and the Market for
Corporate Control,” Journal of Financial Economics, 20, 25-54.
Volpin, P., 2002, “Governance with Poor Investor Protection: Evidence from Top Executive
Turnover in Italy,” Journal of Financial Economics, 64, 61-90.
Winton, A., 1993, “Limitation of Liability and the Ownership Structure of the Firm,” Journal of
Finance, 48, 487-512.
Zingales, L., 1994, “The Value of the Voting Right: a Study of the Milan Stock Exchange
Experience,” Review of Financial Studies, 7, 125-148.
Zwiebel, J., 1995, “Block Investment and Partial Benefits of Corporate Control,” Review of
Economic Studies, 62, 161-185.

33

Table 1
Summary Statistics of Tobin’s Q
Country
Number of firms
Mean
Median
Minimum
Maximum
Standard deviation
Austria
38
1.18
1.06
0.72
2.44
0.35
Belgium
39
1.19
1.10
0.80
2.41
0.33
Finland
70
2.01
1.16
0.68
13.29
2.34
France
191
1.51
1.14
0.59
7.58
1.05
Germany
165
1.48
1.14
0.68
16.99
1.49
Ireland
44
2.11
1.24
0.46
18.39
2.92
Italy
72
1.47
1.18
0.66
4.97
0.86
Norway
58
1.61
1.11
0.56
12.21
1.88
Portugal
34
1.33
1.09
0.44
7.32
1.11
Spain
79
1.29
1.09
0.53
6.40
0.81
Sweden
76
1.75
1.27
0.62
9.11
1.47
Switzerland
102
1.91
1.24
0.56
11.82
2.03
United Kingdom
689
2.05
1.26
0.49
37.62
2.97
Total
1657
1.78
1.19
0.44
37.62
2.26
This table presents summary statistics by country of firms’ Tobin’s Q, which is calculated as the ratio of the book value
of assets minus the book value of common equity and deferred taxes plus the market value of common equity to the
book value of assets. The Tobin’s Q of each firm in the sample is calculated using firm-level data obtained from Bureau
Van Dijk’s Worldscope database. The sample of firms includes all firms for which we have ownership data.

34

Table 2
Importance of Firms with Multiple Blockholders
Panel A: All firms
Group of firms

Firms with no controlling owner
Firms with one controlling owner
Firms with multiple large shareholders
Total

Number of firms
(% of total)
263
830
564
1657

(15.9)
(50.1)
(34.0)
(100)

Total market capitalization in
billions of US dollars
(% of total)
1540
(36.0)
1984
(46.4)
756
(17.7)
4280
(100)

Panel B: Firms with controlling shareholder only
Group of firms

Firms with one controlling owner
Firms with multiple large shareholders
Total

Number of firms
(% of total)
830
564
1394

(59.5)
(40.5)
(100)

Total market capitalization in
billions of US dollars
(% of total)
1984
(72.4)
756
(27.6)
2740
(100)

Panel C: Number of firms by country and ownership type
Country

Firms with no
Firms with one
Firms with multiple
Total
controlling owner
controlling owner
large shareholders
Austria
1
(2.6)
29
(76.3)
8
(21.1)
38
Belgium
2
(5.1)
26
(66.7)
11
(28.2)
39
Finland
12
(17.1)
26
(37.1)
32
(45.7)
70
France
8
(4.2)
113
(59.2)
70
(36.6)
191
Germany
9
(5.5)
96
(58.2)
60
(36.4)
165
Ireland
9
(20.5)
22
(50.0)
13
(29.5)
44
Italy
1
(1.4)
50
(69.4)
21
(29.2)
72
Norway
7
(12.1)
22
(37.9)
29
(50.0)
58
Portugal
1
(2.9)
23
(67.6)
10
(29.4)
34
Spain
8
(10.1)
36
(45.6)
35
(44.3)
79
Sweden
7
(9.2)
37
(48.7)
32
(42.1)
76
Switzerland
14
(13.7)
55
(53.9)
33
(32.4)
102
United Kingdom
184
(26.7)
295
(42.8)
210
(30.5)
689
Total
263
(15.9)
829
(50.2)
561
(33.9)
1653
This table reports the total number and total market capitalization of firms in the sample with (i) no controlling owner,
(ii) one controlling owner, and (iii) multiple large shareholders. Control is defined as 10% of the voting rights or more.
Panel A reports summary statistics by ownership structure for all firms in the sample, panel B reports summary statistics
by ownership structure for firms with controlling shareholders only, and panel C reports the number of firms (with
percentage of country-totals between brackets) for each ownership structure by country.

35

Table 3
Tobin’s Q by Ownership Category
Panel A: Group means, group medians, and nonparametric test of the equality of medians

1. Majority ownership
2. Single non-majority blockholder
3. Multiple blockholders with small dispersion in CF rights
4. Multiple blockholders with large dispersion in CF rights
5. Widely held
Total

# of firms

Average Q

Median Q

406
519
257
212
263
1657

1.78
1.61
1.94
1.67
2.03
1.78

1.14
1.16
1.25
1.15
1.31
1.19

Test of difference in medians with ownership category
Majority
Single nonMultiple
Multiple
Ownership
majority
blockholders blockholders
blockholder
with small
with large
dispersion
dispersion
0.444
0.029**
0.611
0.000***

0.057*
0.642
0.000***

0.029**
0.430

0.001***

Panel B: Correlations Matrix of Ownership Categories and Other Firm Characteristics
Sales growth Log of total assets
Tangibility
Investment ratio
Leverage
Founder
-0.057**
-0.012
-0.061***
-0.012
-0.006
0.096***
(0.010)
(0.594)
(0.006)
(0.593)
(0.794)
(0.000)
2. Single non-majority blockholder
0.015
-0.019
0.033
0.034
0.009
-0.046*
(0.511)
(0.390)
(0.136)
(0.126)
(0.698)
(0.077)
3. Multiple blockholders with small dispersion in CF rights
0.016
-0.078***
-0.027
-0.010
-0.011
-0.008
(0.465)
(0.000)
(0.224)
(0.671)
(0.623)
(0.753)
4. Multiple blockholders with large dispersion in CF rights
0.015
-0.002
0.002
-0.010
-0.000
0.032
(0.505)
(0.940)
(0.915)
(0.644)
(0.989)
(0.215)
5. Widely held
0.026
0.122***
0.062***
-0.010
0.008
-0.072***
(0.250)
(0.000)
(0.005)
(0.651)
(0.728)
(0.006)
We distinguish firms between 5 distinct ownership categories: 1. Majority ownership; 2. Single non-majority blockholder; 3. Multiple blockholders, each with
minority ownership, and small dispersion in CF rights between the two largest blockholders (“CF-1 minus CF-2” less than or equal to 25%); 4. Multiple
blockholders, each with minority ownership, and large dispersion in CF rights between the two largest blockholders (“CF-1 minus CF-2” more than 25%); and 5.
Widely held (no shareholder owns more than 10% of control rights). Panel A reports the average and median Tobin’s Q across ownership groups and the pvalues of a nonparametric test of equality of medians between the indicated ownership categories. Panel B shows the correlation between ownership groups and
other firm characteristics, with p-values between brackets. Sales growth is the 3-year average lagged sales growth. Tangibility is fixed assets to total assets.
Investment ratio is CAPEX to total assets. Leverage is total debt to total assets. Founder indicates whether the founder of the company is on the (management or
supervisory) board of the company.
1. Majority ownership

36

Table 4
Complex Ownership Structures, Family Ownership, and Firm Size
Panel A: Complex Ownership Structures: The Types of the Largest and Second Largest Owners

Second largest shareholder is:
Family
State
Widely-held corporation
Widely-held financial
Other type
Total

Largest
shareholder is a
family

Largest
shareholder is not
a family
Number of firms

All firms

Largest
shareholder is a
family

Largest
shareholder is not
a family
% of total

All firms

284
17
6
64
34
405

70
9
3
41
25
148

354
26
9
105
59
553

70.1
4.2
1.5
15.8
8.4
100

47.3
6.1
2.0
27.7
16.9
100

64.0
4.7
1.6
19.0
10.7
100

Panel B: Complex Ownership Structures and Family Ownership

Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2

Largest
shareholder is a
family
3.479*
(0.051)

Second largest
shareholder is a
family
-2.024**
(0.046)

First& second
largest shareholders
are families
-0.654
(0.403)

Largest is not a
family but the
second largest is
-2.703
(0.102)

Largest is a
family but not
second largest
4.676*
(0.053)

First & second largest
shareholders not
families
-2.952*
(0.056)

Panel C: Complex Ownership Structures and Firm Size
Majority
(All firms)

Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2
(All firms)

Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2
(Exclude firms if Majority=1 or
Widely held=1)
Log(total assets)
-0.124***
-1.501***
-0.881***
-0.393*
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.067)
Panel A provides information on the types of the largest and second largest shareholders in firms with multiple shareholders and with no majority shareholder. It
reports the number and percentage of firms for each combination of large shareholders. Panel B presents partial correlation coefficients (and p-values in
parentheses) between cash-flow dispersion (Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2) and dummy variables that identify particular ownership structures. The partial
correlation coefficients are based on regressions that condition only on country and industry fixed effects based on the subset of firms with multiple blockholders
and where the largest shareholder does not hold a majority stake. Panel C presents similar partial correlation coefficients between ownership structure and firm
size, as measured by the logarithm of total firm assets. Majority is a dummy variable that indicates whether the largest shareholder holds a majority stake in the
firm or not. Widely held is a dummy variable that indicates whether the firm has no shareholder with more than 10% of control rights. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

37

Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2
(Exclude firms if Majority=1)

Table 5
Valuation and Complex Ownership Structures
(1)
Basic
Cash-flow-1
Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1
Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2
Sales growth
Majority
Widely-held
Log of total assets
Asset tangibility
Investment ratio
Leverage
Founder

0.015**
(0.005)
-0.009**
(0.003)
-0.009***
(0.003)
0.381
(0.308)

(2)
Majority and
widely-held
0.019**
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.004)
-0.012***
(0.003)
0.384
(0.308)
0.105
(0.158)
0.273**
(0.118)

(3)
Other firm
factors
0.015*
(0.008)
-0.008*
(0.004)
-0.011*
(0.005)
0.449**
(0.202)
0.091
(0.118)
0.439**
(0.169)
-0.150
(0.092)
-1.160***
(0.360)
2.126***
(0.366)
-0.900
(0.533)
0.949
(0.692)

(4)
Exclude
majority
0.017***
(0.005)
-0.014*
(0.007)
-0.020**
(0.008)
0.619**
(0.240)

(5)
Exclude majority
and widely-held
0.023***
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.007)
-0.022**
(0.008)
0.685***
(0.201)

(6)
Multiple
blockholders
0.037**
(0.017)
-0.001
(0.008)
-0.040**
(0.018)
0.957*
(0.491)

(7)
Multiple blockholders
and other firm factors
0.031
(0.022)
-0.018
(0.014)
-0.040**
(0.017)
1.683***
(0.286)

-0.231
(0.143)
-1.726*
(0.843)
-0.807
(1.484)
-1.507
(1.350)
0.769
(0.711)

Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 * UK

(8)
UK
0.031
(0.022)
-0.017
(0.014)
-0.037**
(0.017)
1.663***
(0.299)

-0.228
(0.143)
-1.715*
(0.840)
-0.880
(1.536)
-1.531
(1.336)
0.728
(0.729)
-0.015
(0.009)

Observations
1638
1638
1195
1233
975
464
330
330
R-squared
0.12
0.12
0.16
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.26
0.26
This table presents OLS regressions that control for the presence and incentives of the two largest shareholders. The dependent variable is Tobin’s Q. The regressions are of the
form: Tobin’s Q = αX + β (Cash-flow-1; Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1; Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2) + γ (Other firm characteristics) + + u, where u is the error term. All
regressions include the cash flow rights of the largest shareholder (Cash-flow-1), the difference between control rights and cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder (Control-1
minus Cash-flow-1), the difference between cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder and cash-flow rights of the second largest shareholder (Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2),
and real sales growth over the preceding three years (Sales growth). Regression (2) controls for whether the controlling owner holds more than 50% of the voting rights (Majority)
and whether no shareholder owns more than 10% of control rights (Widely-held). Regression (3) controls for the ratio of fixed assets to total assets (Asset tangibility), the ratio of
capital expenditure to assets (Investment ratio), the ratio of total debt to assets (Leverage), and a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the founder of the company is still on
the board of the company (Founder). Regression (4) excludes majority-owned firms. Regression (5) excludes majority-owned and widely-held firms. Regression (6) includes only
firms with multiple blockholders. Regression (7) adds the firm-level control variables to regression (6). Regression (8) adds an interaction between the Cash-flow-1 minus Cashflow-2 variable and a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the firm is located in the United Kingdom (UK) to regression (7). All regressions control for country and industry
fixed effects with clustering of standard errors at the country level. Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

38

Table 6
Valuation and Complex Ownership Structures: Alternative Measures of Dispersion
(1)
Basic
Cash-flow-1
Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1
Dispersion ratio

0.006
(0.004)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.340***
(0.102)

(2)
Dispersion ratio
Only multiple
blockholders
0.015*
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.799*
(0.403)

(3)

(4)

Multiple blockholders
and other firm factors
0.009
(0.012)
-0.018
(0.013)
-0.724**
(0.243)

Basic

Cash-flow ratio
Sales growth

0.681***
(0.202)

0.963*
(0.509)

1.698***
(0.299)
-0.246
(0.147)
-1.834*
(0.877)
-0.711
(1.371)
-1.480
(1.325)
0.712
(0.723)

975
0.15

464
0.18

330
0.25

Log of total assets
Asset tangibility
Investment ratio
Leverage
Founder
Observations
R-squared

0.006
(0.004)
-0.009
(0.007)

(5)
(6)
Cash-flow ratio
Only multiple
Multiple blockholders
blockholders
and other firm factors
0.016*
0.011
(0.009)
(0.013)
-0.001
-0.017
(0.009)
(0.014)

-0.387**
(0.129)
0.683***
(0.201)

-0.739
(0.460)
0.961*
(0.512)

-0.765**
(0.300)
1.705***
(0.298)
-0.241
(0.142)
-1.817*
(0.857)
-0.741
(1.409)
-1.469
(1.332)
0.731
(0.722)

975
0.15

464
0.18

330
0.26

This table presents OLS regressions that control for the presence and incentives of the two largest shareholders using alternative measures of the dispersion of
cash-flow rights. The dependent variable is Tobin’s Q. The regressions are of the form: Tobin’s Q = αX + β (Growth; Other firm characteristics) + γ (Cash-flow1; Control-1 minus Cash-Flow-1; Dispersion measure) + u, where u is the error term. All regressions include the cash flow rights of the largest shareholder
(Cash-flow-1), the difference between the control rights and the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder (Control-1 minus Cash-Flow-1), and real sales growth
over the preceding three years (Sales growth). As measure of dispersion of cash-flows, we use the difference between cash-flow-1 and cash-flow-2 divided by the
sum of cash-flow-1 and cash-flow-2 (Dispersion ratio) in regressions (1) to (3), and 1 minus the ratio of cash-flow-2 to cash-flow-1 (Cash-flow ratio) in
regressions (4) to (6). All regressions exclude firms with majority-ownership and widely-held firms. Regressions (2) and (5) include only firms with multiple
blockholders. Regressions (3) and (6) add the following firm-level control variables to regression (2): the ratio of fixed assets to total assets (Asset tangibility),
the ratio of capital expenditure to assets (Investment ratio), the ratio of total debt to assets (Leverage), and a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the
founder of the company is still on the (management or supervisory) board of the company (Founder). All regressions control for country and industry fixed
effects with clustering of standard errors at the country level. Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

39

Table 7
Ownership Types and Shareholder Rights
Cash-flow-1
Control-1 minus Cash-flow-1
Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2
Sales growth

(1)
0.016**
(0.007)
-0.009**
(0.003)
-0.010**
(0.003)
0.378
(0.310)

(2)
0.020**
(0.009)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.013***
(0.004)
0.381
(0.309)
0.107
(0.155)
0.290**
(0.120)
0.079
(0.158)
-0.009*
(0.004)

Majority
Widely held
Different type
Cashflow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 * Different type

0.006
(0.165)
-0.007*
(0.004)

Cashflow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 * Shareholder rights

(3)
0.013**
(0.004)
-0.011**
(0.004)
-0.021***
(0.007)
0.371
(0.308)

(4)
0.019**
(0.007)
-0.009*
(0.005)
-0.028**
(0.011)
0.374
(0.308)
0.126
(0.176)
0.395**
(0.143)

0.005**
(0.002)

0.005**
(0.002)

Observations
1638
1638
1638
1638
R-squared
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.13
This table repeats regressions (2) and (3) of Table 5 but adds an additional interaction terms with the Cash-flow-1 minus Cash-flow-2 variable. The dependent
variable is Tobin’s Q at the firm-level. Regressions (1) and (2) include a variable that indicates whether the first and second largest shareholders are of different
ownership types (where we consider the following ownership categories: family, state, widely-held financial institution, widely-held corporation, and
miscellaneous, with widely-held the default category if there is no controlling shareholder). Regressions (3) and (4) include an interaction with the LLSV (1998)
index of shareholder rights in the country (Shareholder rights). Majority is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the principal shareholder holds more than
50 percent of the voting rights. Widely-held indicates whether the firm’s ownership is widely held. Sales growth is average real growth in sales over the past 3
years. All regressions control for country and industry fixed effects with clustering of standard errors at the country level. Standard errors in parentheses. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

40

