                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE GROWING ALLOCATIVE INEFFICIENCY OF THE U.S. HIGHER EDUCATION
                               SECTOR

                                           James D. Adams
                                         J. Roger Clemmons

                                        Working Paper 12683
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12683


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2006




This paper is part of the Science and Engineering Workforce Project at NBER. The Andrew W. Mellon
and Alfred P. Sloan Foundations have generously supported this research. John Marsh provided research
assistance and Jason Todd Abaluck provided data on student characteristics. We thank Ronald G.
Ehrenberg, Irwin Feller, Amanda Goodall, Richard Jensen, and Donald Vitaliano for comments on
earlier drafts. Special appreciation goes to Richard Freeman for support and guidance. This paper
has benefited from presentations at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Cornell University, meetings
of the NBER-Science and Engineering Workforce Project, and the NBER Higher Education Meetings.
 Any remaining errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Growing Allocative Inefficiency of the U.S. Higher Education Sector
James D. Adams and J. Roger Clemmons
NBER Working Paper No. 12683
November 2006
JEL No. J3,L3,O3

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper presents new evidence on research and teaching productivity in universities using a panel
of 102 top U.S. schools during 1981-1999. Faculty employment grows at 0.6 percent per year, compared
with growth of 4.9 percent in industrial researchers. Productivity growth per researcher is 1.4-6.7
percent and is higher in private universities. Productivity growth per teacher is 0.8-1.1 percent and
is higher in public universities. Growth in research productivity within universities exceeds overall
growth, because the research share grows in universities where productivity growth is less. This finding
suggests that allocative efficiency of U.S. higher education declined during the late 20th century. R&D
stock, endowment, and post-docs increase research productivity in universities, the effect of nonfederal
R&D is less, and the returns to research are diminishing. Since the nonfederal R&D share grows and
is higher in public schools, this may explain the rising inefficiency. Decreasing returns in research
but not teaching suggest that most differences in university size are due to teaching.

James D. Adams
Department of Economics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3406 Russel Sage Laboratory
Troy, NY 12180-3590
and NBER
adamsj@rpi.edu

J. Roger Clemmons
Institute for Child Health Policy, College of Medi
The University of Florida
PO Box 100147
Gainesville, FL 32610-0147
jrc@ichp.ufl.edu
    I. Introduction
    This paper presents new evidence on the productivity of U.S. universities. Our interest in

this subject originates with recent developments in U.S. higher education that strike us as

noteworthy. First, despite their high state, growth of employment and output in top U.S. research

universities has slowed in recent years1. And second, growth of university research has not kept

pace with that of industrial research. This appearance of strain is linked to changes in funding, in

which the federal share of university R&D has declined over time. Given the trends and the

reliance that firms place on universities, an analysis seems warranted to see whether the

slowdown reflects a fundamental decline in university prospects. We find that research

productivity grows at a healthy rate but the allocation of R&D has grown less efficient over time.

While this has interfered with aggregate productivity growth, increasing budget stringency,

especially in public universities, may be the root cause.

    The empirical analysis is based on a panel of 102 top U.S. universities, 68 of which are

public and 34 private, whose outputs and inputs we observe during 1981-1999. A key feature of

our analysis is its separation of productivity into research and teaching, with most of our

emphasis placed on research, owing to data availability. The approach assumes that research and

teaching activities are on the whole separable. In one sense, though, our approach makes a virtue

out of necessity. Price index numbers for research and teaching that could combine the two into

a single index are missing for higher education2.


1
  Data on the top 200 universities world-wide in The Times Higher Education Supplement suggest first, the
preeminence of U.S. universities; and second, erosion of this preeminence. Fifty U.S. schools are in the top 200.
Where a lower rank is better, the mean for 27 U.S. privates is 67.7 in 2004 and 60.7 in 2005; for 23 publics the rank
is 72.5 in 2004 and 94.8 in 2005; the mean U.S. rank falls from 69.9 to 76.4. Shanghai Jiao Tong University ranks
100 schools worldwide in 2003-2005. In 2003 58 U.S. universities are in the top 100, while 53 appear in 2005. The
rankings of U.S. universities improve, but since several publics drop out, it is not clear what to make of this. Both
rankings are controversial. The Times uses employer evaluations while the Shanghai ranking uses a weighted
average of objective data on prizes, papers, citations, and the like. I thank Amanda Goodall for these references.
2
  In the future, the R&D satellite accounts at the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis could fill this gap.
       The definition of productivity is output per faculty-equivalent in research and teaching.

Research output is papers and citations; teaching output consists of undergraduate and graduate

degrees; and numbers of faculty are divided into researchers and teachers. Armed with these

measures we begin the empirical work with a description of research and teaching productivity.

Next we decompose productivity growth into sources within and between universities, and also

groups of public and private universities. Finally, using regression analysis we examine the

determinants of productivity in individual universities.

       Beginning with trends we find that numbers of faculty grow at 0.6 percent per year. This is

demonstrably low compared with the growth of scientists and engineers in U.S. industry. In all

universities during 1981-1999 full-time faculty grow at 1.5 percent a year, while all faculty grow

at two percent (National Science Board 2004, volume 2, table 5-17). By comparison growth in

the industrial science and engineering workforce is 4.9 percent a year during 1980-2000

(National Science Board 2004, volume 1, chapter 3). The university sector is clearly a less

important employer of U.S. scientists and engineers than it was in 1981.

       We find besides that researchers increase more rapidly than teachers. By our reckoning

researchers grow at 1.4 per cent a year while teachers grow at 0.3 percent. At the same time

papers per researcher grow at 1.4 percent and citations to these papers grow at 6.7 percent.

Research productivity is clearly rising. A cautionary note is that growth in citations and real

research growth are not necessarily the same, given the falling cost of citations and worldwide

growth in the number of citing researchers3.

       Research productivity in private universities is roughly twice that of public universities. The

growth rate of research productivity is also greater in private universities, where papers and

citations grow at 2.2 and 8.6 percent per year, than in public universities, where growth is
3
    See the remarks of Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg in Ch. 13 of Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2002).


                                                            2
respectively 1.2 and 6.2 percent. The growth rate of research productivity is therefore two-thirds

to one third higher in private universities.

       Findings on teaching productivity are as follows. The 102 universities produce 4.5

undergraduate degrees per teacher and 2.6 graduate degrees. Undergraduate degrees are 50

percent lower per teacher in private universities, but then graduate degrees per teacher are 50

percent higher in these universities. So relative productivity in the two sets of institutions is

roughly equal. Over time, however, teaching productivity drops slightly in private universities,

while it increases at one percent a year in public schools4. These quantity indexes do not capture

changes in the value of higher education, nor do they capture changes in quality, but they

represent a start on the problem of measuring teaching productivity.

       Besides the study of trends we examine sources of growth in aggregate productivity. By this

we mean a shift-share analysis that decomposes aggregate growth into growth within

universities, growth between universities, and the covariance of growth in shares and

productivity growth. Findings from the decomposition are these. Across all universities the

within-university component of growth accounts for more than 100 percent of growth in research

output. The between-university contribution is smaller but remains positive. But the covariance

of growth in research shares with growth in research productivity is negative. This implies that

research shares grow faster in universities where productivity growth is slower.

       The decomposition yields similar results within groups of private and public universities.

The covariance term is always negative and research grows faster in universities where research

productivity grows more slowly. This result suggests growing allocative inefficiency in research

in higher education. Analysis of sources of growth in teaching productivity tells a similar story.



4
    The comparison between top 10 research universities and non-top 10 schools is similar.


                                                           3
More than 100 percent of growth is accounted for by the within component, the between

component is small but positive, and the covariance term is strictly negative.

   Regression analysis of research and teaching productivity concludes the empirical work. We

find that R&D, endowment, and post-doctoral students increase research productivity but that

research is subject to decreasing returns. In public universities (but not private) there is evidence

that graduate students contribute to research productivity. The nonfederal R&D stock in a

university is linked to a decline in research productivity. This result disappears when fixed

effects are included so that we are unable to identify a within-university effect of nonfederal

R&D. One interpretation is that nonfederal funds are subject to earmarking and are awarded

under less stringent competitive conditions. Another is that the goal of nonfederal funds is less

to produce research than it is to produce information. Regardless of the interpretation, the share

of nonfederal funds in university R&D stocks grows by 19 percent over the sample period.

Overall, it comprises 40 percent of funding in the publics versus 20 percent in the privates. It

could be a factor in productivity differences among public and private universities.

   Regression analysis finds that undergraduate teaching productivity increases with enrollment,

and (in public universities) with graduate assistants. In public universities state appropriations

are linked to a decline in undergraduate degrees per teacher. Production is not subject to

decreasing returns to the same degree as research, suggesting that variation in university size is

primarily a matter of teaching and not research.

   Graduate teaching productivity increases with graduate students and R&D. However, the

output of graduate degrees decreases with the nonfederal share of R&D, suggesting that unlike

federal R&D nonfederal funds are not for the support of graduate students. Reassuringly,

graduate students are at least as important in their own education as they are in faculty research.




                                                   4
      The rest of the paper consists of five sections. Section II describes productivity measurement

and presents identities that decompose productivity growth into within, between, and covariance

components. In addition the section specifies productivity regressions. Section III discusses the

database and presents descriptive statistics. Section IV carries out the decomposition analysis of

productivity growth. Regression findings are presented in Section V. Section VI is a discussion

and conclusion, with emphasis on the challenges facing public universities in the U.S.

    II.   Analytical Framework
             A. Productivity Definitions
      The productivity index that we use in this paper is output per faculty member5. But

university faculty produce both research and teaching. Can labor productivity be measured

separately for the two outputs? Our best but also very imperfect answer is yes. We can exploit

expenditure shares on research and teaching to construct estimates of research and teaching

faculty-equivalents and labor productivity in research and teaching. This of course assumes that

these outputs are separable production processes. While the assumption seems reasonable for

research and undergraduate teaching, it is less promising for research and graduate education. To

an unknown extent these are jointly produced but for practical reasons we set this complication

to one side. First, undergraduate teaching dominates most universities and this conforms to the

assumption of separability. Second, statistics of teaching expenditures by universities do not

distinguish undergraduate and graduate students. Estimated teaching faculty exceeds the number

of undergraduate teachers. The result is a downward bias in undergraduate teaching

productivity. Third, the proportion of graduate teaching in all teaching is higher in universities

of the first rank. Omitting graduate teaching would bias teaching productivity comparisons


5
  We rely on labor productivity for the usual reason in productivity studies, that we lack data on physical capital
stocks which would give us indices of total factor productivity.


                                                           5
between schools. A related reason for including graduate students is that top U.S. research

universities have increasingly emphasized graduate teaching. Omitting graduate education

would under-estimate the growth of teaching productivity. So while research and graduate

education have joint production aspects, there are reasons for provisionally treating the two as

separable.

      We therefore use the following indexes of labor productivity in research and teaching:

                             X jit
(1)                 LPjit   .                     j R, I
                      L jit
Output and faculty form the numerator and denominator of (1). Subscript j                                  R, I stands for

research ( R ) and instruction ( I ), subscript i indexes universities, and t stands for time.

               B. Decomposition of Productivity Growth
           Section IV uses a shift-share analysis to decompose research and teaching productivity

growth into within, between, and covariance components6. We apply this decomposition to the

explanation of productivity growth in universities and groups of public and private universities.

           To simplify notation we drop subscript j                    R, I and let LP stand for either research or

teaching. Also let LPt represent be weighted average of productivity across universities and let

                                                                                        N
LPit stand for productivity of university i . Finally let sit                    Qit / ¦i 1 Qit be the share of

                                     N
university i in total output ¦i 1 Qit . The share variable serves as a weight in the decomposition.

           After some algebra, which is shown in Part A. of the Appendix, we reach

(2)                 'LPt     LPt  LPt 1   ¦s  i it 1
                                                       'LPit  ¦i 'sit 'LPit  ¦i 'sit LPit 1  LPt 1
                                             Within - University         Covariance         Between - University




6
    See for example, Foster, Krizan, and Haltiwanger (2001).


                                                                   6
The change in aggregate productivity consists of three terms. The first is the sum of changes in

productivity within universities weighted by their share in output. This is the within-university

component. The second is the covariance of changes in shares with changes in productivity. It

answers the question: is growth in share positively or negatively associated with productivity

growth? The third term is the between-university component. It is the sum of changes in shares

times the difference between individual and average productivity. This captures whether more

efficient universities on average gain or lose share.

       Equation (2) applies to individual universities, but we are interested besides in groups of

private and public universities. Part B. of the Appendix shows that


(3)             'LPt    >D   t 1                                  @
                                    x 'LPt A  (1 - D t 1 ) x 'LPt B  'D t x ('LPt A  'LPt B )
                                             Within -Group                     Covariance
                                            A          B
                        'D t x ( LP  LP )
                                          t 1       t 1
                                    Between -Group



The first term is the within-group component. It is the average across the two groups of growth

in productivity within each group using within-group average productivity growth. The second

is the covariance component: growth in group A’s share times the gap between growth in its

productivity and group B’s. The third term is the between-group component: the increase in

group A’s share times the difference in its initial productivity and that of group B. We use (2)

and (3) to decompose productivity growth in higher education in Section IV.

           C. Productivity Regressions
       Section V undertakes regression analysis of labor productivity. For this purpose, as noted,

productivity is derived from separable production functions for research and teaching. We

assume that labor productivity in research takes an almost Cobb-Douglas form:




                                                             7
                                                                                          ER
                                                ( ARit LRit )D R G R K itNF  K itF            e J Rt uRit
                   LPRit    QRit / LRit
(4)                                                                   LRit                                    ,
                                                                     ER
                              D R D R 1
                             ARit LRit G R K itNF  K itF                 e J Rt u Rit

The term ARit captures productivity-augmenting features of universities7. We decompose R&D

                                                        NF
of a university ( K Rit ) into the nonfederal stock ( K Rit ), on which we allow a discount or

                                      F
premium G R and the federal stock ( K Rit ). Thus the “effective” R&D stock is

              NF      F 8
K Rit   G R K Rit  K Rit . Also included in (4) are time trend t and u Rit , the error term in research

productivity. Besides G R , the parameters include D R , the output elasticity of labor; E R , the

output elasticity of the R&D stock; and J R , the coefficient of time trend.

         One determinant of ARit is the dummy indicator of public or private control C i . This

affects productivity through governance and selectivity. Endowment Eit is used to hire star

faculty and buy back time, so we expect it to increase productivity. And both post-doctoral and

graduate students M it and G it could augment faculty time. Research labor-augmentation

follows the constant-elasticity function,

                   ARit    BR eK RC C i EitK RE M itK RM GitK RG ,

Inserting this into (4), rearranging, and taking logarithms we reach the nonlinear regression

           ln( QRit / LRit ) D R ln( BR )  J R t  D RK RC Ci  D RK RE ln( Eit / LRit 1 ) 
(5)           D RK RM ln( M it / LRit 1 )  D RK RG ln(Git / LRit 1 )  E R ln> ( G R K Rit
                                                                                          NF      F
                                                                                               K Rit ) / LRit 1 @ 
              [D R (1  K RE  K RM  K RG )  E R  1] ln( LRit 1 ) u Rit

Section V reports estimates of (5). When constant returns to scale hold the coefficient on the


7
  The (almost) Cobb-Douglas assumption means that Hicks-neutral shifts cannot be distinguished from factor
augmentation. For convenience we treat all shifts as labor augmenting.
8
  This functional form allows a direct comparison between the effects of a dollar of non-federal and federal R&D
stock. As far as we are aware, use of this device appears first in Griliches (1986), who used it to distinguish the
effects of basic and applied research on firm productivity.


                                                                      8
logarithm of LRit vanishes. Otherwise its sign captures the direction of divergence from constant

returns9. Notice that we lag LRit on the right by one year to limit division error bias.

         Teaching productivity can be similarly modeled. Assuming a Cobb-Douglas production

function for baccalaureate and graduate degrees, we obtain the following specification for

teaching productivity

                                                 ( AIit LIit ) D I S itE I e J I t u Iit
(6)                LPIit     QIit / LIit                                                    AIitD I LDIitI 1 S itE I e J I t u Iit .
                                                               LIit

Labor augmentation AIit depends on teaching skill and other aspects of teaching. Included are

enrollments or stocks of students in residence S it ; time trend t ; and u Iit , the error term in teaching

productivity. Parameters are D I , the output elasticity of labor, E I , the output elasticity of R&D

stock, and J I , the coefficient of time trend.

         Determinants of instructional labor-augmentation AIit again include public or private

control C i . A second determinant, in public universities, is state teaching appropriations per

teacher Tit . This could be destined for the reduction of class size. If so we expect it to reduce

degrees per teacher. Alternatively, state appropriations could alter the composition of education

in favor of graduate education. But in addition Tit could increase the quality of education. And

third, graduate students Git per teacher could substitute for faculty in undergraduate teaching.

Thus instructional labor-augmentation is represented by the constant-elasticity function,

                   AIit    BI eK IC C i TitK IT GitK IG .

Next insert AIit into (6) and take logarithms:


9
  Adams and Griliches (1998) regress the logarithm of research output on the logarithm of R&D stock. They find
that the specification exhibited diminishing returns at the university-field level and constant returns at the field level.
But they did not examine labor productivity, because the data were not available.


                                                                              9
           ln( QIit / LIit ) D I ln( BI )  J I t  D IK IC Ci  D IK IT ln(Tit / LIit 1 ) 
(7)
             D IK IG ln(Git / LIit 1 )  E I ln(Sit / LIit 1 )  [D I (1  K IT  K IG )  E I  1) ln( LIit 1 ) u Iit

We also include the logarithm of R&D stock in some of the graduate student equations, using the

                                                           NF      F
same functional form E I ln K Rit             E I ln G I K Rit  K Rit , as in (4). Section IV reports estimates

of (7). If constant returns holds the coefficient on LIit disappears; otherwise its sign captures the

divergence from constant returns. As before, we lag LIit to limit division error bias.

 III. Description of the Data
             A. Database of Universities
         This study is based on 110 universities that account for most academic research in the

United States. The primary data sources that we use are the Institute for Scientific Information

(ISI) for research outputs, the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) data

from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) for finances, faculty, salaries, and

degrees; and the National Science Foundation (NSF) CASPAR database for academic R&D and

graduate students. Since data are missing for eight universities this study examines 102 schools.

Allowing for lags we observe universities during 1982-1999. Thus, before missing values are

removed, the data form a panel of 1,836 observations (18 years times 102 universities)10.

      Included in the panel are faculty counts, research and teaching expenditures, research outputs

consisting of papers and citations, and teaching outputs consisting of baccalaureate and graduate

degrees. We use the expenditure data to allocate faculty between research and teaching. These

data yield labor productivity statistics in research and teaching. In addition we construct R&D

stocks, endowment, stocks of graduate students, undergraduate enrollments, and indicators of



10
  Since research and teaching faculty are lagged one year on the right of (5) and (7), the 1981 data are excluded
from the regressions.


                                                                 10
public-private control11. The rest of this section describes the variables and calculations that we

have performed using them.

              B. Faculty Statistics
         The data include estimates of faculty counts by university. We use tenure track and non-

tenure track faculty counts from the National Center for Education Statistics’ (NCES) Faculty

Salary Survey, available through the Integrated Postsecondary Education System (IPEDS).

Figure 1 shows tenure track and non-tenure track faculty over time. Non-tenure track faculty

grow at a slightly faster rate than tenure track faculty, but not by enough to change the non-

tenure track share, which remains at nine percent throughout the period12.

         Since faculty engages in research and teaching and these tend to be competing uses of

time, we would like to obtain faculty-equivalents in these activities. If these were mutually

exclusive production functions for research and teaching would be separable. This assumption is

not as reasonable for graduate education, where teaching and research are to an extent jointly

produced13. But as noted in Section II, it is necessary to tolerate some inaccuracy in the

allocation of faculty to research and teaching. The data on teaching expenditures do not

distinguish undergraduates from graduates and removing graduate education as an output biases

the contributions of different universities.



11
   R&D is over-counted because of transfers between universities. Such transfers should be deducted from the R&D
of sending universities and added to the R&D of receiving universities. But this is not the current practice.
12
   National Science Foundation data show that the share of part-time faculty during 1981-1999 rises from 19 percent
to 28 percent in research universities (National Science Board (2004), Volume 2, Table 5-17). We studied the use of
part-time faculty using the biennial NCES Fall Staff Surveys from 1987 to 1997. Leaving aside graduate assistants
we find that the 34 privates use a higher proportion of part-time faculty than the 68 publics. However, the part-time
proportion grows faster, by 24 percent versus 10 percent. This suggests that the Salary Survey may understate
relative faculty growth in public universities. But the Fall Staff Survey data are rather noisy; and they fail to classify
graduate assistants by teaching and research function. The evidence presented in Table 9 below suggests that
graduate students are an important substitute for faculty in public universities.
13
   Modern graduate education is often credited to the 19th century chemist Justus von Liebig, who learned how to
combine graduate teaching with laboratory research. See the entry on von Liebig in the Encyclopedia Britannica
and Mokyr (2002).


                                                           11
        Thus we employ research and teaching expenditures to separate faculty into research and

teaching components. Note that these categories exclude administration, sports, and auxiliary

enterprises such as food and dormitory services, hospitals, and student organizations. This seems

correct since the primary activities of faculty are teaching and research. Notice also that

research expenditures REXPit include separately budgeted expenditures that are internal and

external to the university. Instructional expenditures IEXPit include expenditures for credit and

non-credit instruction. This includes all instruction: academic, occupational, vocational, special

session, community, and remedial and tutorial instruction. Also included are research and public

service that are not separately budgeted.

        By this account the separation of research and teaching is imperfect. But as an

assumption, it is clearly an improvement on perfect multi-tasking. That assumption argues that

faculty members simultaneously teach and perform research. We replace it with a better

approximation, that the proportion of research faculty equals the proportion of research

expenditures in both research and teaching expenditures REXPit /( REXPit  IEXPit ) . Research and

teaching faculty LRit and LIit in university i at time t are to a first approximation:

                          REXPit
                LRit                   u Lit
(8)                    REXPit  IEXPit       .
                LIit   Lit  LRit

In (8) Lit is total faculty in university i at time t . LRit and LIit are denominators of labor

productivity in research and teaching in equations (1), (4), and (6). There is however, a bias in

this, which suggests that researchers are over-estimated and teachers under-estimated. Because

the research skill price exceeds that of teaching, research expenditures buy fewer researchers and




                                                   12
teaching expenditures buy more teachers than (9) would suggest. But since we know rather little

about the research premium we cannot correct this bias14.

             Figure 2 charts the course of the expenditure proportion REXPit /( REXPit  IEXPit ) . For all

universities the curve’s fish-hook shape reflects the decline in research funding from 1981-1983

and its subsequent recovery and expansion. But the overall curve conceals differences between

public and private universities. In both cases the expenditure share declines through 1983, but

afterwards the pattern differs. The research share in private schools recovers to 0.38 in 1988 but

then declines. This is consistent with reductions in overhead rates for private schools in the late

1980s (Ehrenberg, 2003). The overall pattern in private universities is one of decline, from 0.41

in 1981 to 0.36 in 1999. In contrast, the research share in public universities rises from 0.33 in

1983 to 0.40 in 1999 and the overall pattern is one of increase.

             Table 1 reports means and growth rates of faculty, the research expenditure proportion,

and researchers and teachers. It does so for all, public, and private universities. Universities

employ an average of 1,048 faculty. The research expenditure proportion is 38 percent and an

estimated 381 faculty are engaged do research while 667 teach. Public universities employ 1,218

faculty of which 444 are researchers and 774 teachers. Employment in private schools is 703, of

which 252 are researchers and 451 teachers.

             Table 1 also presents growth rates. Researchers grow faster than teachers by 1.4 percent

a year versus 0.3 percent. Thus research-intensity of faculty is growing. Growth of researchers

is faster in public universities, while growth in teachers is faster in private universities15.

14
     Let f REXP /( REXP  IEXP) as above, and let U ( w R  w I ) / w I ! 0 , where w R =research wage
and w I =teaching wage and let n =measured total faculty. Then it can be shown that the true number of researchers
                   f                                                         (1  f )(1  U )
is n *R                        n and the true number of teachers is n * I                       n . But
          f  (1  f )(1  U )                                             f  (1  f )(1  U )
unfortunately the value of   U   is unknown, including its variation by university.


                                                            13
         Figures 3 and 4 are graphs of research and teaching faculty. To concentrate on

cumulative growth and facilitate comparison we normalize each time series by its 1981 value.

Figure 3 shows that research faculty rise by almost 30 percent in the publics but by less than 15

percent in the privates. Figure 4 reveal that teachers grow by more than 30 percent in the

privates but decline slightly in the publics. For all universities cumulative growth in researchers

is 25 percent by 1999 (Figure 3) but only five percent for teachers (Figure 4). This suggests that

the mix of faculty in top U.S. universities is becoming more research-oriented.

             C. Research and Teaching Outputs
         To calculate labor productivity in research and teaching we require output measures. We

treat papers and citations as research outputs, comparable with patent statistics in industry. The

articles derive from agriculture, astronomy, biology, chemistry, computer science, earth sciences,

economics and business, engineering, mathematics and statistics, medicine, physics, and

psychology. These fields account for most research carried on in universities. The universities

publish 2.4 million papers during 1981-1999 and the papers receive 18.8 million citations. For

each paper we calculate the fraction that a given university contributes. If two schools are listed

each is assigned half of the paper, if three are listed each is assigned one-third, and so on.

Citations received are similarly assigned and in this way we limit the problem of multiple

counting of research output. The fractions are summed across fields by year to arrive at

fractional paper-equivalents of a university per year. Fractional citations are similarly summed,

and the citations are accumulated over the first five years since publication, yielding a five-year

window on citations received. This right-truncates the citations. Also the five-year window cuts




15
  Since research expenditures that are not separately budgeted are recorded as instructional expense, the figures for
instruction may include cross-subsidization of research by teaching.


                                                         14
off citations in 1995, the last year for which a complete record exists. Despite this the five-year

window standardizes citations received and provides a quality dimension for research output.

        Baccalaureate and graduate degrees are currently our indicators of teaching output. At

the present time we lack a quality indicator such as cost or forward value of a degree16. The data

are taken from NCES-IPEDS degree surveys.

        The upper half of Table 2 reports mean research output consisting of papers and five-year

citations, and teaching output consisting of baccalaureate and graduate degrees. As before, we

report data for all, public, and private universities. Universities publish 1,183 papers per year: the

papers account for 4,948 citations over their first five years. Private universities publish slightly

more total papers and public universities slightly less, but private schools have a decided

advantage in citations (Adams and Griliches, 1998), which probably signals differences in

faculty quality as reflected in salary (Ehrenberg, 2003).

        Universities produce 3,010 baccalaureate degrees and 1,747 graduate degrees per year.

Reflecting their size and specialization in undergraduate education, public universities produce

3,795 baccalaureate degrees and 1,721 graduate degrees. Private universities produce 1,417

baccalaureate degrees and 1,758 graduate degrees; they specialize in graduate education.

             D. Labor Productivity in Research and Teaching
        The lower half of Table 2 reports means of productivity by type. The data show an 85

percent advantage of private universities in papers (7.4 papers versus 2.6 papers per faculty), and

an almost 3-to-1 advantage in citations (20.4 citations versus 7.4 citations per researcher)17.



16
   One idea is to use National Association of Colleges and Employers (NACE) data on starting salaries by major, but
these are not available to academic researchers.
17
   Means weighted by size of research faculty. Equally weighted means for public and private institutions are 3.8
and 4.9 papers per researcher, and 17.4 and 25.3 five-year citations per researcher. We prefer weighted means,
which give larger universities more weight and offer a clearer picture of overall research productivity.


                                                        15
         In Table 2 total degrees per teacher are similar across university type. Any differences

show up in undergraduate and graduate productivity18. Indeed the total degree gap is small

considering the concentration of private schools on costly graduate education. The smaller

output of undergraduate degrees per faculty in these institutions again indicates their

specialization in graduate education.

         Figures 5 and 6 are graphs of research productivity over time. Again the series are

normalized by 1981 values. All the series on papers per researcher in Figure 5 grow through

1995 and flatten afterwards. Private universities grow faster, with the divergence taking place

during 1981-1995. By 1999 papers per research faculty grow by 20 percent in public universities

but by 40 percent in public universities. Figure 6 reports citations received per faculty. The data

series end in 1995 given the five-year window on citations. Again a gap opens up between

privates and publics during 1981-1995. By 1995 citations per researcher in public universities

grow by 80 per cent but by 220 percent in private universities.

         Table 3 provides more evidence on the increasing productivity gap between public and

private universities. Annual growth in papers is 1.4 percent in all institutions and growth in

citations is 6.7 percent. Comparable figures in public universities are 1.2 percent (papers) and

6.2 percent (citations). Productivity growth in private universities equals 2.2 percent (papers)

and 8.6 percent (citations).

         The bottom half of the table shows growth in teaching productivity in all universities of

about one percent a year. The data show a decline in teaching productivity in private universities




18
  Since the data do not allow us to distinguish undergraduate teachers from graduate teachers, we are double-
counting teachers in computing teaching productivity. Thus, it is not all clear that fewer undergraduate degrees are
produced per undergraduate teacher in private schools, or that fewer graduate degrees are produced per graduate
teacher in public schools.


                                                         16
of -0.6 to -0.1 percent, compared with a rise of 1.2 to 1.4 percent in public universities. But

again these measurements lack a quality dimension.

        Trends in baccalaureate and graduate degrees per teacher are shown in Figures 7 and 8.

The figures show that all the growth in teaching productivity occurs in public universities.

Comparing these with Figures 6 and 7 we see that as measured, productivity growth is faster in

research than teaching.

            E. Other Data
        We collected several other variables, including faculty salary, academic R&D stocks,

endowment, and state teaching appropriations, all expressed in thousands of 1992 dollars. In

addition we collected lagged stocks of graduate students from the NSF-CASPAR database.

        Table 4 reports means of faculty compensation, consisting of wages plus fringe benefits,

by faculty rank and university type. Mean compensation averages 65 thousand dollars of 1992.

Compensation is higher in private universities, especially at the full professor level, so that the

wage trajectory is much steeper in these universities. Figure 9 shows that compensation also

rises at a faster rate in private universities. Both patterns are familiar, but what is not as well

known is how closely the public-private wage differential tracks the differential in public-private

research productivity (but not teaching productivity). This advantage of private universities is of

course related to their financial resources.

        Past R&D funding contributes to current research output and it also indicates research

excellence. For both reasons it is correlated with research productivity. R&D stock is the

lagged stock of research funding received over the previous eight years, depreciated at 15

percent per year, and expressed in thousands of 1992 dollars. R&D pertains to the same fields of




                                                  17
science and schools that yield the research output statistics19. The source of the R&D data is the

NSF-CASPAR database.

         We divide the R&D stock into federal and nonfederal components. This is a likely factor

in research productivity because nonfederal money could be less subject to competitive pressures

than federal grants and because it may consist of contracts that provide information and advice

rather than publications20. Figure 10 show that nonfederal R&D contributes 20 percent of the

private university stock but 40 percent of the public university stock. The share of nonfederal

R&D grows relative to the federal stock and is 19 percent higher by 1999.

         Endowment is used to attract highly skilled faculty and to support research. For both

reasons, endowment per faculty should increase research productivity. Endowment could also

reduce size of classes or support students, although we fail to find evidence for this. State

appropriations could reduce class size and degrees per faculty member but they could also

expand graduate programs. These data derive from NCES-IPEDS surveys.

         The lagged stock of graduate students helps to produce research and undergraduate

teaching. It should increase research and teaching productivity, but besides this it is an output

(Adams and Griliches, 1998). The graduate student data are drawn from the NSF-CASPAR

database for the 12 sciences in this study. Also taken from this source is the stock of post-

doctoral students, another input into research.




19
   The 12 fields are agriculture, astronomy, biology, chemistry, computer science, earth sciences, economics and
business, engineering, mathematics and statistics, medicine, physics, and psychology.
20
   It is for this reason that we think that recent findings (De Figueiredo and Silverman, 2002) that 5-6 percent of
federal R&D dollars are earmarked and a source of inefficiency represent an understatement of the problem. We
agree that the federal question is interesting, but we also believe that replacement of federal funds by nonfederal
funds may be the larger issue.


                                                         18
 IV. Decomposition of Aggregate Productivity Growth
       Following equation (2), Table 5 reports decompositions of aggregate productivity growth in

research and teaching. The table contains three panels corresponding to all, public, and private

universities. The top line of each panel reports aggregate productivity growth. This is arithmetic

rather than percentage growth. It is the sum of the change in productivity over all universities in

a given set. By (2) the within-university, covariance, and between-university components sum to

the total except for rounding error. The shares of each component in aggregate productivity

growth are shown in parentheses.

       The within-university component dominates. It is usually positive: the exception is a small

decline in teaching productivity within private universities. The covariance term is always

negative: this implies that output share grows more rapidly in universities where productivity

grows more slowly. The between-university component is usually positive: output shares grow

in universities whose productivity is above average. One exception to this is a slight decline in

the between-university component of citations.

       We would like to compare Table 5 with decompositions for the private sector. Foster,

Haltiwanger and Krizan (2001) offers the closest comparison. In their findings for industry the

within-establishment component is a much smaller share of productivity growth21. This is partly

because net entry contributes to industry growth. Entry is identically zero for top universities but

besides this, the covariance term is positive in industry and negative in higher education. In

summary while entry and between-establishment reallocation increase private sector growth,

they are either not a factor (entry) or they decrease growth in universities (covariance).

       Table 6 studies growth in groups of public and private universities. The decomposition

follows (3). Within-group productivity growth is positive but the covariance and between-group
21
     See Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2001), P. 322, Table 8.4, line 2.


                                                           19
terms are negative in seven out of eight cases. The results imply that the share in research and

teaching rises faster for the group whose productivity grows more slowly (covariance

component), and that the share grows faster for the group whose productivity is less (between-

group component). In research it is the less efficient group of public universities whose share

increases, while in teaching it is the apparently less efficient group of private universities.

 V.         Regression Findings
       The empirical work concludes with regression analysis of research and teaching productivity.

Tables 7 and 8 contain findings on research productivity in public and private universities. The

dependent variable in 7.1-7.3 is the logarithm of papers per research faculty. The dependent

variable in 7.4-7.6 is the logarithm of five-year citations to the papers per research faculty.

Equations 7.3 and 7.6 include university fixed effects while the rest exclude these effects.

       Consider papers per researcher in public universities. The coefficient of time trend is

negative and significant in 7.1 and 7.2 but is positive and significant in 7.3. This is consistent

with the shift of research towards less productive universities. Table 5 has shown that as a result,

within-university growth accounts for more than 100 percent of growth. This negative

“between” effect is included in 7.1 and 7.2 but is omitted from the “within” regression 7.3.

       Besides trend, the table includes the logarithm of R&D stock per researcher, and it also

includes the logarithm of lagged researchers, as a check on returns to scale. The nonfederal

coefficient is significantly less than that of federal R&D and it approximates zero in the citation

regressions22. The R&D elasticity is always positive. The coefficient of lagged researchers is

negative, suggesting decreasing returns to scale throughout.




22
     The negative sign on nonfederal R&D does not hit a boundary because nonfederal funds are small.


                                                         20
       Equation 7.2 adds endowment, graduate students, and post-doctoral students to 7.123. The

effect of R&D stock declines but remains positive and significant. Since R&D stock supports

graduate and post-doctoral students, part of its effect is mediated by these variables, which are

accordingly positive and significant. In 7.2, endowment has a small positive effect. The sign

and significance of lagged researchers again suggests diminishing returns.

       We include fixed effects in the within-university equation 7.3, which is otherwise the same as

7.2. The elasticities of the R&D stock, graduate students, and post-doctoral students decline in

the within-university dimension but remain positive and significant. Endowment is now

negative and significant, which is puzzling. Diminishing returns are stronger than before.

       Equations 7.4-7.6 report citation regressions whose setup follows 7.1-7.3. Compared to the

earlier results trend growth is higher but consistent with Table 5 it is still higher in the “within”

regression 7.6. The discount of nonfederal R&D is even greater than for papers, but this effect

disappears in 7.6. The elasticity of R&D stock is higher than in the papers regressions, which

suggests that part of R&D’s effect occurs through research quality. Diminishing returns to R&D

continues to prevail. The contribution of post-doctoral students (but not graduate students) to

research productivity remains positive and significant once fixed effects are included.

       Table 8 reports similar results for private universities. Equations 8.1-8.2 and 8.4-8.5 are the

“total” specifications for papers and citations. As in Table 7 the coefficient of time trend reverses

sign when fixed effects are included in 8.3 and 8.6. When fixed effects are included, as in 8.3

and 8.6, the elasticity of the R&D stock declines but this coefficient remains significant. The

estimate of the nonfederal coefficient is imprecise: in the papers equations 8.1 and 8.3 it is

significantly less than 1.0, but in 8.2 this difference is not significant. The nonfederal effect is

significantly less than zero in 8.4 and 8.5 but does not differ from 1.0 in the “within” equation
23
     To be more precise, graduate and post-doctoral students are averages of stocks over the previous three years.


                                                           21
8.6. Overall, as in Table 7, the nonfederal R&D coefficient is less than or equal to that of federal

R&D. Endowment is consistently stronger in Table 8, implying that private universities are

adept at harnessing endowment to raise their research productivity. The coefficient of post-

doctoral students increases but the graduate student coefficient decreases compared with Table 7.

Thus private universities rely more on post-doctoral students to produce their research.

       Finally we turn to Tables 9 and 10, which contain regression findings for teaching

productivity. The dependent variable in 9.1-9.3 and 10.1-10.3 is the logarithm of baccalaureate

degrees per teacher. In 9.4-9.6 and 10.4-10.6 it is the logarithm of graduate degrees per teacher.

       We begin with undergraduate productivity in public universities. Equation 9.1 includes time

trend, the logarithm of undergraduate enrollments per teacher, and following (7) the logarithm of

teachers, to test for the returns to scale to teaching24. Time trend is insignificant. The logarithm

of enrollment is positive and significant, and its coefficient is robust in 9.3 to the inclusion of

fixed effects. We would expect it to be robust given that students are inputs into their own

education (Rothschild and White, 1995, Winston, 1999). The coefficient of teaching faculty is

positive and significant in 9.1, suggesting increasing returns. However, when fixed effects are

included in 9.3 this sign reverses. Thus, unlike research, where returns are decreasing, the

evidence on returns to scale is mixed in undergraduate teaching.

       Equation 9.2 includes the logarithms of graduate students, endowment, and state

appropriations per teacher. Graduate students play a significant role in public undergraduate

education but it is perhaps not surprising that endowment has little effect. State appropriations

reduce degrees per faculty, but the interpretation of this is unclear. Equation 9.3 adds fixed

effects to 9.2. Enrollment and graduate students remain important determinants of baccalaureate

degrees within universities, but state appropriations drop out.
24
     To be precise, undergraduate enrollment is the average undergraduate enrollment over the previous three years.


                                                           22
   The graduate teaching equations conclude Table 9. Equation 9.4 includes trend, graduate

students, and lagged teachers. Trend is positive and significant, graduate students are a key input

into their own education, and the sign of lagged teachers provides some evidence of diminishing

returns. Equation 9.5 adds state appropriations per teacher. These increase output of graduate

degrees, the opposite of 9.2. Together this suggests that state support substitutes graduate

students for undergraduates. Since R&D hones the research skills of graduate students, equation

9.5 also includes the logarithm of the stock of R&D. The coefficient of nonfederal stock has a

negative effect on graduate degrees; this is insignificant in 9.6. Federal R&D supports graduate

education while nonfederal R&D does not. Equation 9.6 adds fixed effects to 9.5. Coefficients

of graduate students and R&D stock remain significant, but the signs of endowment, state

appropriations, and lagged teachers change. In particular, the evidence on decreasing returns in

this table is fragile and conflicting. Along with the evidence on decreasing returns to research it

suggests that variation in university size is primarily due to teaching.

   Table 10 reports findings for private universities. Main differences from Table 9 are these.

First, there is evidence for decreasing returns to undergraduate teaching in private universities.

Second, unlike their role in public universities, graduate students are not a significant input for

undergraduate education. As before graduate degrees do not increase with nonfederal R&D.

 VI. Discussion and Conclusion
   This paper finds evidence of growing allocative inefficiency in U.S. higher education. Our

most compelling evidence for this claim derives from research output, which is better measured

than teaching output at this time. We find that universities whose productivity grows less rapidly

experience more rapid growth in research share. The allocation of research between public and

private universities has also grown less efficient over time. While the share of public universities




                                                 23
grows more rapidly their research productivity grows more slowly. On top of this the between-

university component is negative: the public university share grows though their research

productivity is less. One suspect that might explain this growing inefficiency is nonfederal R&D.

Its more rapid growth and its much larger role in public universities fit the patterns that we

observe. In support of this view, Tables 7 and 8 show that nonfederal R&D stock decreases

research productivity. Whether this result is due to less competitive conditions attending

nonfederal grants or whether nonfederal awards produce less research by intention, we cannot

say. According to Tables 7 and 8 private university endowments also contribute to the gap in

public-private research productivity.

    Our findings for teaching productivity are similar, but we are less convinced by them. For

starters, the quality dimension of instruction is missing. Falling class size could reflect a rising

demand for quality due to growth in wealth at the top of the distribution. This indicates that

families partly control the allocation of students to schools. Surely this moderates allocative

inefficiency in teaching.

   A deeper interpretation of the observations might instead point to the financial fortunes of

public and private universities over the past quarter century. The public-private comparisons in

this paper are consistent with rising teaching pressures on public universities that could well

discourage more productive researchers from applying for positions. This decline in

competitiveness might explain the increasing reliance, especially by state universities, on

nonfederal R&D that appears to detract from research-productivity. On that interpretation, the

rising allocative inefficiency of research that we uncover results from funding pressures that

render state universities less competitive, and drive them to less productive funding sources.

     This view of the matter implies a stunning reversal of fortune for public universities.




                                                 24
Starting from the Morrill Act of 1862 and the Hatch Act of 1887, state universities offered

practical education in the agricultural and mechanical arts to support local industry. For more

than a century this formula has achieved great successes (Huffman and Evenson, 1993; Adams,

2002). But in our own time it appears to have been less successful. This can perhaps be traced

to aging of the population and to the rising mobility of students, both of which weaken the appeal

of state finance of universities. If this interpretation is correct, then it suggests a different and

more privatized approach to funding universities that would place greater reliance on parental

finance of teaching, and federal and private foundation finance of research. In any event, some

solution seems urgent if the U.S. is to retain its preeminence in higher education, and

subsequently in science, technology, and innovation.




                                                   25
                                        References

Adams, James D., “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers,” Journal

       of Economic Geography 2 (2002): 253-278.

______________, and Zvi Griliches, “Research Productivity in a System of Universities,” Les

       Annales D’Economie et de Statistique 49/50 (1998): 127-162.

______________, Grant C. Black, J. Roger Clemmons, and Paula E. Stephan, “Scientific Teams

       and Institutional Collaborations: Evidence from U.S. Universities, 1981-1999,” Research

       Policy 34 (2005): 259-285.

De Figueiredo, John M., and Brian S. Silverado, “Academic Earmarks and the Returns to

       Lobbying,” forthcoming in Journal of Law and Economics.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., “Studying Ourselves: The Academic Labor Market,” Journal of Labor

       Economics 21 (April 2003): 267-288.

Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan, “Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons

       from Microeconomic Evidence,” in Charles R. Hulten, Edwin R. Dean, and Michael J.

       Harper, New Developments in Productivity Analysis, Studies in Income and Wealth,

       Volume 63, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic

       Research, 2001.

Griliches, Zvi, “Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970s,”

       American Economic Review 76 (March 1986): 141-154.

Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg, Patents, Citations and Innovations: A Window on

       the Knowledge Economy, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2002.

Huffman, Wallace E., and Robert E. Evenson, Science for Agriculture: A Long-Term

       Perspective, Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press, 1993.



                                              26
Mokyr, Joel, The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy, Princeton,

       New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2002.

National Research Council, Research-Doctorate Programs in the United States: Continuity

       and Change, Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 1995.

National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators 2004, Arlington, VA: National

       Science Foundation (Volume 1, NSB 04-1; volume 2, NSB 04-1A) 2004.

Rothschild, Michael, and Lawrence J. White, “The Analytics of the Pricing of Higher Education

       and Other Services in Which the Customers Are Inputs,” Journal of Political Economy

       103 (June 1995): 573-586.

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Institute of Higher Education, “Academic Ranking of World

       Universities,” http://ed.sjtu.edu.cn/ranking.htm, various years.

Winston, Gordon C., “Subsidies, Hierarchy and Peers: The Awkward Economics of Higher

       Education,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (Winter 1999): 12-36.

Times Higher Education Supplement, http://www.thes.co.uk/international comparisons , various

       years.




                                                27
                                                  Appendix
                                          Productivity Decomposition
        Section IV uses the shift-share analysis described in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan

(2001) to decompose productivity growth into within, between, and covariance components for

universities. This section explains the algebra underlying equations (2) and (3) of the text.

    A. Decomposition among Individual Universities
        Let LPt represent mean labor productivity across universities, LPit stand for productivity

                                                   N
of a university, and sit          Qit / ¦i 1 Qit represent the share of a university in total output. Then

                'LPt         LPt  LPt 1
                         ¦ s LP ¦ s LP ¦ s LP ¦ s LP 
                              i   it       it               i       it 1         it 1                     i    it        it             i       it 1         it 1


                       ¦ s LP ¦ s LP ¦ s 'LP  ¦ s LP ¦ s
                         i    it 1       it            i       it 1            it                 i       it 1               it            i       it        it           i   it 1   LPit
(A.1)
                         ¦ s 'LP  ¦ s LP ¦ s LP
                              i   it 1            it                 i     it          it                  i    it 1          it

                        ¦ s LP ¦ s LP  ¦ s LP ¦ s LP
                              i   it       it 1                i     it          it 1                 i       it 1       it 1                 i    it 1         it 1


                         ¦ s 'LP  ¦ 's 'LP  ¦ 's LP
                              i   it 1            it                 i          it            it                     i     it       it 1

To (A.1) we add the term:

(A.2)           ¦ 's
                   i    it LPt 1



(A.2) equals zero because LPt-1 can be factored out and the sum of the changes in shares is zero.

Combining terms in the result yields equation (2) of the text:

(A.3)           'LPt         LPt  LPt 1                       ¦s    i it 1
                                                                                      'LPit  ¦i 'sit 'LPit  ¦i 'sit LPit 1  LPt 1
                                                                Within - University                                 Covariance                                   Between - University



    B. Decomposition among Groups of Universities
        We are also interested in contributions of groups of universities A and B to productivity

growth. Let A and B exhaust the set of universities. Then aggregate labor productivity growth is


(A.4)
                'LPt         LPt  LPt 1                ¦ s LP ¦ s LP
                                                                      i it             it               i it 1            it 1


                                  ¦       s LPit
                                       A it
                                                        ¦ s LP  ¦ s LP ¦
                                                                      A it 1                it 1                        B it       it                     s
                                                                                                                                                           B it 1
                                                                                                                                                                     LPit 1


                                                                                                28
Notice that the sit weights do not add to 1.0 within groups. The following equation rewrites the

weighted averages of labor productivities in (A.4) in terms of within-group averages:

                    'LPt         D t ¦ A s Ait LPit D t 1 ¦ A s Ait 1LPit 1
(A.5)
                               (1  D t )¦ B s B it LPit (1  D t 1 )¦ B s B it 1LPit 1

The three new terms in (A.5) are:

(A.6)               Dt       ¦   A
                                     Qit y     ¦    A
                                                        Qit  ¦ B Qit


(A.7)
                    s A jt   Q jt y     ¦       A
                                                    Qit ,                jA
                    s B jt   Q jt     y ¦       B
                                                    Qit ,                jB

Factor total output from the denominator of (A.6). Then multiply and divide by the sum of

output in each group using the within-group weights (A.7). As a result we can rewrite (A.5) as

                    'LPt         D t LPt A  D t 1 LPt A1
(A.8)
                               (1  D t ) LPt B  (1  D t 1 ) LPt B1

The top line of (A.8) is

(A.9)                D t LPt A  D t 1 LPt A1 D t 1 x 'LPt A  'D t x 'LPt A  'D t x LPt A1

The bottom line of (A.8) equals

(A.10) (1 - D t ) LPt B  (1  D t 1 ) LPt B1              (1  D t 1 ) x 'LPt B  ' (1  D t ) x 'LPt B  ' (1  D t ) x LPt B1

Substitute (A.9) and (A.10) into (A.8) and combine terms using '(1  D t )                                     'D t . We reach



(A.11)              'LPt       >D     t 1                                         @
                                             x 'LPt A  (1 - D t 1 ) x 'LPt B  'D t x ('LPt A  'LPt B )
                                                        Within - Group                           Covariance
                                                      A            B
                              'D t x ( LP  LP )   t 1         t 1
                                             Between - Group



(A.11) is equation (3) of the text.




                                                                           29
                                        Figure 1-Average Number of Faculty
                                                 102 Universities, 1981-1999

                 1050                                                                150




                 1000




                                                                                           Non-Tenure Track
                                                                                     100
 Tenure Track




                                                                                                                Tenure Track Faculty
                  950
                                                                                                                Non-Tenure Track Faculty

                                                                                     50
                  900




                  850                                                                0
                        1981     1984    1987    1990     1993      1996      1999
                                                 Year




                               Figure 2-Ratio of Research to Total Expenditures
                                                 102 Universities, 1981-1999

                 0.43



                 0.41

                                                                                                              Research Proportion, All 102
Research Ratio




                 0.39                                                                                         Universities
                                                                                                              Research Proportion, 68
                                                                                                              Public Universities
                 0.37
                                                                                                              Research Proportion, 34
                                                                                                              Private Universities
                 0.35



                 0.33
                        1981     1984     1987     1990      1993          1996      1999
                                                   Year




                                                                    30
                               Figure 3-Research Faculty Equivalents
                                  102 Universities, 1981-1999 (1981=1.0)

           1.4



           1.3

                                                                          Research Faculty, All 102
           1.2                                                            Universities
Faculty




                                                                          Research Faculty, 68 Public
                                                                          Universities
           1.1
                                                                          Research Faculty, 34 Private
                                                                          Universities
            1



           0.9
                 1981   1984      1987   1990   1993        1996   1999
                                         Year




                         Figure 4-Instructional Faculty Equivalents
                                  102 Universities, 1981-1999 (1981=1.0)

           1.4



           1.3

                                                                          Instructional Faculty, All 102
           1.2                                                            Universities
 Faculty




                                                                          Instructional Faculty, 68
                                                                          Public Universities
           1.1
                                                                          Instructional Faculty, 34
                                                                          Private Universities
             1



           0.9
                 1981   1984      1987   1990   1993        1996   1999
                                         Year




                                                       31
                                          Figure 5-Papers per Research Faculty
                                             102 Universities, 1981-1999 (1981=1.0)

                    1.5


                    1.4


                    1.3                                                                  Papers per Faculty, All 102
                                                                                         Universities
  Faculty




                                                                                         Papers per Faculty, 68 Public
                    1.2
                                                                                         Universities
                                                                                         Papers per Faculty, 34
                    1.1
                                                                                         Private Universities

                      1


                    0.9
                          1981     1984     1987      1990    1993        1996    1999
                                                      Year




                                 Figure 6-Five-Year Citations per Research Faculty
                                             102 Universities, 1981-1995 (1981=1.0)

                    2.4

                    2.2

                     2
                                                                                         Citations per Faculty, All 102
Citations/Faculty




                    1.8                                                                  Universities

                    1.6
                                                                                         Citations per Faculty, 68
                                                                                         Public Universities
                    1.4                                                                  Citations per Faculty, 34
                                                                                         Private Universities
                    1.2

                     1

                    0.8
                          1981       1984          1987      1990          1993
                                                      Year




                                                                     32
                               Figure 7-Bacc. Degrees per Instructional Faculty
                                        102 Universities, 1981-1999 (1981=1.0)

                  1.3



                  1.2

                                                                                 Bacc. Degrees per Faculty,
Degrees/Faculty




                  1.1                                                            All 102 Universities
                                                                                 Bacc. Degrees per Faculty,
                                                                                 68 Public Universities
                   1
                                                                                 Bacc. Degrees per Faculty,
                                                                                 34 Private Universities
                  0.9



                  0.8
                        1981     1984   1987   1990   1993        1996   1999
                                               Year




                               Figure 8-Grad. Degrees per Instructional Faculty
                                        102 Universities, 1981-1999 (1981=1.0)

                  1.3




                  1.2
                                                                                 Grad. Degrees per Faculty,
Degrees/Faculty




                                                                                 All 102 Universities
                                                                                 Grad. Degrees per Faculty,
                  1.1
                                                                                 68 Public Universities
                                                                                 Grad. Degrees per Faculty,
                                                                                 34 Private Universities
                   1




                  0.9
                        1981     1984   1987   1990   1993        1996   1999
                                               Year




                                                             33
                                      Figure 9-Faculty Compensation
                                      102 Universities, 1981-1999 (1981=1.0)

               1.7

               1.6

               1.5
                                                                                          Compensation, All 102
Compensation




               1.4                                                                        Universities
                                                                                          Compensation, 68 Public
               1.3
                                                                                          Universities
               1.2                                                                        Compensation, 34 Private
                                                                                          Universities
               1.1

                1

               0.9
                     1981     1984    1987     1990     1993         1996      1999
                                               Year




                              Figure 10-Non-Federal Share in R&D Stock
                                             102 Universities, 1981-1999

               0.475


               0.425


               0.375                                                                  Non-Federal Share, All 102
                                                                                      Universities
 Share




                                                                                      Non-Federal Share, 68 Public
               0.325
                                                                                      Universities
                                                                                      Non-Federal Share, 34 Private
               0.275
                                                                                      Universities

               0.225


               0.175
                       1981    1984   1987    1990    1993        1996      1999
                                              Year




                                                             34
                                           Table 1
                         Faculty by Research and Teaching Function,
                          Public and Private Universities, 1981-1999


                                                                  University Classification
                    Faculty Indicator
                                                               All         Public       Private

Means
   Tenure Track + Non-Tenure Track Faculty                    1,048          1,218          703
   Research Expenditure Proportion                            0.379          0.381         0.376
   Research Faculty-Equivalents                                 381           444           252
   Instructional Faculty-Equivalents                            667           774           451
Annual Percentage Growth Rates
   Tenure Track + Non-Tenure Track Faculty                      0.6            0.4          1.4
   Research Expenditure Proportion                              0.5            1.0          -0.5
   Research Faculty-Equivalents                                 1.4            1.6           0.8
   Instructional Faculty-Equivalents                            0.3           -0.1          1.8
Notes: The universities are 110 top U.S. research universities, less eight schools with incomplete
data. Means and growth rates of the expenditure proportion are weighted by expenditure.

                                          Table 2
                      Research and Teaching Outputs and Productivity,
                         Public and Private Universities, 1981-1999


                                                                University Classification
                    Faculty Indicator                         All        Public        Private

 Mean Research Output
    Papers                                                1,183        1,173            1,204
    Five-Year Citations                                   4,948        4,170            6,526
 Mean Teaching Output
    Baccalaureate Degrees                                 3,010        3,795            1,417
    Graduate Degrees                                      1,747        1,741            1,758
 Weighted Mean Research Productivity
    Papers/Research Faculty                                 3.1          2.6              4.8
    Five-Year Citations/Research Faculty                   10.3          7.4             20.4
 Weighted Mean Teaching Productivity
    Baccalaureate Degrees/Teaching Faculty                  4.5          4.9             3.1
    Graduate Degrees/Teaching Faculty                       2.6          2.2             3.9
Notes: Means of research and teaching productivity are weighted by faculty size.


                                               35
                                        Table 3
         Annual Percentage Growth Rates in Research and Teaching Productivity,
                       Public and Private Universities, 1981-1999


                                                               University Classification
                Productivity Statistic
                                                         All            Public        Private

  Percentage Growth in Research Productivity
     Papers/Research Faculty                                  1.4           1.2      2.2
     Five-Year Citations/Research Faculty                     6.7           6.2      8.6
  Percentage Growth in Teaching Productivity
     Baccalaureate Degrees/Teaching Faculty                   0.8           1.2      -0.6
     Graduate Degrees/Teaching Faculty                        1.1           1.4      -0.1
Notes: The table covers 1981-1999 for papers and 1981-1995 for citations. Productivity growth
rates are weighted by faculty size. All growth rates are in percents per year.



                                          Table 4
                              Faculty Compensation by Rank,
                         Public and Private Universities, 1981-1999


                                                               University Classification
                  Faculty Indicator
                                                         All            Public        Private

 Means
    Assistant Professor                                 49.1          48.7           50.0
    Associate Professor                                 59.3          58.5           61.2
    Full Professor                                      81.9          79.4           87.4
    All Ranks                                           64.7          62.6           69.5
Notes: Faculty compensation is expressed in thousands of 1992 dollars and includes fringe
benefits in addition to wages.




                                             36
                                                Table 5
                   Aggregate Productivity Growth in University Research and Teaching,
                          (Shares in Total Productivity Growth in Parentheses)

                                          Papers/          Five-Year        Bacc. Degrees/         Grad.
       University Classification        Res. Faculty     Citations/ Res.    Teach. Faculty       Degrees/
                                                            Faculty                            Teach. Faculty
    All Universities (N=102)
      Total Productivity Growth              0.701 (1.00)     8.625 (1.00)       0.585 (1.00)     0.470 (1.00)
         Within University                   0.846 (1.21)     9.998 (1.16)       0.801 (1.37)     0.512 (1.09)
         Covariance                        -0.374 (-0.53)   -1.518 (-0.18)     -0.251 (-0.43)   -0.221 (-0.47)
         Between University                  0.229 (0.33)     0.145 (0.02)       0.035 (0.06)     0.178 (0.38)
    Public Universities (N=68)
       Total Productivity Growth             0.509 (1.00)     5.969 (1.00)       0.976 (1.00)     0.518 (1.00)
         Within University                   0.520 (1.02)     5.933 (0.99)       1.041 (1.07)     0.626 (1.21)
         Covariance                        -0.297 (-0.58)   -0.589 (-0.10)     -0.189 (-0.19)   -0.145 (-0.28)
         Between University                  0.287 (0.56)     0.625 (0.10)       0.123 (0.13)     0.037 (0.07)
    Private Universities (N=34)
       Total Productivity Growth             1.534 (1.00)    20.019 (1.00)      -0.377 (1.00)    -0.064 (1.00)
         Within University                   1.880 (1.23)    22.878 (1.14)      -0.176 (0.46)    0.051 (-0.80)
         Covariance                        -0.514 (-0.34)   -2.582 (-0.13)      -0.190 (0.50)    -0.334 (5.22)
         Between University                  0.168 (0.11)   -0.278 (-0.01)      -0.010 (0.03)    0.219 (-3.42)
       Notes: Productivity growth is the difference over 1981-1999. It is the arithmetic difference
        X T  X 1 and not ( X T  X 1 ) / X 1 . The decomposition follows equation (2). The sum of the
       components may differ slightly from the total because of rounding error.


                                                    Table 6
                              Aggregate Productivity Growth Within and Between
                                   Groups of Public and Private Universities
                              (Shares in Total Productivity Growth in Parentheses)


     Productivity Statistic           Papers/ Res.      Citations/ Res.     Bacc. Degrees/       Grad. Degrees/
                                        Faculty            Faculty          Teach. Faculty       Teach. Faculty
All Universities (N=102)
 Total Productivity Growth               0.701 (1.00)      8.625 (1.00)        0.585 (1.00)        0.470 (1.00)
   Within Group                          0.755 (1.08)      9.339 (1.08)        0.709 (1.21)        0.403 (0.86)
   Covariance                          -0.022 (-0.03)     -0.424 (-0.05)      -0.069 (-0.12)      -0.030 (-0.06)
   Between Group                       -0.032 (-0.05)     -0.291 (-0.03)      -0.055 (-0.09)       0.097 (0.21)
      Notes: Productivity growth is the difference over 1981-1999. It is the arithmetic difference
       X T  X 1 and not ( X T  X 1 ) / X 1 . The decomposition follows equation (3). The sum of the
      components may differ slightly from the total because of rounding error.



                                                       37
                                                     Table 7
                         Public Universities: NLLS Research Productivity Equations,
                                 Papers and Citations Per Research Faculty
                                          (t-Statistics in Parentheses)


     Variable or Statistic            Papers per Research Faculty             Citations per Research Faculty

                                     7.1          7.2            7.3           7.4          7.5              7.6


Time Period                         1982-        1982-         1982-         1982-         1982-        1982-
                                    1999         1999          1999          1995          1995         1995
University Fixed Effects             No           No            Yes           No            No           Yes

Time Trend                        -0.026***    -0.015***       0.009***    -0.016***       0.002       0.056***
                                    (-10.9)       (-7.6)          (8.6)       (-3.6)        (0.4)        (24.5)
Nonfederal Stock of R&D per        0.477***    0.478***        0.566***      -0.043       -0.113*       0.738*
Research Faculty-1 ( G R )            (6.3)       (5.0)           (4.1)       (-0.9)       (-2.0)         (2.0)
Log (Stock of R&D per              0.707***    0.455***        0.297***     0.831***     0.544***      0.272***
Research Faculty-1) ( E R )          (31.4)      (21.7)          (16.3)       (20.6)       (13.8)         (6.7)
Log (Endowment per Research                    0.021***       -0.019***                  0.050***       -0.005
Faculty-1)                                        (3.3)          (-4.4)                     (4.5)        (-0.6)
Log (Graduate Students per                     0.431***        0.277***                  0.312***     -0.178***
Research Faculty-1)                              (15.7)          (12.8)                     (6.3)        (-3.5)
Log (Post-Doctoral Students                    0.138***          0.004                   0.218***      0.042***
per Research Faculty-1)                          (14.2)           (0.8)                    (12.4)         (3.3)
Log (Research Faculty-1)          -0.245***    -0.224***      -0.400***    -0.301***    -0.325***     -0.807***
                                    (-13.3)      (-15.1)        (-32.4)      (-9.0)       (-11.2)       (-30.1)
Number of Universities                68            68             68          68            68            68

Number of Observations              1054         1054           1054          831           831          831

Root Mean Squared Error             0.406        0.325          0.073        0.573         0.534        0.122

Adjusted R2                         0.625        0.760          0.988        0.573         0.679        0.983

       Notes: Dependent variables are logarithms of papers and citations per research faculty-
       equivalent. So as to avoid division error bias, research faculty-equivalents used in the right-hand
       side variables are lagged one year relative to research faculty equivalents on the left. ***
       Significant at the one-tenth of one per cent level. **Significant at the one per cent level. *
       Significant at the five per cent level.




                                                         38
                                                  Table 8
                      Private Universities: NLLS Research Productivity Equations,
                               Papers and Citations Per Research Faculty
                                       (t-Statistics in Parentheses)


    Variable or Statistic           Papers per Research Faculty              Citations per Research Faculty

                                    8.1          8.2            8.3          8.4           8.5           8.6


Time Period                       1982-         1982-         1982-        1982-         1982-         1982-
                                  1999          1999          1999         1995          1995          1995
University Fixed Effects           No            No            Yes          No            No            Yes

Time Trend                       -0.024***   -0.017***          0.003    -0.015***       0.008*      0.042***
                                    (-8.3)      (-5.4)           (1.8)      (-3.9)         (2.1)       (14.1)
Nonfederal Stock of R&D           0.617***    1.352***          0.315    -0.467***     -0.627***        0.891
per Research Faculty-1 ( G R )       (3.8)       (3.9)           (1.6)      (-8.4)       (-56.8)        (1.7)
Log (Stock of R&D per             0.699***    0.443***        0.304***    0.793***      0.325***     0.295***
Research Faculty-1) ( E R )         (21.0)      (13.4)          (11.4)      (16.9)        (10.6)        (6.8)
Log (Endowment per                            0.094***        0.144***                  0.121***      0.104**
Research Faculty-1) a                            (5.4)           (6.9)                     (5.1)        (3.1)
Log (Graduate Students per                     0.077**         0.068*                    -0.036        -0.072
Research Faculty-1)                              (2.7)           (2.1)                    (-1.0)        (-1.4)
Log (Post-Doctoral Students                   0.263***          0.031                   0.539***        0.033
per Research Faculty-1)                         (11.7)           (1.5)                    (17.2)        (1.0)
Log (Research Faculty-1)         -0.264***   -0.214***       -0.381***   -0.193***     -0.100***     -0.553***
                                   (-10.9)     (-10.6)         (-15.7)     (-5.1)         (-3.5)       (-14.1)
Number of Universities               34           34              34         34             34            34

Number of Observations a           475           475           475          475           475            475

Root Mean Squared Error            0.318        0.260          0.072       0.499         0.364          0.117

Adjusted R2                        0.558        0.705          0.977       0.584         0.779          0.977

     Notes: Dependent variables are logarithms of papers and citations per research faculty-
     equivalent. So as to avoid division error bias, research faculty-equivalents used in the right-hand
     side variables are lagged one year relative to research faculty equivalents on the left. a By
     coincidence data on endowments of private universities end in 1995 so that numbers of
     observations on papers and five-year citations are the same. *** Significant at the one-tenth of
     one per cent level. **Significant at the one per cent level. * Significant at the five per cent level.




                                                        39
                                                  Table 9
                 Public Universities: OLS and NLLS Teaching Productivity Equations,
                      Baccalaureate and Graduate Degrees Per Teaching Faculty
                                       (t-Statistics in Parentheses)


     Variable or Statistic        Bacc. Degrees per Teaching Faculty       Grad. Degrees per Teaching Faculty

                                      9.1          9.2           9.3           9.4          9.5              9.6

Estimation Method                    OLS          OLS           OLS           OLS          NLLS             NLLS

Time Period                         1982-         1982-         1982-        1982-         1982-            1982-
                                     1999          1999          1999        1999           1999             1999
University Fixed Effects              No            No            Yes         No             No              Yes
Time Trend                          0.003        -0.001       0.007***     0.011***      -0.008***          -0.001
                                     (1.5)        (-0.6)         (6.7)       (4.0)         (-3.8)           (-0.8)
Log (Undergrad. Enrollment        0.790***      0.604***      0.487***
per Teaching Faculty-1)             (31.9)        (23.9)        (12.2)
Log (Endowment per Teaching                      -0.007        -0.003                     0.031***      -0.020**
Faculty-1)                                        (-1.5)        (-0.5)                       (4.8)        (-3.2)
Log (Graduate Students per                      0.354***       0.065*      0.409***       0.248***     0.408***
Teaching Faculty-1)                               (16.1)         (2.2)       (16.7)          (8.7)       (10.6)
Log (State Appropriations per                    -0.243        -0.017                      0.068**      0.061**
Teaching Faculty-1)                              (-11.8)        (-0.9)                       (2.6)        (3.2)
Nonfederal Stock of R&D per                                                              -0.308***       -0.090
Teaching Faculty-1 ( G I )                                                                  (-4.5)        (-1.2)
Log (Stock of R&D per                                                                     0.130***     0.268***
Teaching Faculty-1) ( E I )                                                                  (5.0)        (9.3)
Log (Teaching Faculty-1)          0.106***      0.069***      -0.354***    -0.066***        0.007      -0.135***
                                    (8.1)         (4.9)         (-7.8)       (-3.8)          (0.4)        (-7.5)
Number of Universities               68            68             68           68             68            68

Number of Observations               886           886           886          886           886              886

Root Mean Squared Error             0.276         0.240         0.069        0.346         0.320            0.088
F                                 353.5+++      280.7+++      409.2+++     144.3+++          --               --
Adjusted R2                         0.544         0.655         0.971        0.327         0.426            0.957

      Notes: Dependent variables are logarithms of undergraduate and graduate degrees per teaching
      faculty-equivalent. To avoid division error bias teaching faculty used in the right-hand side
      variables are lagged one year relative to teaching faculty on the left. *** Significant at the one-
      tenth of one per cent level. **Significant at the one per cent level. * Significant at the five per
      cent level. +++ F-statistic is significant at the one-tenth of one percent level.


                                                         40
                                                 Table 10
                Private Universities: OLS and NLLS Teaching Productivity Equations,
                      Baccalaureate and Graduate Degrees Per Teaching Faculty
                                      (t-Statistics in Parentheses)


     Variable or Statistic       Bacc. Degrees per Teaching Faculty       Grad. Degrees per Teaching Faculty

                                    10.1          10.2          10.3         10.4          10.5            10.6

Estimation Method                   OLS           OLS          OLS           OLS          NLLS         NLLS

Time Period                         1982-         1982-        1982-         1982-         1982-        1982-
                                     1999          1999        1999          1999          1999         1999
University Fixed Effects              No            No           Yes          No             No          Yes
Time Trend                          0.002        0.007*       -0.000         0.003       -0.013**     0.006***
                                     (0.8)         (2.4)       (-0.1)        (0.5)         (-3.2)       (3.5)
Log (Undergrad. Enrollment        0.631***      0.731***     0.658***
per Teaching Faculty-1)             (16.4)        (18.2)        (7.1)
Log (Endowment per                             -0.062***     0.073**                    -0.118***      -0.025
Teaching Faculty-1)                               (-4.2)        (3.3)                      (-3.9)       (-1.1)
Log (Graduate Students per                      -0.072**      -0.021       0.388***       0.146**    0.308***
Teaching Faculty-1)                               (-3.7)       (-0.7)        (11.7)         (3.0)       (8.6)
Log (State Appropriations per                  -0.022***      -0.003                      0.014**       0.002
Teaching Faculty-1)                               (-8.9)       (-1.4)                       (3.0)       (0.9)
Nonfederal Stock of R&D per                                                                0.492       -0.130
Teaching Faculty-1 ( G I )                                                                  (0.9)       (-0.5)
Log (Stock of R&D per                                                                    0.285***    0.154***
Teaching Faculty-1) ( E I )                                                                 (6.2)       (6.2)
Log (Teaching Faculty-1)          -0.175**     -0.207***     -0.359***     0.228***      0.217***    -0.282***
                                    (-8.1)       (-10.2)       (-4.0)        (5.9)          (6.4)      (-12.6)
Number of Universities                34           34            34           34             34           34

Number of Observations               475          475           475           475          475             475

Root Mean Squared Error            0.262         0.236         0.067        0.462         0.428            0.079
F                                105.3+++       84.2+++      294.6+++      50.6+++          --               --
Adjusted R2                        0.398         0.513         0.960        0.239         0.347            0.978

     Notes: Dependent variables are logarithms of undergraduate and graduate degrees per teaching
     faculty-equivalent. To avoid division error bias teaching faculty used in the right-hand side
     variables are lagged one year relative to teaching faculty on the left. *** Significant at the one-
     tenth of one per cent level. **Significant at the one per cent level. * Significant at the five per
     cent level. +++ F-statistic is significant at the one-tenth of one percent level.


                                                      41
