NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION:
THEORY, EVIDENCE, AND SPECULATION
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 12698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12698

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006

I gratefully acknowledge financial support from an NSF CAREER Award, the John and Cynthia Fry
Gunn Faculty Fellowship, and the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies. I thank Anusha
Chari, Roger Gordon, Diana Kirk, John McMillan, Paul Romer, and two anonymous referees for helpful
comments. Diego Sasson provided excellent research assistance. Finally, I thank Sir K. Dwight Venner
and the Research Department of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank for hosting me in the summer
of 1994, when I first started thinking about the issues addressed in the paper.
© 2006 by Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation
Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 12698
November 2006
JEL No. E6,F3,F4,G15,O16
ABSTRACT
Writings on the macroeconomic impact of capital account liberalization find few, if any, robust effects
of liberalization on real variables. In contrast to the prevailing wisdom, I argue that the textbook theory
of liberalization holds up quite well to a critical reading of this literature. The lion's share of papers
that find no effect of liberalization on real variables tell us nothing about the empirical validity of the
theory, because they do not really test it. This paper explains why it is that most studies do not really
address the theory they set out to test. It also discusses what is necessary to test the theory and examines
papers that have done so. Studies that actually test the theory show that liberalization has significant
effects on the cost of capital, investment, and economic growth.
Peter Blair Henry
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
Littlefield 277
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
Brookings Institution and NBER
pbhenry@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
A capital account liberalization is a decision by a country’s government to move from a
closed capital account regime, where capital may not move freely in and out of the country, to an
open capital account system in which capital can enter and leave at will. Broadly speaking, there
are two starkly different views about the wisdom of capital account liberalization as a policy
choice for developing countries.
The first view, Allocative Efficiency, draws heavily on the predictions of the standard
neoclassical growth model pioneered by Solow (1956). In the neoclassical model, liberalizing
the capital account facilitates a more efficient international allocation of resources and produces
all kinds of salubrious effects. Resources flow from capital-abundant developed countries,
where the return to capital is low, to capital-scarce developing countries where the return to
capital is high. The flow of resources into the developing countries reduces their cost of capital,
triggering a temporary increase in investment and growth that permanently raises their standard
of living (Fischer, 1998, 2003; Obstfeld, 1998; Rogoff, 1999; Summers, 2000). Motivated in
part by the prospective gains from incorporating Allocative Effciency arguments into their
economic policies, dozens of developing-country governments from Santiago to Seoul have
implemented some form of capital account liberalization over the past 20 years.
The alternative view regards Allocative Efficiency as a fanciful attempt to extend the
results on the gains to international trade in goods to international trade in assets.

The

predictions of Allocative Efficiency hold only where there are no distortions to the economy
other than barriers to free capital flows. Because there are many other distortions in developing
countries, skeptics argue that the theoretical predictions of the neoclassical model bear little
resemblance to the reality of capital account policy. This alternative view is best characterized

1

by an article provocatively titled, “Who Needs Capital Account Convertibility?” (Rodrik, 1998).1
Rodrik’s empirical analysis finds no correlation between the openness of countries’ capital
accounts and the amount they invest or the rate at which they grow. He concludes that the
benefits of an open capital account, if indeed they exist, are not readily apparent, but that the
costs are manifestly evident in the form of recurrent emerging-markets crises.
Since the publication of Rodrik’s polemic, evidence has seemed to mount in support of
the view that capital account liberalization has no impact on investment, growth, or any other
real variable with significant welfare implications. For example, in his survey of the research on
capital account liberalization, Eichengreen (2001) concludes that the literature finds, at best,
ambiguous evidence that liberalization has any impact on growth. In another review of the
literature, Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Sløk (2004) survey ten studies of liberalization and
document that only three uncover an unambiguously positive effect of liberalization on growth.
Finally, in their comprehensive survey of the research on financial globalization, Prasad, Rogoff,
Wei, and Kose (2003) extend the Edison et al. (2004) survey to fourteen studies, but still find
only three that document a significant positive relationship between international financial
integration and economic growth. Prasad et al. (2003) conclude that “…an objective reading of
the vast research effort to date suggests that there is no strong, robust, and uniform support for
the theoretical argument that financial globalization per se delivers a higher rate of economic
growth.”
In contrast to existing surveys, this article demonstrates that a critical reading of the
literature reveals that the textbook theory of liberalization stands up to the data quite well. It is
true that most papers find no effect of liberalization on growth. But these papers tell us nothing

1

See also Bhagwati (1998) and Stiglitz (1999, 2000, 2002).

2

about the empirical validity of the theory. They perform purely cross-sectional regressions that
look for a positive correlation between capital account openness and economic growth, implicitly
testing whether capital account policy has permanent effects on differences in long-run growth
rates across countries. The fundamental problem with this approach is that the neoclassical
model provides no theoretical basis for conducting such tests. The model makes no predictions
about the correlation between capital account openness and long-run growth rates across
countries, and certainly does not suggest the causal link needed to justify cross-sectional
regressions.
What the neoclassical model does predict is that liberalizing the capital account of a
capital-poor country will temporarily increase the growth rate of its GDP per capita. The
temporary increase in growth matters, because it permanently raises the country’s standard of
living. However, as it is the increase in the level of GDP per capita that is permanent—not its
rate of growth—theory dictates that one tests for either a permanent level effect or a temporary
growth effect. Testing for a permanent growth effect makes no sense because capital
accumulation, which is subject to diminishing returns, is the only channel through which
liberalization affects growth in the neoclassical model.
A small but growing branch of the literature takes the time series nature of the
neoclassical model’s prediction seriously. It does so by investigating whether countries invest
more and grow faster in the immediate aftermath of a discrete change in their capital account
policy. In contrast to work that looks for a permanent impact of capital account openness on
growth across countries, papers in the policy-experiment genre find that opening the capital
account within a given country consistently generates economically large and statistically
significant effects, not only on economic growth, but also on the cost of capital and investment.

3

While the policy-experiment literature removes any serious doubts about whether
liberalization has real effects, its findings raise more questions than they resolve. Are the
magnitudes of the documented effects plausible? Do the transmission mechanisms emphasized
by the theory really drive the results, or are other forces at work? With their focus on aggregate
data, papers in the policy-experiment genre do not have enough empirical power to be of any
use. Fortunately, a new wave of papers demonstrates how to make progress on these and other
important questions by using firm-level data. Analyzing capital account liberalization at the
level of the firm instead of the country provides greater clarity about the ways in which
liberalization affects the real economy.
Disaggregating the data also brings clarity to the contentious debate on liberalization and
crises. Because there are many different ways to liberalize the capital account, when trying to
determine whether liberalizations cause crises, it is critical to specify exactly what kind of
liberalization you mean. At a minimum, the distinction between debt and equity is critical.
Recent research demonstrates that liberalization of debt flows—particularly short-term, dollardenominated debt flows—can cause problems. On the other hand, all the evidence we have
indicates that countries derive substantial benefits from opening their equity markets to foreign
investors.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents an organizing theoretical
framework. Section 3 reviews the literature on the cross-sectional approach to the
macroeconomic effects of capital account liberalization. Section 4 uses the framework from
Section 2 to explain why the cross-sectional literature finds no real effects of liberalization.
Section 5 discusses the policy-experiment approach to the macroeconomic effects of
liberalization. Section 6 discusses problems with the policy-experiment approach. Section 7

4

reviews recent advances using firm-level data. Section 8 examines whether liberalizations cause
crises. Section 9 concludes.

2. Capital Account Liberalization and the Neoclassical Growth Model
This section illustrates the fundamental predictions of the neoclassical growth model
about the impact of capital account liberalization on a developing country. The framework is not
novel, but it brings clarity to the discussion of the empirical literature that follows in Section 3.
Assume that output is produced using capital, labor, and a Cobb-Douglas production
function with labor-augmenting technological progress:
Y = F (K , AL ) = K α ( AL )1 −α
Let k =

(1).

K
Y
be the amount of capital per unit of effective labor and y =
the amount of
AL
AL

output per unit of effective labor. Using this notation and the homogeneity of the production
function we have:
y = f (k ) = k α

(2).

Let s denote the fraction of national income that is saved each period and assume that
capital depreciates at the rate δ , the labor force grows at the rate n, and total factor productivity
grows at the rate g. Saving each period builds up the national capital stock and helps to make
capital more abundant. Depreciation, a growing population, and rising total factor productivity,
all work in the other direction making capital less abundant. The following equation summarizes
the net effect of all these forces on the evolution of capital per unit of effective labor:
k (t ) = sf ( k (t ) ) − ( n + g + δ ) k ( t )

(3).

5

When k (t ) = 0 , the economy is in the steady state depicted by Point A in Figure 1. At Point A,
the ratio of capital to effective labor ( k ) is constant. In contrast, the steady-state level of capital
(K) is not constant, but growing at the rate n + g . Output per worker (

Y
) grows at the rate g.
L

Finally, the steady state marginal product of capital equals the interest rate plus the depreciation
rate:
f ′(k s.state ) = r + δ

(4).

Equation (4) gives a general expression of the equilibrium condition for investment. This
equation has important implications for the dynamics of a country’s investment and growth in
the aftermath of capital account liberalization, because the impact of liberalization works through
the cost of capital. Let r* denote the exogenously given world interest rate. The standard
assumption in the literature is that r* is less than r, because the rest of the world has more capital
per unit of effective labor than the developing country. It is also standard to assume that the
developing country is small, which means that nothing it does affects world prices.
Under these assumptions, when the developing country liberalizes, capital surges in to
exploit the difference between the world interest rate and the country’s rate of return to capital.
The absence of any frictions in the model means that the country’s ratio of capital to effective
labor jumps immediately to its post-liberalization, steady-state level. Figure 1 depicts this jump
as a rightward shift of the vertical dashed line from ks.state to ks*.state . In the post-liberalization
steady state, the marginal product of capital is equal to the world interest rate plus the rate of
depreciation:
f ′ ( ks*.state ) = r * + δ

(5).

6

The instantaneous jump to a new steady state is an unattractive feature of the model,
because it implies that the country installs capital at the speed of light. There are a variety of
formal ways to slow down the speed of transition, but taking the time to do so here would lead us
astray.2
The vital fact about the transition dynamics, which would hold true in any model, is that
there must be a period of time during which the capital stock grows faster than it does before or
after the transition. To see why the growth rate of the capital stock must increase temporarily,
recall that in the pre-liberalization steady state the ratio of capital to effective labor ( ks.state ) is
constant, and the stock of capital (K) grows at the rate n + g . In the post-liberalization steady
state, the ratio of capital to effective labor ( ks*.state ) is also constant and the capital stock once
again grows at the rate n + g . However, because ks*.state > ks.state , it follows that at some point
during the transition, the growth rate of K must exceed n + g .
The temporary increase in the growth rate of capital has implications for economic
growth, because the growth rate of output per worker is given by the formula γ Y = α
L

Since the growth rate of K exceeds n + g at some point during the transition,

k
+g.
k

k
must be greater
k

than 0 during the corresponding interval of time. Therefore, the growth rate of output per worker
also increases temporarily.
Figure 2 illustrates the time paths of the interest rate, the growth rates of capital and
output per worker, and the natural log of output per worker during the aftermath of capital
account liberalization in the neoclassical growth model. Figures 3 through 5, which display the
2

See for example Chapter 2 of Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995).

7

response of the cost of capital, investment, and growth during eighteen real-life capital account
liberalization episodes, bear a striking resemblance to Figure 2. Section 6 discusses the details
behind the construction of Figures 3 through 5.
If the evidence lines up with the theory, then why does such a large literature fail to find
that liberalization has any real effects? This is the question to which we now turn.

3. The Cross-Sectional Approach to Measuring the Impact of Liberalization
Does capital account liberalization promote a more efficient allocation of resources
across countries? This section describes the methodology, data, and results associated with the
traditional, cross-sectional approach to this question.
Attempts to measure the impact of capital account liberalization on economic
performance require information on countries’ capital account policies. The IMF’s Annual
Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) provides the most
readily available, standardized source of such information. Available since 1967, the AREAER
provides a list of the rules and regulations governing resident and nonresident capital-account
transactions in each country, a table that summarizes the presence of restrictions, and a
qualitative judgement on whether the country has an open or closed capital account. For the
editions of AREAER published between 1967 and 1996, the summary table contains a single line
(line E2) entitled, “Restrictions on payments for capital transactions.” The presence of a bullet
point in line E2 indicates that the country has some form of restrictions on capital account
transactions. In effect, line E2 delivers a binary judgment that takes on the value one if any
capital controls are in place and zero otherwise.
The typical study maps the qualitative information from Line E2 into a quantitative

8

measure of capital account openness by tallying the number of years that each country was
judged to have an open capital account. That tally is then divided by the total number of years in
the period to produce a number called SHARE—the fraction of years over a given period that the
IMF judged the country to be free from “Restrictions on payments for capital account
transactions.” For example, if a country had an open capital account for 3 of the 10 years from
1986 to 1995, then SHARE is equal to 0.3.

3A. Empirical Methodology
Papers that use the variable SHARE assess the real effects of capital account liberalization
by running some variant of the following cross-country growth regression:
GROWTH i = a + b * SHAREi + CONTROLSi + ε i

(6).

where GROWTH i denotes the average growth rate of real GDP per capita in country i over the
time period in question—typically about twenty years—and CONTROLSi denotes the usual set
of control variables used in cross-country growth regressions in the tradition of Barro (1991).
With the variable SHARE in hand, estimating equation (6) is a relatively straightforward
exercise, because data on the left-hand-side variable are readily available from standard sources
such as the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) International Financial Statistics (IFS).
Because equation (6) does not contain time subscripts, it makes no use of the variation in
growth rates or openness over time within a given country. In other words, it identifies the
impact of capital account policy exclusively through the cross-country variation in average
growth rates and fraction of years open. In effect, the estimation procedure tests whether
countries with open capital accounts have higher long-run growth rates than countries whose
capital accounts are closed.

9

Although this test is clearly at odds with the predictions of the neoclassical growth model
reviewed in Section 2, a large number of papers use Equation (6), or a close cousin, as their
benchmark of analysis. Of the fourteen studies of liberalization and growth summarized in Table
3 of the survey by Prasad, Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003), twelve perform cross-sectional
regressions. The corresponding numbers from other surveys are nine of ten in Table 6 of Edison,
Klein, Ricci, and Sløk (2004); eleven of twelve in Table 1 of Calderon, Loayza, and SchmidtHebbel (2004); and twenty-two of twenty-five in Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2006). Given
the prevalence of the cross-sectional regression approach in the literature on the macroeconomic
effects of capital account liberalization, it is important to understand what these papers do, the
results they find, and how to interpret the evidence.

3B. Evidence
Attempts to quantify the real effects of capital account liberalization using SHARE have
not been kind to the Allocative Efficiency view. Most of the published papers in the crosssectional genre find no effect of liberalization on investment or growth. In the most prominent
example of such papers, Rodrik (1998) examines the relation between liberalization and growth
in a sample of 100 developed and developing countries from 1975 to 1989. Specifically, Rodrik
estimates regressions with average growth rates of GDP per capita on the left-hand-side and
SHARE on the right-hand-side. His regressions show no significant correlation between growth
and SHARE. Since the theoretical channel from liberalization to growth operates through capital
accumulation, Rodrik also regresses the average ratio of investment-to-GDP on SHARE and
again finds no significant correlation. He concludes that there is no evidence to suggest that
countries with fewer restrictions on capital movements grow faster, or invest more, than

10

countries with greater restrictions.
One problem with the variable SHARE is that it is constructed from a binary measure of
capital controls that treats all countries as either completely closed or completely open. As such,
it does not allow for varying degrees of intensity across countries that are classified as open. In
an attempt to address this problem, Quinn (1997) uses the information in the AREAER to create
a measure of the intensity of capital account openness. Quinn’s measure splits capital account
transactions into two categories: capital account receipts and capital account payments. For each
of the two categories, he assigns a country a score between 0 and 2, based on a reading of the
qualitative description of the AREAER reports. A score of 0 indicates the most restrictive of
regimes, where payments for capital transactions are completely forbidden, while a score of 2
indicates that capital transactions are not subject to any taxes or restrictions. Intermediate
scores—broken into increments of 0.5—indicate intermediate levels of restrictiveness. Quinn
then adds the scores for the two categories to create a variable called CAPITAL, which ranges
from 0 to 4. Quinn’s indicators are available annually from 1950 to 1997 for 21 OECD
countries. For the 43 non-OECD countries in his sample they are available for four different
years: 1958, 1973, 1982, and 1988. Quinn runs cross-sectional regressions of average annual
growth rates on changes in CAPITAL and finds a positive and significant correlation.
Quinn’s data provide a novel attempt at quantifying the intensity of capital account
openness, but there are two reasons why they may be of limited use for understanding the impact
of capital account liberalization on developing countries. First, Quinn’s data for non-OECD
countries end in 1988, and therefore do not include the most rapid period of capital account
liberalization in the developing world (the late 1980s and early 1990s). Given the time span of
his data, Quinn’s results may reflect the impact of the move from closed to open capital markets

11

among the developed nations. For example, in 1973 11 OECD countries and 26 developing
countries scored 2 or lower on Quinn’s index. In 1988 the number of OECD countries with a
score of 2 or lower fell to 1. In contrast, the number of developing countries with a score of 2 or
lower rose to 32. Second, Quinn, like Rodrik, also uses a strictly cross-sectional regression
framework, so his results imply that easing restrictions on capital account transactions have
permanent effects on growth. Since theory predicts only a temporary effect, it is not clear how to
interpret this result (more on this in Section 4C).
Whatever the correct interpretation of Quinn’s results may be, in finding a positive effect
of liberalization on growth, his study is an outlier among the most heavily cited papers that
assess the macroeconomic impact of capital account liberalization using cross-sectional
regressions. For instance, using data on a sample of developed and developing countries from
1976 to 1995, Levine and Zervos (1998a) examine whether capital account liberalization has an
effect on investment. Like Rodrik and Quinn, they also test for permanent effects, but use a
different measure of liberalization.

Specifically, Levine and Zervos ask whether countries

experience a permanent increase in the growth rate of their capital stocks when their stock
markets become more integrated with the rest of the world. They argue that emerging stock
markets became more integrated in the 1980s and use 1985 as a common break point across all
countries. Next, they examine whether the growth rate of the capital stock of the countries in
their sample increased after 1985. They find no evidence that this is the case and conclude that
capital account liberalization has no effect on investment.
Among the entire class of papers that test whether countries with more open capital
accounts have permanently higher growth rates than those that do not, the bulk of evidence

12

supports the findings of Rodrik (1998) and Levine and Zervos (1998a) over Quinn (1997).3 For
example, of the 10 studies of liberalization surveyed in Edison, Levine, and Sløk (2002), only 3
find an unambiguously positive effect of liberalization on growth (see their Table 6). Prasad,
Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003) extend the Edison et al. survey to 14 studies, but still find only 3
papers that uncover a significant positive relationship between international financial integration
and economic growth.
A number of papers debate whether the absence of significant evidence is a consequence
of trying to find an unconditional correlation between openness and long-run growth when the
relationship between the two variables is more complicated. Because countries with strong
institutions stand to gain more from capital account liberalization, the relationship between
growth and capital account policy may be a conditional one that depends on the strength of a
country’s institutions.4 Klein and Olivei (2000) explore this hypothesis using data on 67
countries from 1976 to 1995. They find a significant correlation between SHARE and growth,
but the developed countries in the sample drive the results. There is no significant correlation
between growth and SHARE for the non-OECD countries, leading the authors to conclude that
capital account liberalization only promotes financial development when done in an environment
that is supportive in terms of its overall institutional development.
Edwards (2001) uses Quinn’s CAPITAL measure and the variable SHARE to conduct
formal tests for a conditional relationship between capital controls and long-run growth rates in a
sample of 20 industrial and emerging economies during the 1980s. To test whether the impact of
capital account policy varies according to a country’s level of development, Edwards interacts
each country’s capital account openness measure with its level of GDP per capita in 1980. He
3

See also Alesina, Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1994), Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995), Kraay (1998), Edison, Levine,
and Sløk (2002).
4
See Kose et al. (2006) for an extensive review of the literature on the conditional effects of liberalization.

13

finds evidence that an open capital account positively affects growth after a country achieves a
certain degree of economic development.
Arteta, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (2001) take exception with Edwards’ results on the
grounds that he (1) uses Quinn’s measure in 1973 and 1988 only; (2) weights observations by
GDP per capita in 1985, thereby giving richer countries a higher weight; and (3) uses instruments
that may not be appropriate. Using data on 61 countries from 1973 to 1992, Arteta et al. (2001)
perform cross-sectional regressions using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and Instrumental
Variables. They find a fragile association between growth and capital account liberalization and
conclude that there is little evidence to suggest that capital account liberalization has a larger
impact in high and middle-income countries than in poor developing ones.
Like Arteta et al., Kraay (1998) also finds no evidence of a conditional relationship
between capital account liberalization and growth. In fact, while future work may prove
otherwise, it seems fair to say that the absence of significant results in the cross-sectional
literature is not a consequence of failing to condition their tests on the level of institutional
development.5 Rather, the next section demonstrates that the ostensible lack of an effect of
liberalization on real variables stems from a number of more basic issues common to papers in
the cross-sectional literature—those that test for the conditional and unconditional impact of
liberalization on growth alike.

4. The Reasons Why Cross-Sectional Studies Find No Impact of Liberalization on Growth
There are at least three reasons why purely cross-sectional regressions find no impact of
liberalization on growth (although not all three reasons apply to all papers in this literature).
5

Which is not to deny the importance of institutional considerations.

14

First, the variable SHARE contains important sources of measurement error that hinder empirical
attempts to capture the impact of liberalization on the real economy. Second, many of the papers
in this literature include both developed and developing countries in the sample when theory
suggests that the two types of countries should be examined separately.6 Third, and most
importantly, the vast majority of papers in this literature test for a permanent effect of
liberalization on growth when the theory says that the impact should only be temporary. I now
discuss the empirical consequences of each of these three points in some detail.

4A. Measurement Error Problems with Liberalization Indicators
Cross-sectional studies conclude that capital account liberalization has no real effects
because they do not find any correlation between economic growth and broad measures of
capital account openness such as SHARE. As discussed in Section 3A, the variable SHARE is
constructed using the judgement on capital account openness contained in line E2 of the IMF’s
AREAER. In turn, the judgement in the AREAER is based on the restrictions applied to an
exhaustive list of all possible capital account transactions.7 When the IMF changes its
assessment of a country’s capital account openness, the AREAER provides no information on
the specific aspect of the capital account that was liberalized. Because the underlying data
provide no indication of what has been liberalized, neither can any index that is based on such
data. Without any indication of what drives the variation in SHARE, it is also unclear how to
map that variation to a well-articulated model for the purpose of empirical estimation.
For example, AREAER does not tell whether the IMF made a change in the judgement

6

Some of the papers in this literature do acknowledge differences between countries (see the discussion in Section
3C). But papers that do acknowledge the importance of country heterogeneity also use the SHARE variable to test
for permanent effects of liberalization.
7
For an extensive enumeration of these transactions, see the appendix of Kose et al. (2006)

15

about the openness of a country’s capital account because of an easing of restrictions on capital
inflows or capital outflows. This distinction matters. Theory predicts that when a capital-poor
country liberalizes capital inflows it will experience a permanent fall in its cost of capital and a
temporary increase in the growth rate of its capital stock and GDP per capita. In principle, if that
same developing country were to liberalize capital outflows nothing would happen to its cost of
capital, investment, or GDP.

4B. Country Heterogeneity
The second reason why cross-sectional studies may fail to find significant effects of
liberalization is related to the first. Many cross-sectional studies lump both developed and
developing countries together in their sample. Including both sets of countries increases sample
size, but doing so without employing an empirical methodology that explicitly recognizes the
fundamental theoretical difference between developed and developing countries undermines the
study’s ability to interpret the data. Again, the neoclassical model predicts that capital account
liberalization will have a different impact on a developing country than on a developed one.
Developing countries are capital poor and should experience net capital inflows, a permanent fall
in their cost of capital, and a temporary increase in growth when they remove all restrictions on
capital flows. In contrast, capital-rich, developed countries should experience exactly the
opposite effects.8 For instance, with both developing and developed countries included in their
samples, the Rodrik (1998) and Levine and Zervos (1998a) results may suggest that capital
account liberalization has no effect on investment and growth, but the results may also reflect the
opposing effects of liberalization in the developing and developed-country subsamples.
8

Although the rich country’s GDP falls because it exports capital, its GNP will rise, as it receives the income that
accrues to that capital. I discuss the Lucas (1990) paradox in Section 5.

16

Developing and developed countries also implemented the process of capital account
liberalization at different times. Developed countries liberalized in the late 1970s and early
1980s (Reisen and Fischer, 1993). Most developing countries did not liberalize until the late
1980s and early 1990s (Mathieson and Rojas-Suárez, 1993). The differences in liberalization
dates highlight an additional limitation of the Rodrik paper. Since developing-country
liberalizations commenced in the late 1980s and early 1990s, empirical attempts to determine
whether liberalization boosted investment and growth should use data that extend into the 1990s.
Because Rodrik’s data end in 1989, they exclude developing-country economic performance in
precisely the period when we would expect to see the effects of liberalization. Therefore, it is
not clear that Rodrik’s data tell us anything about the impact of capital account liberalization on
growth in developing countries.9

4C. Theory Predicts That Liberalization Will Have a Temporary Impact on Growth
The third and most important reason why cross-sectional studies fail to find any impact of
liberalization on growth is that they test for a permanent effect while theory predicts that the
impact will only be temporary. To see the point, recall that Equation (6) makes no use of
variation in growth rates or openness over time within a given country. Because Equation (6)
identifies the impact of liberalization exclusively through cross-country variation in average
growth rates and degrees of openness, the regression implicitly tests whether countries with open
capital accounts have higher long-run growth rates than those whose capital accounts are closed.
The problem with this test is that we have already seen (in Section 2) that the neoclassical
model does not predict that countries with open capital accounts will have higher long-run
9

Figure 5A of Kose et al. (2006) looks at the data from 1985 to 2004. Like Rodrik, they find no significant
relationship between growth and capital account openness. The discussion in Section 4C of this paper explains why.

17

growth rates than countries whose capital accounts are closed. In the neoclassical model,
differences in long-run growth rates across countries are driven exclusively by differences in
their growth rates of total factor productivity (TFP). Because there is no channel in the model
through which capital account liberalization affects TFP growth, strictly speaking, there is no
theoretical basis for estimating equation (6).10 In other words, papers that estimate the effects of
capital account openness on growth do not provide a test of any causal theory.
What the theory does predict is that capital-poor countries will experience a permanent
fall in their cost of capital and a temporary increase in the growth rate of their capital stock and
GDP per capita when they liberalize. This is an important point, because testing whether
countries with more open capital accounts invest more or grow faster than countries with closed
capital accounts is not logically equivalent to testing whether countries that liberalize experience
a temporary increase in investment and growth. Moreover, the next subsection demonstrates that
there are nontrivial examples in which adopting a purely cross-sectional regression framework
will lead to specious conclusions about the data.

4D. Numerical Example of the Pitfalls of the Cross-Sectional Regression Approach
Consider two countries (A and B) that are in steady state and have the same level and
growth rate of total factor productivity. Country A has a closed capital account while Country B
has no capital account restrictions whatsoever. Assume that both countries are small and that the
world interest rate r ∗ is lower than r , the domestic interest rate in Country A. Since Country B
is open and faces the world interest rate, r ∗ , Country B will have a higher ratio of capital to
effective labor than country A. Because both countries are in steady state and have identical
10

Foreign direct investment (FDI) is one form of inflow that could bring technology in addition to capital. If FDI
brings new technology, it could generate knowledge spillovers that result in TFP growth. I discuss the empirical
relevance of this consideration in Section 5D.

18

growth rates of total factor productivity, they will also have identical growth rates of GDP per
capita (although B has a higher level of GDP per capita).
Now consider the path of these two economies over the next twenty years under the
following scenario: Country A keeps all of its restrictions on capital in place for the first 10
years, but removes all restrictions on capital inflows and outflows for the second ten years.
Country B, on the other hand, makes no change in its capital account policy and remains
completely open for the entire 20-year period.
The transition dynamics in this example follow immediately from the discussion in
Section 2. Country B continues to grow at its steady-state rate, because nothing there has
changed. In order to understand what happens to Country A when it liberalizes, recognize that as
soon as it does so it will face the same cost of capital as Country B. Therefore, when Country A
reaches its new steady state, it will have the same ratio of capital to effective labor as Country B.
In order for Country A to reach its new, higher, steady-state ratio of capital to effective labor, the
growth rate of its capital stock must exceed its growth rate of effective labor throughout the
transition to its new equilibrium. Since A began in a steady state where capital and effective
labor were growing at the same rate, the growth rate of A’s capital stock must increase
temporarily.
The temporary increase in the growth rate of A’s capital stock will also generate a
temporary increase in the growth rate of its GDP per capita. Since GDP per capita in A and B
were growing at the same rate before the shock, it follows that A grows faster than B throughout
A’s transition to its new steady state. Because A grows faster than B throughout the transition, it
also follows that A will have a higher average growth rate for the twenty-year period under
consideration than Country B.

19

What would we conclude about the impact of capital account openness on growth if,
using data from multiple countries like like A and B, we ran a regression of GROWTH on
SHARE? The answer is that we would conclude that capital account openness has a negative
impact on growth. To see why, remember that A’s capital account was open for 10 years and
closed for 10. This means that SHARE for Country A is 0.5, a smaller number than the value of
SHARE for Country B, which is equal to 1. Since A has faster growth and a lower value of
SHARE over the period than Country B, it follows that regressing GROWTH on SHARE would
produce a negative coefficient on SHARE, with the attendant (and specious) conclusion that
liberalization exerts a negative impact on growth. Yet in this example it is clear that Country A’s
decision to liberalize capital inflows does lead to a temporary increase in growth. The strictly
cross-sectional regression framework is simply powerless to detect the effect.
Again, if the goal is to understand whether capital account liberalization has real effects,
then theory tells us that the right question to ask is the following: Do we see a fall in the cost of
capital and a temporary increase in investment and growth when developing countries liberalize
restrictions on capital inflows? The most direct and transparent way of answering this question
is to examine whether the behavior of the cost of capital, investment, and growth in the
immediate aftermath of liberalization differs from its behavior in the immediately preceding
period. We now discuss a class of papers which attempt to do just that.

5. The Policy-Experiment Approach to Capital Account Liberalization
Examining the behavior of real variables before and after the removal of restrictions on
capital inflows requires information about the date on which the restrictions were lifted. The
policy-experiment approach grapples with the complexity of identifying liberalization dates by

20

narrowing the scope of the problem. Instead of trying to determine the date on which the entire
capital account was judged to be open, as in the cross-sectional approach, the policy-experiment
literature tries to identify the first point in time that a country liberalizes a specific aspect of its
capital account policy.
One example of liberalizing a specific aspect of the capital account is a decision by a
country’s government to permit foreigners to purchase shares of companies listed on the
domestic stock market. Liberalizing restrictions on the ownership of domestic shares enables
foreign capital to flow into a part of the country’s economy from which it was previously
prohibited. Just such a policy change occurred repeatedly in the late 1980s and early 1990s, as a
number of developing countries opened their stock markets to foreign investors for the first time
(Claessens and Rhee, 1994). These stock market liberalizations constitute discrete removals of
barriers to capital inflows that bear close resemblance to the thought experiment in Section 2. As
the closest empirical analogue to the textbook example, stock market liberalizations provide realworld policy experiments that allow researchers to evaluate the empirical validity of the two
competing views of capital account liberalization outlined in the introduction.
Since the stock market is forward-looking, the critical question is when does the market
first learn of a credible, impending liberalization? In principle, obtaining this information simply
involves identifying the date on which the government declares that foreigners may purchase
domestic shares. In practice, the liberalization process is not so transparent. The literature uses
official policy decree dates when they are available, but in many cases there is no obvious
government declaration or policy decree to which one can refer (see for example Levine and
Zervos, 1994). When policy decree dates are not available, papers in this area typically pursue
two approaches.

21

First, many countries initially permitted foreign ownership through closed-end country
funds. Since one presumably needs government permission to establish a fund, the first country
fund establishment date serves as a proxy for the official implementation date. The second way
of indirectly capturing official implementation dates is to monitor the International Finance
Corporation’s Investability Index (Claessens and Rhee, 1994). The investability index is the
ratio of the market capitalization of stocks that foreigners can legally hold to total market
capitalization. As such, a large jump in the investability index provides indirect evidence of an
official liberalization. In the end, the policy-experiment literature defines the date of a country’s
first stock market liberalization as the first month with a verifiable occurrence of any of the
following: liberalization by policy decree, establishment of the first country fund, or an increase
in the investability index beyond a certain threshold.11
An important limitation of the policy-experiment approach is that relatively few
developing countries have a stock market, publish reliable stock market data, and also
implemented a liberalization. Hence, the number of countries that can feasibly be included under
the stock-market-liberalization-based implementation of the policy-experiment approach is much
smaller than in purely cross-sectional studies (an issue I discuss further in Section 6A.3).
Table 1 presents a list of 18 developing countries that liberalized their stock markets
between 1986 and 1993. The third column of the table indicates that the modal indicator of
liberalization for this sample is the establishment of a closed-end country fund. Relative to the
broader indicators employed elsewhere in the literature, the establishment of a country fund, in
particular, and stock market liberalizations in general may seem like a narrow way to define
capital account liberalization. But again, it is precisely the narrowness of stock market
11

See Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000a) for further details on the difficulty of dating stock market
liberalizations.

22

liberalizations that make them more useful than broad indicators of capital account liberalization
for testing the implications of the theory. For all of the reasons explained in Section 4A, broad
indicators such as the IMF’s introduce significant measurement error. Since measurement error
reduces the statistical power of any regression, it is important to focus on policy experiments
where the true variation in the data is large relative to noise. Stock market liberalizations
provide just such experiments, because they constitute a radical shift in the degree of capital
account openness (Frankel, 1994).
In addition to identifying episodes of large changes in capital account openness, focusing
narrowly on stock market liberalization offers another advantage. In contrast with the
unspecified easing of restrictions indicated by movements in the variable SHARE, there is no
theoretical ambiguity about the expected impact of lifting restrictions on the flow of capital into
the stock market of a developing country. Since stocks are risky, however, using stock market
liberalizations to examine the impact of capital account liberalization on economic performance
raises issues of uncertainty not addressed by the deterministic framework of Section 2.

5A. Extending the Theoretical Framework to Incorporate Uncertainty
This subsection shows that the fundamental predictions of the deterministic neoclassical
model of capital account liberalization extend to the risky-asset setting of the policy-experiment
approach.12 In the absence of uncertainty, it is optimal to invest until the marginal product of
capital equals the interest rate. When the payoff from investing in capital is risky, the interest
rate is no longer the relevant hurdle rate for investment. Optimality in a risky world requires that
investment take place until the expected marginal product of capital equals the interest rate plus a
risk premium to compensate for the uncertain return to capital.
12

The discussion in this section borrows heavily from Bulow and Summers (1984) and Stulz (1999b).

23

For a country that has not yet opened its stock market to the rest of the world, this means
that the first-order condition for investment is: f ′(k )e = r + θ + δ , where f ′(k )e denotes the
expected marginal product of capital, r is the domestic interest rate, θ is the aggregate equity
premium, and δ is the rate of depreciation of the capital stock. In the context of the capital asset
pricing model (CAPM), θ is equal to the price of risk, γ , times the variance of the market
return, so that the first-order condition for investment under uncertainty is:
f ′(k )e = r + γ Var (rM ) + δ

(7).

Where rM is the risky return to investing in the market.
Starting from the equilibrium in Equation (7), the issue is whether liberalization reduces
the cost of capital as it does in Section 2.13 The first component of the cost of capital is the
domestic interest rate ( r ) which responds the same way to liberalization as in the case of perfect
certainty; it falls to the world interest rate ( r ∗ ). The second component of the cost of capital is
the aggregate equity premium. Whereas the equity premium before liberalization is equal to the
price of risk times the variance of the local market return, the equity premium after liberalization
is equal to the price of risk times the covariance of the local market with the rest of the world
(see Stulz, 1999b).
The change in both components of the cost of capital means that following liberalization
the first-order condition for investment becomes:
f ′(k )e = r ∗ + γ Cov(rM , rW ) + δ

(8).

Because the world interest rate ( r ∗ ) is less than the domestic interest rate ( r ), comparing the
right-hand-side of Equation (8) with that of (7) indicates that liberalization will reduce the cost of

13

For expositional convenience, I assume that liberalization has no effect on the marginal product of capital.
Section 4D discusses what happens when this assumption does not hold.

24

capital if the variance of the domestic market return is greater than its covariance with the world
market. Historical stock returns show that this condition holds for emerging stock markets
(Stulz, 1999b). Therefore, stock market liberalization reduces the cost of capital, and the
attendant predictions about investment and growth follow accordingly.

5B. Evidence: The Cost of Capital, Investment, and Growth
We do not observe the cost of capital directly, but we do observe stock prices. Because
stock prices and the cost of capital move inversely, we should observe a one-time revaluation of
the stock market if liberalization reduces the cost of capital. In a sample of 12 emerging
economies that liberalized between 1986 and 1991, the average country experienced a
revaluation of 26 percent in real dollar terms (Henry, 2000a). Kim and Singal (2000) and
Martell and Stulz (2003) also document a sharp rise in stock prices in conjunction with
liberalizations.14 Consistent with these revaluations, liberalizations also coincide with an
average fall in dividend yields of 5 to 75 basis points (Bekaert and Harvey, 2000).15 While the
magnitude of the effect differs slightly depending on the sample of countries and the exact
liberalization dates applied, there is broad agreement across all policy-experiment studies that
liberalization reduces the cost of capital.
Since liberalizations reduce the cost of capital, some projects that were negative net
present value (NPV) before liberalization become worthwhile to undertake once the government
permits foreigners to hold domestic shares. Consequently, the rate of capital accumulation
should rise until the marginal product of capital is driven down to the country’s new, lower cost
of capital. If investment increases temporarily, so too should the growth rate of GDP per
14

A related but different literature shows that firms in emerging markets experience stock price increases when they
list their shares on stock exchanges in developed countries (see Karolyi, 1998 and Foerster and Karolyi, 1999).
15
See also Errunza and Miller (2000).

25

capita.16
The policy-experiment approach tests the investment and growth predictions by
estimating panel regressions of the following form:
GROWTH it = a0 + a1 * LIBERALIZEit + ε it

(9).

The variable GROWTH generically denotes the growth rate of the variable of interest: the capital
stock in the case of the investment regressions and GDP per capita. The variable LIBERALIZE is
a country-specific dummy variable that takes on the value one in the year that country i
liberalizes (Year [0]) and each of the subsequent five years (Year [+1] through Year [+5]).
Equation (9) highlights two important dimensions along which the policy-experiment
approach differs from the traditional cross-sectional regression approach typified by equation (6).
First, equation (9) uses every annual observation of each country’s growth rate to exploit the
variation in growth rates within countries over time. In contrast, equation (6) uses a single
number on the left-hand-side—the average growth rate over the time period in question.
Second, the definition of the variable LIBERALIZE ensures that Equation (9) tests for a
temporary effect of liberalization on growth instead of a permanent one as in equation (6). If
liberalization causes a temporary increase in growth, then estimating Equation (9) should
produce a positive and significant estimate of the coefficient on the variable LIBERALIZE. In
other words, the coefficient on LIBERALIZE measures the temporary abnormal growth
associated with liberalization episodes.
The behavior of both investment and GDP in the aftermath of liberalizations supports the
predictions of the neoclassical model. For the 18 countries in Table 1, the raw growth rate of the
capital stock rises from an average of 5.4 percent per year in the five years preceding

16

Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) argue that the welfare implications of the growth effect are de minimus.

26

liberalization to an average of 6.5 percent in the five-year post-liberalization period (Henry,
2003). Similarly, in a sample of 11 emerging economies, stock market liberalization leads to a
22 percentage point increase in the growth rate of real private investment (Henry, 2000b). Of the
eleven countries in the sample, only two do not experience abnormally high rates of investment
in the first year after liberalization, and only one in the second year after liberalization. Bekaert,
Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) find that the growth rate of GDP per capita increases by a
percentage point per annum. An important question that I defer until Section 6C is whether the
growth and investment numbers are mutually consistent.
Figures 3 through 5 summarize the principal findings of the policy-experiment literature
by plotting the cost of capital, investment, and growth in event time for the 18 countries listed in
Table 1.17 When developing countries liberalize capital flows into their stock markets, the cost
of capital falls and investment increases along with the growth rate of GDP per capita. In
contrast to the cross-sectional studies reviewed in Section 3, the evidence from the policyexperiment approach demonstrates that the real-world impact of capital account liberalization is
quite consistent with the Allocative Efficiency view.

5C. Economic Reforms
The policy-experiment evidence is also consistent with interpretations in which
liberalization plays no causal role. Figure 3, which uses the dividend yield as a proxy for the
cost of capital, helps to demonstrate the point. The theoretical justification for interpreting a fall
in the dividend yield as a reduction in the cost of capital comes from Gordon (1962). In the
Gordon model, the dividend yield equals the cost of capital, ρ , minus the (constant) expected
17

The data used to construct Figure 4, the average growth rate of the real capital stock for the 18 countries in listed
in Table 1, comes from Bosworth and Collins (2003).

27

future growth rate of dividends: D / P = ρ − g e .18 If the growth rate of dividends does not
change with liberalization, then a fall in the dividend yield implies a fall in the cost of capital.
Because liberalizations are part of a general process that involves substantial macroeconomic
reforms, however, there is a strong possibility that large changes in expected future growth rates
do occur at the same time that countries liberalize.
Columns 4 through 7 of Table 1 demonstrate that the timing of economic reforms—
inflation stabilization, trade liberalization, and privatization—poses a significant challenge to the
central policy-experiment findings reviewed in Section 5B. Stabilizing inflation drives up asset
prices, investment, and growth (Bruno and Easterly, 1998; Calvo and Végh, 1998; Easterly,
1996; Fischer, Sahay, and Végh, 2002; Henry, 2000b, 2002). When a country liberalizes trade,
domestic production shifts toward the country’s comparative advantage, thereby increasing its
output for a given stock of capital and labor. Accordingly, trade liberalization is good for growth
(Krueger, 1997, 1998; Sachs and Warner, 1995; Frankel and Romer, 1999, Wacziarg and Welch,
2003). Privatization raises the efficiency and value of formerly state-owned enterprises
(Megginson, 2001). Finally, in return for adopting reforms, many countries received debt relief
under the Brady Plan. Debt relief also has a positive impact on stock prices, investment, and
growth in certain emerging economies (Arslanalp and Henry, 2005, 2006a, b).
Papers in the policy-experiment literature approach adopt different methods of trying to
disentangle the impact of liberalization from that of other economic reforms. Some papers treat
reforms and liberalization symmetrically, constructing dummy variables that take on the value
one in the year a reform program of a particular type begins and each of the five subsequent

18

Recall that

ρ = r + γ Var (rM ) before liberalization and ρ = r * + γ COV (rM , rW )

after liberalization.

28

years.19 Using the variable “REFORMS” as a convenient shorthand to denote the reform
dummies, the key regression then simply becomes an extension of equation (9):
GROWTH it = a0 + a1 * LIBERALIZEit + a2 * REFORMSit + ε it

(10).

Other papers, instead of conducting a before-and-after analysis of reforms, use continuous
proxies such as the level of inflation and trade openness.20 Kose et al. (2006) discuss the relative
merits of both approaches on page 19 of their survey.

5D. Policy Endogeneity

The impact of stock market liberalization on stock prices, dividend yields, investment and
growth remains statistically and economically significant, after controlling for reforms (Bekaert
and Harvey, 2000; Bekaert and Harvey, and Lundblad, 2005; Henry 2000a, b). But an even
more difficult interpretation problem remains. Do liberalizations drive up stock prices,
investment, and economic growth or does causation run the other way round? Because
liberalizing the stock market during bad times may draw criticism for selling off the country at
fire sale prices, politicians may be may be more inclined to open up when times are good
(Summers, 1994). To the extent that the economy’s current and expected future performance
influence policy makers’ decision to liberalize, the endogeneity problem is quite real.
In trying to think of a legitimate instrument for this problem, one is struck by the distinct
lack of variables that are correlated with the decision to liberalize but uncorrelated with the stock
market or macroeconomic fundamentals. Changes of political regime are a natural candidate,
but in addition to being correlated with liberalizations, political changes also bring new
economic programs that influence market expectations. Because none of the papers in the
19

See for example Henry (2000a)
See for instance, Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005).

20

29

policy-experiment literature are fully able to dispel with concerns about endogeneity, the
economically large and statistically significant correlations between liberalization and real
variables uncovered by the policy-experiment literature require a measured interpretation.

6. Problems with the Policy-Experiment Approach

The strength of the policy-experiment approach is that it provides a clear picture of what
happens to developing countries when they liberalize capital inflows. The weakness of the
policy-experiment approach is that it raises more questions than it answers (even putting aside
the issue of endogeneity raised at the end of Section 5). This section of the paper addresses three
of those questions.

6A. Why Is the Financial Impact of Liberalization So Small?

Liberalization drives up the value of the stock market by roughly 30 percent in real dollar
terms. This is a large number relative to most event studies conducted using US data (see
McKinlay, 1997). But it is small in comparison with theoretical predictions about the impact of
capital account liberalization. Casual observation suggests that developing countries have much
lower ratios of capital to labor than rich countries. If the neoclassical model provides a
reasonable description of the world, then we should observe a much larger financial impact when
developing countries permit capital flows into their stock markets (Stulz, 1999a, c, 2005).
There are at least three possible explanations for the relatively modest increase in stock
prices (decrease in the cost of capital) associated with liberalizations. The first is that the policyexperiment approach treats liberalization as a one-shot event when it is really an incremental
process. The second explanation is that the rate of return to capital in developing countries may

30

not really be that much higher than in the developed world (Lucas, 1990; Mankiw, 1995). The
third is that developing countries do have substantially higher rates of return, but the presence of
capital market imperfections causes much of the return differential to persist, even in the face of
free capital flows. The next three subsections elaborate on each of these points in turn.

6A.1 Treating Liberalization as a Binary Process May Understate Its True Impact

The policy-experiment literature estimates the change in the cost of capital that occurs the
first time a country opens its stock market to foreign investors. The problem with this approach
is that countries seldom move from having a completely closed stock market to one that is fully
open. Most countries undergo several stock market liberalizations subsequent to the first. South
Korea provides a good example. South Korea began allowing foreigners very limited access to
its stock market through closed-end country funds as early as 1982, but did not start lifting its
statutory ceiling on foreign investment until 199221 Even then, Korea did not finish lifting its
regulatory ceiling until 1998 (Shin and Park, 2006).
If a country takes several episodes to open its stock market completely, then looking
exclusively at the stock market response to its initial opening may understate the total financial
impact of the liberalization process (Stulz, 1999b). One way of addressing the issue is to
estimate the market response to every opening, sum up all of the responses, and use the resulting
number as a proxy for the total liberalization effect. It turns out that stock market responses to
liberalizations subsequent to the first are fairly small, so the incremental-opening hypothesis
cannot account for the small financial impact of liberalization.
Another alternative is to estimate the total financial impact using continuous measures of
21

See Park and Van Agtmael (1993), Price (1994); and Wilson (1992).

31

liberalization such as the IFC’s investable index (Edison and Warnock, 2003). Again, the
investable index indicates the fraction of the domestic stock market capitalization that foreign
investors may legally own. In contrast to the policy-experiment approach, which estimates the
one-time response of the stock market at the time of a large, discrete change in the investable
index, the continuous approach regresses returns or dividend yields on the level of the
investability index over the entire sample. The continuous approach also reveals a small change
in the cost of capital. The estimated cumulative fall in the dividend yield is about 140 basis
points (De Jong and De Roon, 2005). All in all, the evidence suggests that the dichotomy
between the binary measure of liberalization used by policy-experiment papers and the more
gradual nature of the process cannot explain the relatively small financial impact of
liberalizations.

6A.2 Poor Institutions in Developing Countries May Reduce the Return to Capital

Large differences in capital-to-labor ratios across countries imply large differences in
rates of return to capital only if all countries have the same level of total factor productivity. In
standard production theory, the level of total factor productivity is captured by the parameter A,
which is usually taken to be an index of technology or ideas. But it is important to remember
that, for a given stock of technology, total factor productivity measures the general efficiency
with which an economy transforms capital and labor into output (Solow, 2001). Holding
technology constant, there are many factors that may influence this general level of efficiency.
For instance, weak institutions and inappropriate government regulation can distort
economic decision making, reduce total factor productivity, and lead to lower rates of return than
would otherwise prevail (Harberger, 1998). The rate of return to capital in emerging economies

32

may not be much higher than in rich countries if emerging-market governments fail to create “an
environment that supports productive activities and encourages capital accumulation, skill
acquisition, invention and technology transfer” (Hall and Jones, 1999).
To illustrate the point, Table 2 demonstrates the gap between the G-7 countries and the
18 emerging economies that liberalized their stock markets using some frequently employed
measures of the quality of economic institutions. Column 2 shows that according to the Hall and
Jones (1999) measure of social infrastructure, the median G-7 country ranks fourteenth of 130
countries, while the median emerging economy ranks sixty-fourth. Columns 3 through 5, which
present analogous measures using the Heritage House’s Index of Economic Freedom, the World
Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Index, and the World Economic Forum’s Global
Competitiveness Index, display a similar pattern.
In other words, the relatively small financial effects of liberalization may simply indicate
that the return to capital in developing countries is not that much higher than in the developed
world. Recent work using various development accounting methods produces indirect estimates
of rates of return that support this view (see, for example, Caselli, 2005, and Caselli and Feyrer,
2006). However, there are few studies that attempt to measure the rate of return to capital in
developing countries directly. In my view, this continues to be an important gap in the literature.

6A.3 Capital Market Imperfections

A third explanation for the relatively small financial impact of liberalization is that
developing countries really do have higher rates of return to capital, but the presence of capital
market imperfections such as agency problems, asymmetric information and poor investor
protection leads to a persistent return differential between rich and poor countries (Stulz, 2005).

33

Investor protection matters. Where accounting standards and enforcement bodies do not
exist to restrain insiders, resources invested in a company may be wasted on superfluous
managerial perks or even stolen outright (Jensen, 1986). The insiders may be controlling
shareholders, such as a founding family, a firm’s top managers, or both. Because outside
investors know less than insiders about the firm’s prospects and the behavior of its managers,
they will demand higher returns or simply not invest.
Strong investor protection can help to mitigate problems of agency and asymmetric
information by providing minority shareholders with mechanisms to restrain insiders. A large
body of research demonstrates that the degree to which a country’s laws protect the legal rights
of minority shareholders exerts a significant influence on the size and robustness of capital
markets (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny 1997, 1998, 2002). Firms located in
countries with strong investor protection have greater access to external finance, invest more,
and have higher valuations than their counterparts in countries with weak investor protection
(LaPorta et al., 1997, 1998, 2002; Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Rajan, 2000).22
Conversely, investors will stay away from countries in which investor protection is weak
(Dornbusch, 2000). Table 3 shows the 18 emerging economies that liberalized their stock
markets rank lower than developed countries on every commonly used measure of investor
protection: the rule of law, efficiency of the judicial system, contract repudiation, expropriation
risk, and the accounting system. Weak investor protection decreases effective returns, thereby
reducing the incentive for capital to flow from rich to poor countries (Shleifer and Wolfenzon,
2002).23 Because minority shareholders in emerging economies receive less protection than their
counterparts in rich countries, lifting restrictions on capital inflows may generate smaller
22

In a related paper, Johnson, Boone, Breach, and Friedman (2000) show that measures of investor protection do a
better job of explaining stock market declines during the Asian Crisis than do standard macro variables.
23
See also the discussion in Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Love (2002).

34

changes in asset prices and capital flows than would occur if emerging economies gave minority
shareholders the same average level of protection they receive in developed economies.
Although Table 3 corroborates the basic story, an important question for future research
is the extent to which the capital market imperfections view truly explains the relatively small
financial impact of liberalization. For instance, an empirical prediction of the market
imperfections view is that the impact of liberalization should be larger in countries that have
stronger investor protection. Unfortunately, the policy-experiment approach is not well-suited to
test this prediction. With typically no more than 25 countries that meet the criteria for sample
inclusion, there are simply not enough data points to conduct precise tests of the cross-sectional
prediction that liberalization will have a larger impact in countries with stronger investor
protection.24
In a related exercise that is not a study of liberalization per se, Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan,
and Volosovych (2006) try to determine whether the capital-market-imperfections view or the
weak-institutions view has greater empirical relevance for the observed pattern of asset prices
and capital flows to emerging economies. They construct a measure of the strength of
institutions for a large cross-section of countries, using variables from Political Risk Service’s
International Country Risk Guide. As a proxy for international capital market imperfections they
construct a measure of economic “remoteness” which they interpret as capturing informational
frictions as in Coval and Moskowitz (1999, 2001) and Portes and Rey (2005).
In running horse races between the two views, Alfaro et al. (2006) find that their measure
of institutions explains over half of the variation in foreign direct investment and portfolio flows
as a fraction of GDP. They interpret their finding as indicative of the primacy of weak
24

Chinn and Ito (2002) do find that countries whose financial systems have a higher level of legal and institutional
development benefit more from capital account openness, but like other purely cross-sectional studies, the paper
examines the correlation between openness and real variables, not the impact of liberalization per se.

35

institutions over capital market imperfections for explaining the paucity of capital flows to
developing countries. One problem with their interpretation is that it is not clear that economic
remoteness is the right proxy for capital market imperfections such as agency problems and
investor protection. Furthermore, it is also difficult to say where institutional quality ends and
capital market imperfections begin. Poor institutions (e.g., the absence of property rights) lead to
market imperfections such as weak investor protection. While it is not clear that one can
successfully distinguish between the institutions view and the capital market imperfections view
using aggregate cross-country data, the Alfaro et al. (2006) paper does provide empirical support
for the notion that the myriad of potential distortions not explicitly modeled in the neoclassical
framework can account for some of the Lucas (1990) paradox.

6B. Can We Believe the Investment Results?

Although the financial impact of stock market liberalization is small relative to
predictions, the evidence in Section 5B demonstrates that it is apparently still large enough to
have significant effects on real investment. However, it is not clear how much confidence we
should place in results that attribute economy-wide investment booms to a policy change that
affects directly only those firms that are traded on the stock market. In most emerging
economies, the economic activity of stock-market-listed firms accounts for a relatively small
fraction of GDP, so it is natural to ask whether the aggregate investment booms that occur in the
aftermath of liberalizations may be plausibly linked with events that partially open a single
component of the capital account.
For instance, the establishment of a country fund is the modal means through which the
policy-experiment approach identifies capital account liberalization dates. The size of a country

36

fund is typically small relative to the size of the liberalizing country’s capital stock. The Chilean
liberalization listed in Table 1 illustrates the point. Chile liberalized its stock market in May of
1987, and the vehicle through which it did so was the Toronto Trust Mutual Fund, a Canadian
closed-end fund with a net asset value of 37.7 million US dollars. A capital inflow of this size is
simply not large enough to account for the size of Chile’s subsequent investment boom. Because
the capital stock of publicly traded Chilean firms is a subset of the entire economy’s, to illustrate
the point it is sufficient to show that 37.7 million dollars is small relative to the increase in the
capital stock of the publicly traded firms. In 1987 Chile’s stock market capitalization was 5.34
billion US dollars, and the ratio of the market value of assets to book value was 0.7. This means
that the book value of assets was roughly 7.63 billion US dollars at the time Chile liberalized. In
the five years after liberalization, Chile experienced abnormal capital stock growth of 2.2
percentage points per year. Applying this growth number to the capital stock in a continuously
compounded fashion for the next five years adds an additional 890 million dollars of productive
assets to the economy. The 37.7 million dollar capital inflow can account for less than five
percent of this increase.
The apparent incongruity of these numbers forces harder thinking about the validity of
the empirical link between liberalization and real investment. In doing so, an important point to
keep in mind is that the policy-experiment approach uses country-fund openings as observable
de facto indicators of harder-to-pinpoint de jure policy changes.25 If country-fund dates are valid
proxies for the occurrence of broader, undocumented liberalizations, then significant quantities
of capital may flow in through stock markets that are not part of any particular country fund. If
that is the case, then the size of the initial country fund will understate the quantity of resources
that stock market liberalizations make available to finance an increase in the domestic capital
25

See Kose et al. (2006) for a detailed discussion of de facto versus de jure indicators.

37

stock. Three facts suggest that closed-end country fund dates do indeed provide nonspecious
indicators of a larger move towards open capital markets.
First, a steady stream of country funds and issuances of American Depository Receipts
typically follow stock market liberalizations (Karolyi, 2004, Levine and Schmukler, 2005). In
the case of Chile, 6 additional country funds with a cumulative net asset value of 991.8 million
dollars were established between 1987 and 1992. More generally, Table 4 shows that aggregate
net equity inflows to emerging equity markets rise sharply following the median date of countryfund openings.
Second, with the sole exception of Malaysia during the Asian Crisis of 1997-98, none of
the stock market liberalization dates from Table 1 were followed by a reversal of freedom of
foreign access.26 Together with the first fact, this second fact confirms that stock market
liberalizations indicate a discrete change in capital account policy that signifies the beginning of
a steady march toward greater freedom of capital inflows.
Third, stock market liberalizations coincide with a significant increase in the importation
of capital goods. In a sample of 25 countries that liberalized their stock markets between 1980
and 1997, liberalization leads to a 6-percent increase in capital goods as a fraction of total
imports, and the share of total machine imports to GDP rises by 12 percent (Alfaro and Hammel,
2006). Because developing countries do not produce a significant portion of the capital goods
they use, the observation that imports of capital goods rise in concert with the advent of portfolio
equity inflows increases confidence in earlier work on liberalization and aggregate investment.

6C. Are the Growth Effects Plausible?

Stock market liberalizations may be able to account for a nontrivial fraction of country26

See Abdelal and Alfaro (2002, 2003) for a detailed discussion of the Malaysian case.

38

wide investment booms, but the increase in the capital stock following liberalizations is too small
to account for the observed increase in growth. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) find that
the increase in economic growth due to liberalization is about one percent per year after
controlling for a number of variables. This estimate is implausibly large.27 To see why, recall
that the growth rate of capital increases by about one percent per year following stock market
liberalizations and that the elasticity of output with respect to capital is roughly one-third.
Therefore, a percentage-point increase in the growth rate of the capital stock cannot raise the
growth rate of GDP per capita by much more than one-third of a percentage point.
Within the standard neoclassical framework, any increase in the growth rate of output not
due to an increase in the growth rate of capital and labor must be the result of an increase in the
growth rate of total factor productivity (TFP). The growth rate of TFP did rise from an average
of 0.19 percent per year in the five years preceding stock market liberalization to an average of
1.82 percent per year in the subsequent five years. But one cannot glibly attribute the increase in
TFP growth to stock market liberalization. The reason is that the operative channel from
liberalization to growth in the neoclassical model runs through capital accumulation. Total
factor productivity does not enter into the story, unless stock market liberalizations are associated
with a major easing of restrictions on foreign direct investment (FDI).
When foreign firms undertake FDI in the form of green field investments or the purchase
of a majority stake of a domestic firm, they may bring new technology and management
techniques that increase the efficiency of the acquired firm and generate economy-wide
knowledge spillovers. Mexico is the only country in Table 1 whose liberalization date (May
1989) also coincides with a major easing of restrictions on FDI. There was a significant increase
27

See the discussion on page 19 and page 22 of Kose et al. (2006).

39

in the TFP growth of Mexican plants that changed from domestic to majority foreign ownership
(Perez Gonzales, 2005). FDI in Venezuela also increased TFP growth at the plant level (Aitken
and Harrison, 1999).28 There is no evidence, however, that plant-level productivity gains
generate economy-wide knowledge spillovers that stimulate higher aggregate TFP growth
(Haddad and Harrison, 1993; Aitken and Harrison, 1999; Gorg and Greenaway, 2004).
Now, capital account liberalization could raise TFP growth if it increased the allocative
efficiency of domestic investment, but it is not obvious why it should. It is precisely because
economists do not think that capital account liberalization necessarily enhances the efficiency of
the domestic financial system, that so many of them recommend enhancing the efficiency of the
domestic financial system before opening up to free capital flows (see, for example, Dornbusch,
1983; Edwards, 1984; McKinnon, 1991; Mishkin, 2005).
It is true that capital account liberalization within a country does tend to increase its
financial development (Levine, 2001; Levine and Zervos, 1998a, b). It is also true that countries
at high levels of financial development allocate capital more efficiently than countries at low
levels of financial development (Love, 2003; Wurgler, 2000; Rajan and Zingales, 1998;
Eichengreen, 2004). The temptation, of course, is to invoke transitivity and conclude that capital
account liberalization increases domestic allocative efficiency. The problem with such logic is
that documenting a positive correlation between the efficiency of capital allocation and financial
development in a cross section of countries does not permit us to infer that more financial
development within a given country will improve its allocative efficiency. Without a convincing
body of time series evidence that the quality of a country’s capital allocation improves as its
level of financial development rises, no basis exists for concluding that liberalization indirectly
28

For an analysis of the anticipated productivity gains from foreign direct investment using stock market data, see
Chari, Ouimet, and Tesar (2004).

40

improves the efficiency of domestic capital allocation through its impact on financial
development.29
I am not arguing that one cannot tell stories in which capital account liberalization
increases higher TFP growth. Liberalization may ease liquidity constraints (Gupta and Yuan,
2005; Mitton, 2006), thereby enabling firms to adopt technologies that they could not finance
prior to the liberalization. Liberalization also facilitates increased risk sharing, which might
encourage investment in riskier, higher growth technologies in the spirit of Obstfeld (1994),
Levine (1997), or King and Levine (1993). The point is that while the developing countries in
this sample may have increased their rate of adoption of new production technologies during the
late 1980s and early 1990s, there is simply no intellectually sound way to draw such a conclusion
from aggregate data.
In contrast, the aggregate TFP growth numbers are completely consistent with the readily
observable evidence on economic reforms. As discussed in Section 6A.2, economic reforms that
raise the efficiency of a given stock of capital and labor will increase TFP, and again, Table 1
shows that stock market liberalizations typically coincide with a raft of other such reforms. Of
course, the only way to completely resolve these kinds of issues is to confront them with data
that are capable of distinguishing between competing theories. Recent studies of liberalization
that move from aggregate to firm-level data show the way forward.

7. Firm-Level Perspectives on Capital Account Liberalization

Perhaps the most important shortcoming of aggregate data is its limited ability to help us
understand whether countries that liberalize efficiently allocate the capital that flows in. While
the rise in aggregate stock prices and investment documented in the literature suggests that
29

Gallindo, Schiantarelli, and Weiss (2005) provide some of the first evidence on this subject of which I am aware.

41

liberalization promotes some efficient movement of capital between countries, it says nothing
about the efficiency of capital allocation within countries. Within-country efficiency would
require that the stream of capital from developed countries get allocated to the highest return
sectors within the emerging economies to which it flows.
The efficiency of capital allocation is closely related to the cost of capital. For instance,
the larger the fall in a country’s cost of capital, the more its investment should increase. In other
words, cross-country changes to investment in the aftermath of liberalizations should be
negatively correlated with cross-country changes in the cost of capital on impact. The problem is
that the small-sample-size problem inherent in the policy-experiment approach once again does
not provide sufficient power to say anything meaningful about the empirical relevance of this
hypothesis.
Similarly, aggregate data are of little use in helping us understand the role of international
risk sharing, a subject that also has important efficiency implications and is of broad interest in
the literature.30 Because the cost of capital matters for investment and risk sharing matters for
the cost of capital, it is natural to wonder about the importance of risk sharing relative to the fall
in the interest rate for the overall change in liberalizing countries’ cost of capital. Unfortunately,
studies of liberalization that use aggregate data provide no help on this point. For each country,
aggregate data supply one observable proxy for the change in the cost of capital—the stock
market revaluation discussed in Section 5. But there are two forces at work: the change in risk
sharing and the change in the interest rate. Since one data point is not sufficient to identify two
effects, it is impossible to disentangle them using aggregate data.
Firm-level data, on the other hand, provide more than sufficient degrees of freedom with

30

For surveys of the literature on international risk sharing see Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), chapter 5.

42

which to disentangle the impact of risk sharing from the interest rate. This section reviews how
recent work uses such data to gain a better understanding of risk sharing and the allocation of
capital within countries. More generally, this section explains how recent firm-level studies
enhance our understanding of the real effects of liberalization.

7A. Risk Sharing and Asset Prices

The country-level organizing framework in Section 5A extends naturally to a firm-level
setting that lays bare the risk-sharing content of stock price revaluations. The key idea is that the
changes that occur in firms’ stock prices at the time of liberalization embody signals about the
impact of liberalization on the firms’ fundamentals. If capital allocation is efficient, then firms’
investment decisions should respond to these signals.
An efficient allocation of capital is one that satisfies the first-order condition for
investment. Recall that before liberalization occurs the first-order condition for aggregate
investment requires the expected marginal product of the aggregate capital stock to be equal to
the aggregate cost of equity capital plus the rate of depreciation. The difference between the
first-order condition for the economy as a whole and that for an individual firm lies in the equity
premium. Whereas the aggregate equity premium is proportional to the variance of the return on
the domestic market, Var (rM ) , the equity premium for an individual firm, is proportional to the
covariance of the firm’s return with the local market.
Written in symbols to express it more concisely, the first-order condition for an
individual firm’s investment before liberalization is:
f i′(k )e = r + γ COV (ri , rM ) + δ

(11)

where the i subscripts indicate that we are now talking about a single firm instead of the entire

43

economy. Liberalizing a country’s stock market changes the relevant source of systematic risk
for pricing a firm’s shares from the local stock market index to a world stock market index. Due
to this change, the first-order condition for investment after liberalization is:
f i′(k * )e = r * + γ COV (ri , rW ) + δ

(12)

Where COV (ri , rW ) is the covariance of firm i’s return with the world market. Subtracting
equation (12) from equation (11) gives a useful expression for the change in the first-order
condition from before-to-after liberalization:
∆f i′(k )e = (r − r * ) + γ DIFCOVi

(13)

where DIFCOVi = COV (ri , rM ) − COV (ri , rW ) .
The right-hand-side of equation (13) highlights the two channels through which
liberalization changes a firm’s cost of capital. Moving from left to right, the first term is exactly
the same as in the aggregate case: a fall in the risk-free rate as the country switches from
financial autarky to financial integration with the world market; this is a common shock to all
firms in the economy. The second effect is unique to each firm: the greater the covariance of the
firm’s stock return with the local market relative to the covariance of its return with the world
market, the larger the change in the firm-specific component of its cost of capital.
If liberalization does not alter the firm’s expected future cash flow, the response of firm
i 's stock price to the news of the liberalization will mirror the change in its cost of capital. The

firm’s stock price will increase if liberalization reduces the cost of capital and vice versa. In
other words, equation (13) predicts that each firm’s revaluation will have an intercept term and a
slope term. The intercept term should be the same across all firms within a given country. As
for the slope effect, if risk sharing matters, then the revaluations that firms experience should be
an increasing function of the variable DIFCOV.
44

Recent work supports the two asset-pricing predictions of equation (13). Firms
experience significant stock price revaluations during liberalizations (Chari and Henry, 2004;
Patro and Wald, 2005). Furthermore, the stock price change associated with liberalization is
positively and significantly related to DIFCOV. In a sample of 430 firms from 8 countries, the
average firm-level revaluation is about 15 percent in real dollar terms, changes in firm-specific
covariances explain roughly one-third of the revaluation, and the common shock is the same for
all firms (Chari and Henry, 2004).
The finding that stock prices of firms in emerging markets move in accordance with
changes in systematic risk provides some of the first empirical support for the CAPM in a
domestic or international setting.31 It also runs counter to recent work which finds that stock
returns in emerging economies generally contain little firm-specific information (Morck, Yeung,
and Yu, 2000). These two facts make you wonder whether the firm-level asset pricing results are
spurious. Two observations suggest otherwise.
First, the empirical design of the firm-level policy-experiment approach gives it power to
uncover cross-sectional relationships between expected returns and systematic risk that are
difficult to detect in other settings. Covariances are measured with error (Fama and French,
2004), and measurement error reduces the statistical power of any regression. Instead of testing
for a relationship between levels of returns and levels of systematic risk, the firm-level policyexperiment approach focuses on episodes where there are large changes in both risk and returns.
The magnitude of the liberalization-induced changes in expected returns and systematic risk
associated with opening up the economy to foreign capital flows may simply dominate the
attenuating effects of measurement error that usually plague efforts to find cross-sectional
31

For discussions of the CAPM’s empirical record, see Fama (1991), Cochrane (1999), and Campbell (2000).
Karolyi and Stulz (2001) discuss the international CAPM.

45

pricing relationships. Similarly, changes in emerging-market stock prices may convey little
firm-specific information in general, but they do convey such information during episodes like
liberalizations when the magnitude of the information is sufficiently large.32
Second, using a similar approach to that of Chari and Henry (2004), Dvorak and Podpiera
(2005) also find that large changes in systematic risk have explanatory power for changes in the
cross-section of expected returns. The policy experiment that provides the key source of
variation for Dvorak and Podpiera’s exercise is the addition of eight central and Eastern
European countries into the European Union in 2001. Dvorak and Podpiera (2005) argue that
accession into the European Union integrated the stock markets of the acceding countries with
the rest of Europe and thereby changed the source of systematic risk facing investors in the
countries that gained membership. In their sample of 74 firms, the difference between the beta
of a firm’s stock return with the local market and its beta with the European market explains
about 22 percent of the typical stock price revaluation that occurs with accession.

7B. Risk Sharing and Resource Allocation

While the correlation between changes in returns and changes in systematic risk provide
some evidence of within-country efficiency at the level of asset pricing, the more pressing
question is whether real resource allocation—investment—responds accordingly.33 As the
benchmark for determining the firm’s investment hurdle rate switches from the local stock
market index to a world stock market index, efficiency requires that allocation of the firm’s
physical capital also shift in accordance with the change in the source of the country’s systematic
32

The firm-specific information in stock prices also rises as countries adopt greater capital market openness (Li,
Morck, Yang, and Yeung, 2004).
33
The idea of trying to relate changes in investment to the liberalization-induced changes in stock prices follows in
the spirit of earlier work that tries to relate changes in investment to changes in stock prices more generally
(Blanchard, Rhee, and Summers, 1993; Fischer and Merton, 1984; Tobin and Brainard, 1977).

46

risk.34 In order to restore equilibrium, the increase in the firm’s capital stock must be large
enough to drive the expected marginal product down to the lower, post-liberalization cost of
capital. Equation (13) implicitly defines the size of the required increase and therefore delivers
two testable predictions about investment.
The first prediction is that the common shock to the cost of capital should cause the
average investment rate of all firms to rise. The second prediction is that, given the common
shock, the firm-specific shock (the change in covariance) implies that firms whose equity premia
fall should invest even more than those whose premia rise. In other words, if physical capital is
reallocated in line with the optimal smoothing of production risk, then high DIFCOV firms
should experience faster capital stock growth than low DIFCOV firms following liberalization.
The first prediction about liberalization and firm-level investment finds empirical support
in the literature. The growth rate of the average firm’s capital stock exceeds its pre-liberalization
mean by an average of 3.8 percentage points per year (Chari and Henry, 2006). This effect is
much larger than the corresponding increase in the aggregate capital stock over the same time
period (1.1 percentage points per year). Because stock market liberalizations most directly affect
the investment incentives of publicly traded firms, the firm-level investment results are more
credible than the aggregate results and make a stronger case that liberalization does, indeed, have
real effects.35
The second prediction about liberalization and firm-level investment enjoys rather less
empirical success. There is no evidence that physical investment responds to changes in
systematic risk, and firm-specific changes in equity premia (the DIFCOV variable) have an
34

For a helpful exposition on the resource-allocation implications of changes in systematic risk, see Tesar and
Werner (1998), pp. 290-292.
35
The firm-level investment data used by Chari and Henry (2006) comes from the International Finance
Corporation’s Corporate Finance Database. For a detailed description of this dataset, see Demirguc-Kunt, and
Maksimovic (1998) and Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2001).

47

economically trivial and statistically insignificant effect on changes in investment.
The finding that firms’ investment decisions are insensitive to firm-specific changes in
their cost of capital delivers a powerful blow to the Allocative Efficiency view of liberalization.
On the other hand, with little evidence from developed markets to suggest that exposure to
aggregate covariance risk drives expected returns, testing the hypothesis that firms in developing
countries allocate physical investment in accordance with the CAPM may seem to fly in the face
of all common sense.
But if the risk-sharing-resource-allocation hypothesis is a straw man, then it is a very
popular one. Virtually all studies of international risk sharing lean heavily on the intuition that
the gains to trade in risky assets stem from the difference between the variance of domestic
returns (consumption) and the covariance of domestic returns (consumption) with the rest of the
world (see, for example, Athanasoulis and Van Wincoop, 2000; Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1996,
chapter 5; Lewis, 1999, 2000; Van Wincoop, 1994, 1999). Furthermore, we have just seen that
firm-level stock prices do move in conjunction with liberalization-induced changes in systematic
risk. So the real issue is why the reductions in risk premia do not cause firms to adopt projects—
a lá Obstfeld (1994)—that were too risky to undertake in the absence of international risk
sharing.
However one chooses to interpret the evidence, an important limitation of existing firmlevel studies on the benefits of risk sharing is their exclusive focus on: (a) the production side of
the economy (i.e., investment) and (b) the removal of restrictions on capital inflows. The largest
future welfare gains to capital account liberalization in developing countries such as China and
India are likely to come from the reduction in consumption and income volatility that will occur
when their governments liberalize capital outflows, thereby permitting their citizens to hold

48

assets abroad and unload some of the systematic risk of the domestic economy. This is not a
new point (see Lessard, 1973, 1994), but the glaring absence of empirical research on the welfare
impact of liberalizing capital outflows practically cries out for an application of the policyexperiment approach. Given the problems with aggregate consumption data (especially in
developing countries), substantial contributions in the area of risk sharing and liberalization are
most likely to come from analyses that use the cross-sectional variation in firm-level data in
conjunction with major policy changes to construct convincing identification strategies.

7C. Other Firm-Level Approaches to Liberalization and Efficiency

Testing whether liberalization-induced changes in risk drive changes in asset prices and
investment provides one way of evaluating efficiency, but it is also useful to adopt a broader
perspective—one that is grounded in theory but not tied so restrictively to the CAPM. There is
much to be learned about the impact of capital account policy on real variables by looking at
firm-level data from a number of different perspectives.
For instance, another way to tackle the question of liberalization and allocative efficiency
is to turn the policy-experiment approach on its head. In addition to looking at how firms
respond to liberalization, it may be just as instructive to study how firms respond when countries
impose restrictions on capital inflows (Forbes, 2006). If capital account liberalization enhances
efficiency, then imposing capital controls should diminish efficiency in at least two important
ways. First, capital controls may reduce the supply of capital, thereby raising the cost of
borrowing and tightening the financing constraints faced by domestic firms. Second, by
reducing the supply of capital, capital controls can decrease competition and market discipline,
permitting firms that might not survive if their competitors had access to credit to flourish behind

49

closed borders (Rajan and Zingales, 2003; Johnson and Mitton, 2002, Morck, Strangeland, and
Yeung, 2000).
A number of papers examine the extent to which the presence of capital controls
exacerbates the financing constraints faced by various kinds of firms. In the spirit of Fazzari,
Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), the basic test involves the examination of the sensitivity of
investment to cash flow.36 Forbes (2003) uses El Encaje, the Chilean episode of taxes on capital
inflows from 1991 to 1998, as a policy experiment with which to assess the efficiency
implications of capital controls.37 Her analysis begins with the following observation. In
developed countries, small, publicly traded firms exhibit higher investment growth than large,
publicly traded firms. Forbes (2003) finds that this is also the case in Chile before 1991 and after
1998. During El Encaje, however, she finds that the investment growth of small firms drops
below that of large firms. She goes on to show that El Encaje increased the sensitivity of
investment to cash flow for small, publicly traded firms whereas the sensitivity of large firms
was unaffected.
In contrast to Forbes’ case study, Harrison, Love and McMillan (2004) use a crosscountry, firm-level panel data set to study the impact of capital account restrictions. They take
their measures of capital account restrictions from the IMF publication AREAER discussed in
Section 3. Like Forbes (2003), they find that the presence of capital account restrictions
increases the sensitivity of firms’ investment to cash flow. They also document that the
sensitivity of domestically-owned firms’ investment to cash flow is greater than that of firms
with foreign ownership or assets.
In a paper that reverts back to the easing of capital controls, Laeven (2003) constructs a
36
37

For a detailed discussion of the literature on financing constraints and investment, see Hubbard (1998).
Gallego and Hernandez (2003) also conduct an analysis of el Encaje.

50

cross-country data set to address the question of whether financial liberalization eases financing
constraints and increases competition. Financial liberalization typically refers to the removal of
interest rate ceilings, directed credit, and other such distortions in the domestic financial
markets.38 Laeven’s paper has implications for capital-account liberalization because his
measure of financial liberalization captures the impact of foreign direct investment (i.e., foreign
entry) into the domestic banking sector. As such, it has some power to speak to the issue of
whether foreign bank entry increases the supply of capital and makes the domestic lending
market more competitive. He finds that the sensitivity of small firms’ investment to cash flow
falls by 80 percent as a result of financial liberalization. He also finds that the investment of
large firms becomes more sensitive to cash flow after financial liberalization and interprets this
finding as evidence that large firms may have had access to preferential credit before financial
liberalization.
One important weakness of firm-level papers that examine the efficiency implications of
capital controls is their interpretation of the sensitivity of investment to cash flow as a measure of
firm-financing constraints. If firms face financing frictions then their investment will be
sensitive to cash flow. But the converse of the preceding statement need not be true: Sensitivity
of investment to cash flow does not imply that firms face financial constraints (Kaplan and
Zingales, 1997, 2000; Stein, 2003).
While there are multiple interpretations of the investment-cash-flow sensitivity of
emerging-market firms, and it remains to be seen how all of the results reviewed in this section
will stand up to further scrutiny, there is little question that papers which use firm-level data
provide two steps forward: (1) They increase our understanding of the transmission mechanisms

38

See McKinnon (1973), Shaw (1973), and Diaz Alejandro (1985).

51

through which capital-account policy affects the real economy, and (2) they provide a blueprint
of how to construct firm-level identification strategies for disentangling those mechanisms.

8. Do Liberalizations Cause Crises?

Stock market liberalizations deliver undeniable benefits over the short-to-medium term,
but viewed over a more extensive horizon, the data raise questions about the longer-run costbenefit tradeoff. For instance, extending Figures 4 and 5 to ten years beyond the liberalization
dates in Table 1 would reveal the collapse in investment and output associated with the Asian
Crisis. In addition to its effect on real variables, there is the additional question of whether
liberalizations also amplify the cycle in asset prices (Kaminsky and Schmukler, 2002). For
instance, in contrast to the efficient-markets prediction that there should be no revaluation of
assets once markets are open to foreign investors, equity prices continue to rise for two to three
years after stock market liberalizations, but then lose significant value over the longer term
(Martell and Stulz, 2003). At first glance, the boom-bust cycle in output, investment and asset
prices seems consistent with the view that liberalizations cause crises, but there are at least three
important points to keep in mind.
First, crises occur not in only in countries that liberalize the capital account, but also in
those where capital controls are in place (Forbes, 2006). There is, in fact, some systematic
evidence that the occurrence of crises and the imposition of capital controls are positively
correlated (Glick and Hutchinson, 2000; Eichengreen, 2003). So it is equally plausible that bad
policy precipitates crises and countries impose capital controls as a way to postpone the
financial-market consequences (such as depreciation of the currency) of weak or deteriorating
fundamentals. In other words, at least some of the existing evidence supports the notion that

52

poor macroeconomic policies, not capital account liberalizations, cause crises.
Second, when trying to determine whether liberalizations or fundamentals cause crises, it
is important to think critically about timing. The median stock market liberalization date in
Table 1 is 1989—five years prior to the Mexican crisis of December 1994 and almost 10 years
before the Asian crisis of 1997. Given the length of time between the onset of stock market
liberalizations and the rash of subsequent emerging-market financial crises, any causal link
between the two is far from obvious. Of course, the seeds of a misguided policy may take a long
time to yield their bitter fruit, so lags in timing alone cannot dismiss the possibility that stock
market liberalizations played a role. Nevertheless, the more proximate and plausible cause of the
crises would appear to be the build-up of short-term dollar-denominated debt: tesobonos in the
case of Mexico and interbank loans in the case of Asia (Krueger, 2000; Mishkin, 1996, 2000).
The question of whether stock market liberalizations or short-term debt caused the
Mexican and Asian crises raises the third and most important point: Cost-benefit analyses of
capital account liberalization do not make sense without specifying exactly what is meant by the
term “capital account liberalization.” In its broadest form, a capital account liberalization can be
any decision by a country’s government that allows capital to flow more freely in and (or) out of
that country. Allowing domestic businesses to take out loans from foreign banks, permitting
foreigners to purchase domestic government debt instruments, and allowing foreigners to invest
in the domestic stock market are but three examples. At a minimum, we need to distinguish
between two categories of liberalization: those that involve debt and those that involve equity.
The distinction matters, because the answer to the question, “do liberalizations cause crises?”
depends critically on whether you are talking about the liberalization of debt or equity flows.

53

8A. The Importance of Distinguishing Debt from Equity

A debt contract requires regular payments, regardless of the borrower’s circumstances.
This means that when bad news arises, creditors rush to get their money while they can. An
equity contract, on the other hand, involves risk-sharing—large payouts for shareholders when
times are good and little to nothing when times are bad. It may seem that foreign purchase of
equities on the domestic stock market could be reversed if and when foreign investors become
concerned about a country’s prospects, but shareholders cannot simply demand their money
back. They have to sell their shares, and prices will drop as soon as other market participants
(domestic or foreign) anticipate the increase in supply. Furthermore, as prices fall, expected
returns rise so that the incentive to sell equity is no longer as strong (Choe, Kho, and Stulz,
1999). In other words, servicing an equity contract involves procyclical payments that tend to
stabilize the balance of payments, whereas debt service payments are countercyclical and
therefore have the opposite effect.
Because it does not embody risk-sharing, excessive reliance on debt can cause financial
distress. In the 1970s developing-country governments obtained large quantities of floating-rate
commercial bank loans. The Debt Crisis of the 1980s then demonstrated that debt contracts can
induce large inefficiencies when economic conditions turn out to be worse than anticipated at the
time the contract was signed (Fischer, 1987). Nor is it simply the flow of asset-service payments
that is more likely to vary in a stabilizing way for equity than for debt. “The debt crisis was
caused most immediately and powerfully by the cutoff in new lending without any similar curb
on the requirement to pay amortization” (Williamson, 1997, p. 288).
Williamson’s point about the cessation of new lending gains particular saliency in the
context of the further distinction between bonds and bank loans. The nature of bank lending

54

makes that form of capital flows far more volatile than portfolio bond or equity flows. For
instance, domestic banks borrow short-term in the foreign interbank market with the expectation
that they will be able to roll over the loans. The potential problems here are twofold. First, the
decision by lenders to call in loans and cease rolling them over tends to be driven not by
idiosyncratic shocks to individual borrowers but common shocks to the domestic economy
(Dobson and Huffbauer, 2001). Second, common shocks dominate idiosyncratic shocks in
emerging markets (Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000). Taken together, these two facts create the
potential for large-scale reversals of short-term interbank loans.
Yet the vast majority of bank lending to emerging markets takes the form of short-term
bank loans (loans with a maturity of less than a year). At the end of 1997, 55 percent of foreign
bank loans world-wide were short-term, and one third of these loans were of the interbank
variety. For instance, foreign capital slows to Thailand peaked at 25.5 billion dollars in 1995; 75
percent of this sum took the form of bank loans; two thirds of these loans had maturities of less
than a year, and the majority went to Thai banks and nonbank financial intermediaries (Baily,
Farrell, and Lund, 2000).
The critical point about interbank loans is that they may be used by the recipient banks to
make loans to finance domestic projects that may not be short-term, thereby creating a liability
mismatch. These liability mismatches wreak havoc on the domestic economy in the face of
external shocks. Excessive short-term borrowing in dollars from foreign banks by Asian banks,
companies, and governments played a central role in the onset of the Asian Financial Crisis
(Furman and Stiglitz, 1998; Radelet and Sachs, 1998). In essence, the mismatch between the
term structure of Asian borrowers’ assets (long term) and their dollar-denominated external
liabilities (short term) meant that any bad news that made their lenders reluctant to extend new

55

loans was bound to create a liquidity problem.
The tendency toward sudden reversal of short-term bank flows underscores the central
point of the discussion. Whereas portfolio flows adjust to shocks through changes in prices,
short-term bank loans adjust through quantities (Dobson and Huffbauer, 2001). Consequently,
bank lending to emerging markets is far more volatile than portfolio investment in bonds or
equities (Kose et al., 2006). Again, the Asian Crisis highlights the difference in volatility. In
1996, the five Asian Crisis countries (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, Thailand)
received 47.8 billion dollars of capital inflows in the form of bank loans; in 1997, they
experienced a collective outflow of 29.9 billion dollars—a reversal of almost 80 billion dollars in
a one-year period (Baily, Farrell, and Lund, 2000).
In contrast to the abrupt reversal in bank flows, portfolio flows remained positive in Asia
throughout 1997. Baily, Farrell, and Lund (2000) document that aggregate portfolio flows to the
crisis countries fell by about half but remained positive. Furthermore, the aggregate pattern
holds at the individual country level for South Korea, Malyasia, and Thailand. In the case of
Thailand, even as foreign banks were refusing to roll over loans, portfolio flows increased by 70
percent between the second and third quarters of 1997 and remained positive through the first
half of 1998. The authors document that Indonesia did experience net portfolio outflows in the
fourth quarter of 1997, but they turned positive again by the middle of 1998.
Beyond the Asian crisis, heavy short-term borrowing in dollars played a central role in
precipitating almost every emerging-market financial crisis during the 1990s (Dornbusch, 2000;
Feldstein, 2002). A general finding is that the ratio of short-term debt to reserves predicts crises,
and greater short-term exposure predicts more severe crises when positive capital flows turn
negative (Rodrik and Velasco, 2000).

56

8B. If Debt Is So Risky, Why Do We See So Much of It?

Table 4 illustrates the dominance of debt over equity by breaking the composition of
capital flows to developing countries into five major categories: public and publicly guaranteed
debt flows, private nonguaranteed debt flows, foreign direct investment (FDI), portfolio equity,
and grants. The sum of the first two categories reflects all debt flows. From 1970 to 1984, debt
typically accounted for about 80 percent of all capital flows to developing countries. If debt
constitutes such a dangerous form of lending, why do we do we see so much of it relative to
equity? One obvious reason follows directly from the discussion in Section 5: Prior to the latter
half of the 1980s, developing countries largely banned foreigners from holding domestic shares.
If debt is so risky relative to equity, then why do governments liberalize debt inflows by
removing restrictions on offshore borrowing by domestic banks, while retaining hard limits on
foreign participation in the equity market? There are number of competing explanations for the
relatively slow liberalization of equity markets, all of which deserve more serious consideration
than the speculative treatment I give them in the next few sentences. Domestic capitalists in the
nonfinancial sector of the economy may favor liberalization because it reduces their cost of
capital. But these capitalists may also be reluctant to create the necessary preconditions for
successful equity market liberalization (Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002). Alternatively, there may
be competing interests. Liberalization generates aggregate welfare gains, but there may also be
potential losers who oppose the process (Rajan and Zingales, 2003). For example, domestic
banks may lose monopoly rents because liberalizations provide domestic firms with alternative
sources of financing. In turn, large, nonfinancial firms may be worse off because new sources of
financing for their smaller, more financially constrained industry peers may increase product
market competition. Finally, governments may delay equity market liberalizations for an

57

entirely different set of considerations. Future research should address these issues.
Whatever explains the delay, with the advent of stock market liberalization, portfolio
equity as a fraction of total capital inflows rose from less than 0.1 percent in 1980–84 to 18.7
percent in 1990–95—an increase of almost two-hundredfold. Debt as a fraction of total capital
flows fell from 82 percent in 1980–84 to 50 percent in 1990–95. FDI flows as a fraction of total
capital flows increased from 13 percent in 1980–84 to 28 percent in 1990–95. However, the
flow of portfolio equity to emerging markets has slowed since the boom of the early 1990s
(Akyut, Kalsi, and Ratha, 2003). And while developing countries’ ratios of external debt to
equity fell between 1997 and 2001, it is still not clear that they have fallen to prudent levels
(Suttle, 2003, p. 9). Hence, the recent increase in portfolio equity and FDI inflows,
notwithstanding, developing countries still lean heavily towards debt.39
The observed pattern of debt and equity flows is an equilibrium outcome, resulting from
the optimal response of borrowers and lenders to a given set of institutional arrangements.
Therefore, the critical issue is what distortions in the international financial system produce
incentives that lead to so much debt and so little equity. One prominent example of an incentivedistorting institutional arrangement was the Basel Capital Accord of 1988 (Basel I).
Drafted in response to the 1980s debt crisis, Basel I tried to reduce systemic risk by
linking banks’ capital adequacy ratios to the riskiness of their loans. Under Basel I, banks had to
set aside capital equal to at least 8 percent of their risk-adjusted assets to provide a buffer in case
of a loss on those assets. The problem was that Basel I’s system for risk-adjusting assets created
an unintentional bias toward short-term lending to emerging markets. Lending to banks in
OECD countries received a 20-percent risk weighting, regardless of the maturity structure of the
39

Home bias, the fact that foreign investors hold fewer foreign securities than they should, does not explain why the
composition of securities they do hold favors debt so strongly. Lewis (1999) surveys the home-bias literature.

58

loan. For loans to non-OECD countries, short-term loans received a 20-percent weight, longterm loans a 100-percent weight (Bonte, 1999).
As a consequence of Basel I’s weighting system, short-term, foreign currency lending to
banks in emerging markets required only one fifth of the capital required of long-term loans to
banks in emerging markets, and no more capital than a long-term loan to a bank in an OECD
country. Skewing the incentive structure for banks in G-10 countries to lend short-term to
emerging markets had predictable consequences. As discussed in Section 8A, short-term, dollardenominated loans, most of which originated with European and Japanese banks, constituted the
lion’s share of debt contracts in the East Asian Crisis. The introduction of Basel II in 1999 may
help alleviate the bias towards short-term debt in Basel I, but Rogoff (1999) identifies three other
sources of debt bias in the international financial system not directly related to capital adequacy
ratios.
First, by making it less risky to hold deposits, deposit insurance in creditor and debtor
countries increases the deposit base and expands the size of the banking system. Implicit
subsidies are also a problem. As the size of banking system expands, it becomes increasingly
difficult for the government to credibly commit to not bail out the banking system in the event of
a financial meltdown (Akerlof and Romer, 1993). Somewhat perversely, deposit insurance may
also raise the probability of bank failures by reducing the incentive for depositors to monitor the
lending practices of the financial institutions where they keep their money.40
Second, the international financial system protects the rights of debt holders more
vigilantly than those of equity holders. G-7 lenders to emerging-market countries can resort to
G-7 courts in the event of a debt dispute, but there is no such avenue of recourse for G-7 holders
40

Rogoff (1999) also argues that funds from international financial institutions aimed at helping distressed-country
debtors also provide an implicit subsidy to G-7 debt holders that encourages debt financing over equity.

59

of emerging-market equity (Bulow, 2002; Rogoff, 1999; Obstfeld, 1998).
Third, the underdevelopment of equity markets in emerging economies exacerbates the
problem of preferential treatment of debtholders in G-7 courts. The point here is closely related
to the discussion in Section 6A.3. A lack of transparency in emerging equity markets makes
foreigners reluctant to invest, and weak protection of the rights of equity investors reinforces the
tendency of capital suppliers to purchase debt instead of equity (Henry and Lorentzen, 2003).
9. Conclusion

Writing about capital account liberalization in 1998, Jagdish Bhagwati threw down the
gauntlet, declaring that “It is time to shift the burden of proof from those who oppose to those
who favor liberated capital” (Bhagwati, 1998). The explosion of papers written on the subject
since that time indicates the seriousness with which the profession has taken his challenge.
There is little evidence that economic growth and capital account openness are positively
correlated across countries. But there is lots of evidence that opening the capital account leads
countries to temporarily invest more and grow faster than they did when their capital accounts
were closed. Why does so much of the literature focus on the relationship between openness and
long-run growth when the predictions of the neoclassical model all point toward the short-run
impact of a country opening up? Part of the answer is tradition. Cross-sectional regressions of
national growth rates on policy variables have been around for a while, so the gravitational pull
of that methodological approach is quite strong. But I also think that the answer has something
to do with a professional obsession. There has always been a great deal of interest in uncovering
policies that increase the steady-state rate of growth. As a consequence, economists tend to
ignore the importance of short-run increases that permanently raise the path of national income
to a higher, but parallel trajectory (Solow, 2000, pp. 182-83).

60

References

Abdelal, Rawi and Laura Alfaro. 2002. “Malaysia: Capital and Control,” Harvard
Business School Case 702-040.
Abdelal, Rawi and Laura Alfaro. 2003. “Capital and Control: Lessons From Malaysia,”
Challenge 46(4), 36-53.
Aitken, Brian and Ann Harrison. 1999. “Do Domestic Firms Benefit From Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela,” American Economic Review, 89(3), 605-618.
Akerlof, George and Paul M. Romer. 1993. “Looting: The Economic Underworld of Bankruptcy
for Profit,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1–74.
Akyut, Dilek, Himmat Kalsi, and Dilip Ratha. 2003. “Sustaining and Promoting Equity-Related
Finance for Developing Countries,” Global Development Finance: Striving for Stability
in Development Finance, Washington: World Bank.
Alfaro, Laura and Eliza Hammel. 2006. “Capital Flows and Capital Goods,” Harvard
Business School Working Paper.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemi-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2006. “Why Doesn’t Capital
Flow From Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation” in Capital Controls and
Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences, Sebastian
Edwards (ed.) University of Chicago Press, Forthcoming.
Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli, and Gian-Maria Milesi-Feretti. 1994. “The Political Economy
of Capital Controls” in Capital Mobility: The Impact on Consumption, Investment and
Growth, L. Leiderman and A. Razin (eds.), Cambridge, New York and Melbourne:
Cambridge University Press, 289-321.
Arslanalp, Serkan and Peter Blair Henry .2005. “Is Debt Relief Efficient?” Journal of Finance,
60(2), 1021-1055.
Arslanalp, Serkan and Peter Blair Henry. 2006a. “Debt Relief,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 20(1), 207-220.
Arslanalp, Serkan and Peter Blair Henry. 2006b. “Helping the Poor to Help Themselves: Debt
Relief or Aid?” in Sovereign Debt at the Crossroads, Chris Jochnick and Fraser A.
Preston (eds.), Oxford University Press, 174-193.
Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen, and Charles Wyplosz. 2001. “When Does Capital
Account Liberalization Help More Than It Hurts?” NBER Working Paper No.
8414.
Athanasoulis, Stefano and Eric Van Wincoop. 2000. “Growth Uncertainty and Risk Sharing”

61

Journal of Monetary Economics, 45, 477-505.
Baily, Martin, Diana Farrell, and Susan Lund. 2000. “The Color of Hot Money,” Foreign Affairs,
79, 99-109.
Barro, Robert. 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106(2), 407-443.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth, New York: McGraw Hill.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey. 2000. “Foreign Speculators and Emerging
Equity Markets,” Journal of Finance, 55(2), 565-613.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey and Christian Lundblad. 2005. “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?” Journal of Financial Economics, 77(1), 3-55.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1998. “The Capital Myth,” Foreign Affairs, 77, 7-12.
Blanchard, Olivier J., C. Rhee, and Lawrence Summers. 1993. “The Stock Market,
Profit, and Investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 115-136.
Bonte, Rudi. 1999. “Supervisory Lessons to Be Drawn From the Asian Crisis.” Basel
Committee on Supervision Working Papers, No. 2.
Booth, Laurence, Varouj Aivazian, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2001.
“Capital Structures in Developing Countries,” Journal of Finance, 56(2), 87-130.
Bosworth, Barry and Susan Collins. 2003. “The Empirics of Growth: An Update” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 113-206.
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly. 1998. “Inflation Crises and Long Run
Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 41(1), 3-26.
Bulow, Jeremy. 2002. “First World Governments and Third World Debt,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 229-255.
Bulow, Jeremy and Lawrence Summers. 1984. “The Taxation of Risky Assets,”
Journal of Political Economy, 92(1), 20–39.
Calderon, Cesar, Norman Loayza, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2004. “Openness,
Vulnerability, and Growth,” Working Paper, Central Bank of Chile.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carlos Végh. 1998. “Inflation Stabilization and Balance of Payments
Crises in Developing Countries” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, John Taylor and
Michael Woodford, (eds.) Amsterdam: North-Holland.

62

Campbell, John. 2000. “Asset Pricing at the Millennium” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55 (4)
1515-1567.
Caselli, Francesco. 2005. “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences” in Peter Aghion
and Steven Durlauf eds. The Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland.
Caselli, Francesco and James Feyrer. 2006. “The Marginal Product of Capital” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2004. “Risk Sharing Asset Prices: Evidence From
a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Finance, 59(3), 1295-1324.
Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2006. “Firm-Specific Information and the
Efficiency of Investment,” NBER Working Paper No. 12186.
Chari, Anusha, Page Ouimet, and Linda Tesar. 2004. "Acquiring Control in Emerging
Markets: Evidence from the Stock Market,” NBER Working Paper No. 10872.
Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito. 2002. “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions, and
Financial Development: Cross Country Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 8967.
Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and René M. Stulz. 1999. “Do Foreign Investors Destabilize
Stock Markets? The Korean Experience in 1997,” Journal of Financial Economics 54(2),
227–264.
Claessens, Stijn and Moon-Whoan Rhee. 1994. “The Effect of Barriers to Equity Investment in
Developing Countries” in The Internationalization of Equity Markets, Jeffrey A. Frankel,
(ed.), University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 231-275.
Cochrane, John. 1999. “New Facts in Finance” Economic Perspectives Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, 23 (3), 36-58.
Coval, Joshua and Tobias J. Moskowitz. 1999. “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in
Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, 54(1), 2045-2074.
Coval, Joshua and Tobias J. Moskowitz. 2001. “The Geography of Investment: Informed
Trading and Asset Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(4), 811-841.
De Jong, Frank and Frans De Roon. 2005. “Time Varying Market Integration and Expected
Returns in Emerging Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 78(3), 583-613.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı and Vojislav Maksimovic. 1998. “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,”
Journal of Finance 53(6), 2107–2136.
Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F. 1985. “Goodbye Financial Repression Hello Financial
Crash,” Journal of Development Economics, 19, 1-24.

63

Dobson, Wendy and Clyde Huffbauer. 2001. World Capital Markets: Challenge to the G-10,
Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1983. Panel discussion on the southern cone, International
Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 30, 164-184.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 2000. Keys to Prosperity: Free Markets, Sound Policy, and a Bit of Luck,
MIT Press.
Dvorak, Tomas and Richard Podpiera. 2005. “European Enlargement and Equity Markets in
Accession Countries,” European Central Bank, Working Paper No. 552.
Easterly, William. 1996. “When Is Stabilization Expansionary?” Economic Policy, 22, 67–107.
Edison, Hali, Ross Levine, and Torsten Sløk. 2002. “International Financial Integration
and Economic Growth,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 21, 749-776.
Edison, Hali, Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk. 2004. “Capital Account
Liberalization, and Economic Performance: Synthesis and Survey,” IMF Staff Papers,
51(2), 220-256.
Edison, Hali and Francis Warnock. 2003. “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital
Controls,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 10(1), 81-103.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1984. “The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in
Developing Countries,” Princeton Essays in International Finance, 156.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2001. “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are
Emerging Economies Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2001. “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country
Studies Tell Us?” The World Bank Economic Review, 16(3), 341-365.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2003. Capital Flows and Crises, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2004. “Financial Instability” in Global Crises: Global Solutions, Bjorn
Lomborg (ed.), Cambridge University Press.
Errunza, Vihang and Darius Miller. 2000. “Market Segmentation and the Cost of Capital” in
International Equity Markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 577600.
Fama, Eugene F. 1991. “Efficient Capital Markets: II,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 46(5), 15751617.
Fama, Gene and Ken French. 2004. “The CAPM: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic

64

Perspectives, 18(3), 25-46.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. 1988. “Financing Constraints
and Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988(1), 141206.
Feldstein, Martin. 2002. “Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies:
Overview of Prevention and Management,” NBER Working Paper No. 8837.
Fischer, Stanley. 1987. “Sharing the Burden of the Debt Crisis,” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings 77(2), 165–170.
Fischer, Stanley. 1998. “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” Princeton
Essays in International Finance 207, 1-10.
Fischer, Stanley. 2003. “Globalization and Its Challenges,” American Economic Review, 93(2),
1-30.
Fischer, Stanley and Robert C. Merton. 1984. “Macroeconomics and Finance: The Role of the
Stock Market,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 21, 57-108.
Fischer, Stanley, Ratna Sahay, and Carlos Végh. 2002. “Modern Hyper and High Inflations,”
Journal of Economic Literature 40(3), 937–980.
Foerster, S. and Andrew Karolyi. 1999. “The Effects of Market Segmentation and Investor
Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence From Stocks Listing in the U.S.” Journal of
Finance, 54, 981-1014.
Forbes, Kristin. 2003. “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial
Constraints for Smaller Traded Firms,” NBER Working Paper No. 9777.
Forbes, Kristin. 2006. “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch” in
Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and
Consequences, Sebastian Edwards (ed.) University of Chicago Press, Forthcoming.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1994. “Introduction” in The Internationalization of Equity Markets, Jeffrey
A. Frankel (ed), Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1-20.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and David Romer. 1999. “Does Trade Cause Growth?" American Economic
Review, 89(3), 379-399.
Furman, Jason and Joseph Stiglitz. 1998. “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East
Asia,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1–114.
Gallego, Francisco and Leonardo Hernandez. 2003. “Microeconomic Effects of Capital Controls:
The Chilean Experience During the 1990s,” International Journal of Finance and

65

Economics, 8(3), 225-253.
Gallindo, Arturo, Fabio Schiantarelli, and Andrew Weiss. 2005. “Does Financial Liberalization
Improve the Allocation of Investment? Micro Evidence from Developing Countries,”
Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Glick, Reuven and Michael Hutchinson. 2000. “Stopping Hot Money or Signaling Bad Policy?
Capital Controls and the Onset of Currency Crises,” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Working Paper.
Gordon, Myron. 1962. The Investment, Financing, and Valuation of the Corporation,
Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc.
Gorg, Holger and David Greenaway. 2004. “Much Ado About Nothing? Do Domestic Firms
Really Benefit from Foreign Direct Investment?” World Bank Research Observer, 19(2),
171-197.
Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Olivier Jeanne. 2006. “The Elusive Gains from International
Financial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Grilli, Vittorio and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 1995. “Economic Effects and Structural
Determinants of Capital Controls,” IMF Staff Papers, 42(3), 517-551.
Gupta, Nandini and Kathy Yuan. 2005. “On the Growth Effects of Liberalizations,” University
of Michigan Working Paper.
Haddad, Mona and Ann Harrison. 1993. “Are There Positive Spillovers from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Panel Data for Morocco,” Journal of Development
Economics, 42, 51-74.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83-116.
Harberger, Arnold. 1998. “A Vision of the Growth Process,” American Economic Review, 88(1),
1-32.
Harrison, Ann, Inessa Love, and Margaret McMillan. 2004. “Global Capital Flows and
Financing Constraints,” Journal of Development Economics, 75(1), 269-301.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2000a. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and
Emerging Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, 55(2), 529-564.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2000b. “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?”
Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2), 301-334.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2002. “Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market?” Journal of

66

Finance, 57, 1617-1648.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and
Economic Growth,” American Economic Review, 93(2), 91-96.
Henry, Peter Blair and Peter L. Lorentzen. 2003. “Domestic Capital Market Reform and Access
to Global Financial Markets: Making Markets Work” in The Future of Domestic Capital
Markets in Developing Countries, Robert E. Litan, M. Pomerleano, and V. Sundararajan
(eds.), Brookings Press, pp. 170-214.
Himmelberg, Charles P., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Inessa Love. 2002. “Investor Protection,
Ownership, and the Cost of Capital,” Policy Research Working Paper 2834, Washington:
World Bank.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. 1998. “Capital Market Imperfections and Investment,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 36, 193-225.
Jensen, Michael C. 1986. “The Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow: Corporate Finance and
Takeovers,” American Economic Review 76(2), 323–329.
Johnson, Simon and Todd Mitton. 2002. “Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence From
Malaysia,” Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 351-382.
Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman. 2000. “Corporate
Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics 58(1-2),
141–186.
Kaminsky, Graciela and Sergio Schmukler. 2002. “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The
Effects of Financial Liberalization” NBER Working Paper 2912
Kaplan, Steven and Luigi Zingales. 1997. “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide
Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 159216.
Kaplan, Steven and Luigi Zingales. 2000. “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Are Not Valid
Measures of Financing Constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 707-712.
Karolyi, G. Andrew. 1998. Why Do Companies List Shares Abroad: A Survey of the Evidence
and Its Managerial Implications, Financial Markets. Institutions and Instruments 7,
Boston: Blackwell Publishers.
Karolyi, G. Andrew. 2004. “The Role of ADRs in the Development of Emerging Equity
Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(3), 670-690.
Karolyi, G. Andrew and René M. Stulz. 2001. “Are Financial Assets Priced Locally or
Globally?” Handbook of the Economics of Finance, forthcoming.

67

Kim, E. Han and Vijay Singal. 2000. “Stock Market Openings: Experience of Emerging
Economies,” Journal of Business, 73, 25-66.
King, Robert and Ross Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (3), 717-738.
Klein, Michael and G. Olivei. 2000. “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth, and
Economic Growth,” Tufts University Working Paper.
Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2006. “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal,” NBER Working Paper No. 12484.
Kraay, Aart. 1998. “In Search of the Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Account
Liberalization,” World Bank Working Paper.
Krueger, Anne O. 1997. “Trade Policy and Economic Development: How We Learn,” American
Economic Review, 87(1), 1-22.
Krueger, Anne O. 1998. “Why Trade Liberalization is Good for Growth,” Economic Journal,
108, 1513-1522.
Krueger, Anne O. 2000. “Conflicting Demands on the International Monetary Fund,” American
Economic Review, 90(2), 38-42
Laeven, Luc. 2003. “Does Financial Liberalization Reduce Financing Constraints?” Financial
Management, Spring, 5-34.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1997.
“Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998.
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2002.
“Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance 57(3), 1147–1170.
Lessard, Donald R. 1973. “International Portfolio Diversification: A Multivariate Analysis for A
Group of Latin American Countries,” Journal of Finance, 28(3), 619-633.
Lessard, Donald R. 1994. Commentary on “The Effect of Barriers to Equity Investment in
Developing Countries” in The Internationalization of Equity Markets, Jeffrey A. Frankel,
(ed.), University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.
Levine, Ross. 1997. “Financial Development and Growth: Views and Agenda,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 35(2), 688-726.

68

Levine, Ross. 2001. “International Financial Liberalization and Economic Growth,”
Review of International Economics, 9(4), 688-702.
Levine, Ross and Sergio Schmukler. 2005. Internationalization and the Evolution of Corporate
Valuation,” NBER Working Paper 11023.
Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos. 1994. “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
Development: Data Annex of Country Policy Changes,” World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos. 1998a. “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,”
American Economic Review, 88, 537-558.
Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos. 1998b. “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
Development,” World Development 26(7), 1169-1183.
Lewis, Karen K. 1999. “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal of
Economic Literature 37(2), 571–608.
Lewis, Karen K. 2000. “Why Do Stocks and Consumption Imply Such Different
Gains from International Risk Sharing?” Journal of International Economics, 52, 1-35.
Li, Kan, Randall Morck, Fan Yang, and Bernard Yeung. 2004. “Firm-Specific Variation and
Openness in Emerging Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Forthcoming.
López-de-Silanes, Florencio. 2002. “The Politics of Legal Reform,” Economia, 2(2), 91–152.
Love, Inessa. 2003. “Financial Development and Financing Constraints: International Evidence
From the Structural Investment Model,” Review of Financial Studies, 16(3), 765-791.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1990. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”
American Economic Review, 80(2), 92-96.
Mankiw, Gregory N. 1995. “The Growth of Nations,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1, 275-326.
Martell, Rodolfo and René M. Stulz. 2003. “Equity Market Liberalizations as Country IPOs,”
American Economic Review, 93(2), 97-101.
Mathieson, Donald J. and Liliana Rojas-Suárez. 1993. “Liberalization of the Capital Account:
Experiences and Issues,” IMF Occasional Paper Number 103, Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund.
McKinlay, A. Craig. 1997. “Event Studies in Economics and Finance,” Journal of Economic
Literature 35(1), 13-39.
McKinnon, Ronald I. 1973. Money and Capital in Economic Development, Washington, D.C.,

69

Brookings Institution.
McKinnon, Ronald I. 1991. The Order of Economic Liberalization, Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore.
Megginson, William. 2001. “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Studies on
Privatization,” Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 321-389.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1996. “Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country
Perspective” in Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics, Michael Bruno
and Boris Pleskovic, (eds.), Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 29-62.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2000. “Financial Market Reform” in Economic Policy Reform: The Second
Stage, Anne O. Krueger (ed.), University of Chicago Press.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2005. “Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?” Journal of Money Credit and
Banking, forthcoming.
Mitton, Todd. 2006. “Stock Market Liberalization and Operating Peformances at the Firm
Level,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Morck, Randall, David A. Strangeland, and Bernard Yeung. 2000. “Inherited Wealth, Corporate
Control, and Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease” in Concentrated Corporate
Ownership, R. Morck, (ed.), NBER Conference Volume, University of Chicago Press.
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu. 2000. “The Information Content of
Stock Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price
Movements?” Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2), 215-260.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 1994. “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 84(5), 1310-1329.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 1998. “The Global Capital Market: Benefactor or Menace?” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 12(4), 9-30.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. 1996. Foundations of International Macroeconomics.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Park, Keith, and Antoine W. Van Agtmael. 1993. The World’s Emerging Stock Markets:
Structure, Development, Regulations and Opportunities, Chicago: Probus Publishing
Company.
Patro, D. K. and J. K. Wald. 2005. “Firm Characteristics and the Impact of Emerging Market
Liberalizations,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 29(7), 1671-1695.
Pérez González, Francisco. 2005. “The Impact of Acquiring Control on Productivity,” Working
Paper, Columbia Business School.
70

Portes, Richard and Héléne Rey. 2005. The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,”
Journal of International Economics, 65(2), 269-296.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and Ayhan Kose. 2003. “Effects of Financial
Globalization on Developing Countries; Some New Evidence,” IMF Occasional Paper
No. 220.
Price, Margaret M. 1994. Emerging Stock Markets, New York: McGraw Hill, Inc.
Quinn, Dennis. 1997. “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,”
American Political Science Review, 91(3), 531-551.
Radelet, Steven and Jeffrey Sachs. 1998. “The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies,
Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1–91.
Rajan, Raghuram. 2000. “NBER Corporate Finance Program Report,” NBER Website
.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Development and Growth,”
American Economic Review, 88(3), 559-586.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of
Financial Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, 59, 5-50.
Reisen, Helmut and Bernard Fischer. 1993. “Financial Opening: Policy Issues and Experiences
in Developing Countries,” Paris: OECD Development Center.
Rodrik, Dani. 1998. “Who Needs Capital Account Convertibility?” Princeton Essays in
International Finance 207, 55-65.
Rodrik, Dani and Andres Velasco. 2000. “Short-Term Capital Flows” Annual World Bank
Conference on Development Economics 1999, pp. 59-90. Washington: World Bank.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 1999. “International Institutions for Reducing Global Financial
Instability,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(4), 21-42.
Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1-95.
Shaw, Edward S. 1973. Financial Deepening in Economic Development, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance,”
Journal of Finance, 52, 737-783.
Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2002. “Investor Protection and Equity

71

Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 3-57.
Shin, Inseok and Changyun Park. 2006. “Stock Market Opening and the Cost of Capital: The
Case of Korea,” forthcoming in International Financial Issues Around the Pacific Rim,
East Asia Seminar on Economics,17, Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose (eds.), University
of Chicago Press.
Solow, Robert M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 70, 65-94.
Solow, Robert M. 2000. Growth Theory: An Exposition, Oxford University Press
Solow, Robert M. 2001. “Applying Growth Theory Across Countries,” World Bank
Economic Review, 15(2), 283-288.
Stein, Jeremy C. 2003. “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment” in the Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, Constantinides, Harris and Stulz (eds.), forthcoming.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 1999. “Reforming the Global Economic Architecture: Lessons From Recent
Crises,” Journal of Finance, 54(4), 1508-1521.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2000. “Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth, and
Instability,” World Development, June, 28(6), 1075-1086.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2002. Globalization and Its Discontents, W.W. Norton.
Stulz, René M. 1999a. “International Portfolio Flows and Security Markets,” in International
Capital Flows, M. Feldstein (ed.), University of Chicago Press, 257-293.
Stulz, René M. 1999b. “Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital,” New York
Stock Exchange Working Paper 99-2.
Stulz, René M. 1999c. “Globalization, Corporate Finance, and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance 12(3): 8-25.
Stulz, René M. 2005. “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance, 60(4), 15951638.
Summers, Lawrence H. 1994. “A Changing Course Toward Privatization” in GA. Galal
and M. Shirley eds.: Does Privatization Deliver? Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Summers, Lawrence. 2000. “International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and
Cures,” American Economic Review, 90(2), 1-16.
Suttle, Philip. 2003. “Financial Flows to Developing Countries: Recent Trends and Near-Term
Prospects,” Global Development Finance: Striving for Stability in Development Finance,
Washington: World Bank.
72

Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid M. Werner. 1998. “The Internationalization of Securities Markets
Since the 1987 Crash” in Brookings Wharton Papers on Financial Services, Robert E.
Litan and Anthony M. Santomero (eds.), Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Tobin, James and William C. Brainard. 1977. “Asset Markets and the Cost of Capital”
in Balassa, B. and Nelson, R. (Eds.), Economic Progress, Private Values, and
Public Policy. North Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 235-62.
Van Wincoop, Eric. 1994. “Welfare Gains from International Risk Sharing,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 34,175-200.
Van Wincoop, Eric. 1999. “How Big Are Potential Welfare Gains from International
Risk Sharing?” Journal of International Economics, 47(1), 109-135.
Wacziarg, Romain and Karen Welch. 2003. “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence”
NBER Working Paper No. 10152
Williamson, John. 1997. “Prospects for Avoiding Crises with Liberalized Capital Flows,”
Estudios de Economía, 24(2), 287–295.
Wilson, Ian M. 1992. The Wilson Directory of Emerging Market Funds, Saskatoon: Wilson
Emerging Market Funds Research.
Wurgler, Jeffrey. 2000. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of
Financial Economics 58(1), 187–214.

73

Table 1. Dates of Stock Market Liberalizations and Major Economic Reforms
Country
Year of
Means of
Stabilization
Trade
Liberalization
Liberalization
Program
Liberalization
Argentina
November 1989
Policy Decree
November 1989 April 1991

February 1988

Brady Plan Debt
Relief
April 1992

Brazil

March 1988

Country Fund

January 1989

April 1990

July 1990

August 1992

Chile

May 1987

Country Fund

August 1985

1976

1988

NA

Colombia

December 1991

Policy Decree

NA

1986

1991

NA

India

June 1986

Country Fund

November 1981

1994

1991

NA

Indonesia

September 1989

Policy Decree

May 1973

1970

1991

NA

Jordan

December 1995

Policy Decree

May 1994

1965

January 1995

June 1993

Malaysia

May 1987

Country Fund

NA

1963

1988

NA

Mexico

May 1989

Policy Decree

May 1989

July 1986

November 1988

September 1989

Nigeria

August 1995

Policy Decree

January 1991

NA

July 1988

March 1991

Pakistan

February 1991

Policy Decree

September 1993 2001

1990

NA

Philippines

May 1986

Country Fund

October 1986

November 1988

June 1988

August 1989

South Korea

June 1987

Country Fund

July 1985

1968

NA

NA

Taiwan

May 1986

Country Fund

1963

NA

NA

Thailand

September 1987

Country Fund

June 1985

Always Open

1988

NA

Turkey

August 1989

Policy Decree

July 1994

1989

1988

NA

Venezuela

January 1990

Policy Decree

June 1989

May 1989**

April 1991

June 1990

Zimbabwe

June 1993

Policy Decree

September 1992 NA

1994

NA

Privatization

74

Table 2. The Economic Infrastructure of Emerging Markets Is Weaker Than That of Developed Countries.
Hall and Jones (1999):
Heritage House: Index
World Bank: Ease of
World Economic Forum:
Social Infrastructure Index of Economic Freedom
Doing Business Index
Global Competitiveness Index
Argentina
77
23
101
69

Brazil

68

87

121

66

Chile

43

15

28

27

Colombia

79

73

79

65

India

87

126

134

43

Indonesia

45

76

135

50

Jordan

34

58

78

52

Malaysia

22

42

25

26

Mexico

64

91

43

58

Nigeria

116

97

108

101

Pakistan

113

107

74

91

Philippines

90

69

126

71

South Korea

33

33

23

24

Taiwan

28

16

47

13

Thailand

20

38

18

35

Turkey

71

49

91

59

Venezuela

53

99

104

88

Zimbabwe

94

122

153

119

Average Emerging Market

63

68

83

59

Average Developed
Country

14

14

23

15

75

Table 3. Investor Protection in Emerging Markets Is Weaker Than in Developed Countries.
Rule of Law
Judicial Efficiency Contract Repudiation Expropriation Risk
Argentina
5.4
6.0
4.9
5.9

Accounting Standards
4.5

Brazil

6.3

5.8

6.3

7.6

5.4

Chile

7.0

7.3

6.8

7.5

5.2

Colombia

2.1

7.3

7.0

7.0

5

India

4.2

8.0

6.1

7.8

5.7

Indonesia

4.0

2.5

6.1

7.2

NA

Jordan

4.4

8.7

4.9

6.1

NA

Malaysia

6.8

9.0

7.4

8.0

7.6

Mexico

5.4

6.0

6.6

7.3

6

Nigeria

2.7

7.3

4.4

5.3

5.9

Pakistan

3.0

5.0

4.9

5.6

NA

Philippines

2.7

4.8

4.8

5.2

6.5

South Korea

5.4

6.0

8.6

8.3

6.2

Taiwan

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Thailand

6.3

3.3

7.6

7.4

6.4

Turkey

5.2

4.0

6.0

7.0

5.1

Venezuela

6.4

6.5

6.3

6.9

4

Zimbabwe

3.7

7.5

5.0

5.6

NA

Emerging Market Mean

4.8

6.2

6.1

6.8

5.7

Developed Country
9.1
Mean
Source: Lopez-de-Silanes (2002)

9.2

9.2

9.5

6.4

76

Table 4 Composition of Capital Inflows to Developing Countries 1970-95
Average 1970-74
Average 1975-79
Average 1980-84
Millions
Percent of
Millions
Percent of
Millions
Percent of
of dollars
total
of dollars
total
of dollars
total
Net Resource
Flows
12529.1
32836.8
51604.7

Average 1985-89
Millions
Percent of
of dollars
total

Average 1990-95
Millions
Percent of
of dollars
total

32726.2

90184.1

Net Flows on Debt
(PPG+PNG)

10121.3

80.8

27151.3

82.7

42374.6

82.1

20563.4

62.8

45316.2

50.2

Public and Publicly
Guaranteed debt (PPG)

5628.0

44.9

18014.0

54.9

28383.4

55.0

14844.5

45.4

12820.5

14.2

Private Nonguaranteed
debt (PNG)

4493.4

35.9

9137.3

27.8

13991.2

27.1

5718.9

17.5

32495.8

36.0

Foreign Direct
Investment

1798.6

14.4

4247.2

12.9

6871.7

13.3

9006.5

27.5

24993.8

27.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

27.0

0.1

762.2

2.3

16855.0

18.7

609.2

4.9

1438.3

4.4

2331.3

4.5

2394.2

7.3

3019.0

3.3

Portfolio Equity
Grants

77

Output Per Unit of
Effective Labor

(n + g + δ )k
sf (k )
A

k s .state

k *s .state

k

Figure 1: Capital Account Liberalization in the Neoclassical Growth Model

78

Panel A: The Cost of Capital
Interest Rate

r
r*

t

to
Panel B: Investment

Growth Rate of K

n+g

t

to
Panel C: Growth Rate of GDP Per Worker

Y
Growth Rate of
L

g
t

to
Y
ln
L

Panel D: Level of GDP Per Worker
t
effec
t
n
e
an
Perm

to

er a
of lib

ion
lizat

t

Figure 2: The Impact of Liberalization on the Cost of Capital, Investment, and Growth.
79

6

5.5

Dividend Yield (Percent)

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Year Relative to Liberalization
Figure 3. The Cost of Capital Capital Falls When Countries Liberalize the Capital Account.

80

Growth Rate of the Capital Stock (Percent)

0.075

0.07

0.065

0.06

0.055

0.05

0.045

0.04
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Year Relative to Liberalization
Figure 4. Investment Booms When Countries Liberalize the Capital Account .

81

0.05

Growth Rate of Output Per Worker (Percent)

0.045
0.04
0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Year Relative to Liberalization
Figure 5. The Growth Rate of Output Per Worker Increases When Countries Liberalize.

82

