                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       IS THE INTERNATIONAL DIVERSIFICATION POTENTIAL DIMINISHING?
                  FOREIGN EQUITY INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE US

                                          Karen K. Lewis

                                       Working Paper 12697
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12697


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2006




Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania and NBER. For comments and suggestions, I thank Geert
Bekaert, Bernard Dumas, Vihang Errunza, Andrew Karolyi, Magnus Dahlquist, Gangadhar Darbha,
Craig MacKinlay, Paolo Soderlind, Jessica Wachter, Frank Warnock, Amir Yaron, and seminar participants
at the Wharton Micro-Lunch seminar, the Swedish Institute for Financial Research, and the Kansas
City Federal Reserve. I acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation with thanks.
 Any errors are my responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Karen K. Lewis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Is the International Diversification Potential Diminishing? Foreign Equity Inside and Outside
the US
Karen K. Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 12697
November 2006
JEL No. F3,F4,G11,G15

                                             ABSTRACT

Over the past two decades international markets have become more open, leading to a common perception
that global capital markets have become more integrated. In this paper, I ask what this integration
and its resulting higher correlation would imply about the diversification potential across countries.
  For this purpose, I examine two basic groups of international returns: (1) foreign market indices
and (2) foreign stocks that are listed and traded in the US. I examine the first group since this is the
standard approach in the international diversification literature, while I study the second group since
some have argued that US-listed foreign stocks are the more natural diversification vehicle (Errunza
et al (1999)). In order to consider the possibility of shifts in the covariance of returns over time, I
extend the break-date estimation approach of Bai and Perron (1998) to test for and estimate possible
break dates across returns along with their confidence intervals. I find that the covariances among
country stock markets have indeed shifted over time for a majority of the countries. But in contrast
to the common perception that markets have become significantly more integrated over time, the covariance
between foreign markets and the US market have increased only slightly from the beginning to the
end of the last twenty years. At the same time, the foreign stocks in the US markets have become
significantly more correlated with the US market. To consider the economic significance of these
parameter changes, I use the estimates to examine the implications for a simple portfolio decision
model in which a US investor could choose between US and foreign portfolios. When restricted to
holding foreign assets in the form of market indices, I find that the optimal allocation in foreign market
indices actually increases over time. However, the optimal allocation into foreign stocks decreases
when the investor is allowed to hold foreign stocks that are traded in the US. Also, the minimum variance
attainable by the foreign portfolios has increased over time. These results suggest that the benefits
to diversification have declined both for stocks inside and outside the US.

Karen K. Lewis
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu
        One of the most enduring puzzles in international macroeconomics and finance is the tendency
for investors to disproportionately weight their asset portfolios towards domestic securities and thereby
forego gains to international diversification. The puzzle in international macroeconomics has focused
upon the tendency for consumers to be underinsured against aggregate shocks that could otherwise
have been hedged by holding foreign assets.1 In the financial economics literature, the puzzle has been
based upon the observation that investor portfolios hold less foreign securities than implied by
predictions of standard mean-variance optimization principles.2 In both the macroeconomics and
financial economics frameworks, the underlying source of diversification arises from the relatively low
correlation in asset returns across countries.3
        A number of explanations have been proposed to explain this phenomenon, including the
transactions costs of acquiring and/or holding foreign assets. The transactions may be in the form of
outright brokerage type costs or more subtle information costs.4 On the other hand, critics have argued
that transactions costs cannot be very high for stocks of foreign companies that trade in the United
States on exchanges.5 Furthermore, Errunza et al (1999) argue that domestically traded stocks can
span the risks of foreign markets. These stocks are no more expensive to acquire than domestic stocks.
The foreign stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) must also go through the same
disclosure requirements as domestic companies, including provision of the US-based accounting and
financial statements. It therefore seems unlikely that the information costs are significantly higher for
these stocks. If so, domestic investors need not go to foreign capital markets to diversify
internationally and they may do so with essentially no difference in costs.
        These international gains from diversification depend critically on low correlations between
foreign and domestic stock returns. The growing impression in recent years, however, is that the
returns from international securities have become more correlated over time due to a general
integration of markets. If true, the rising international correlations would suggest that gains from
diversification have declined. This raises the question: Do the international diversification
opportunities remain in this new integrated financial environment?




1
  See for example Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1991), Baxter and Crucini (1995), Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Stockman and
Tesar (1995), and Pesenti and van Wincoop (2002).
2
  See for example the frameworks in French and Poterba (1991) and Pastor (2000).
3
  Lewis (1999) describes the relationship between these two approaches in the context of domestic investor’s diversification
into foreign assets.
4
  See Gehrig (1993).
5
  Tesar and Werner (1995) also show that the aggregate turnover of foreign stocks is higher than domestic stocks,
suggesting that the transactions costs for purchasing and selling foreign stocks are not higher than domestic stocks.

                                                                                                                          2
         This paper re-examines the asset pricing relationships upon which the diversification argument
rests and asks what the potentially changing nature of these relationships say about diversifying into
foreign markets. I begin by examining the standard foreign market diversification relationship in
foreign market indices. I then study the set of foreign companies traded in the United States. For both
sets of foreign returns, I allow for the possibility that the relationship between US and foreign markets
have changed over time. I then analyze the effects of potential asset pricing changes in aggregates and
cross-listed firms to consider the implications for home bias.
         An extensive literature has analyzed international asset pricing relationships, including the
possibility that those relationships have changed over time. Papers investigating the potential for
changing asset pricing relationships have generally either put structure on the dynamic process for
parameters or the dates at which relationships are presumed to change.6 Of course, these approaches
are entirely appropriate for the purposes of estimating parameters given a dynamic adjustment process
as in the former case, or testing for changes in parameters conditioned on dates as in the latter case.
         My goal in this paper is different, however. I intend to provide a longitudinal picture of basic
international equity returns over time, for individual stocks as well as market indices, from the
perspective of a US investor. For this purpose, I need an approach that will minimize the structure on
the dynamic process of changing parameters and of their potential change dates. By doing so, the
resulting estimated processes may be stable or they may change over time in a minimally
parameterized manner. Moreover, no a priori information about change dates is imposed.
         To achieve this goal, I estimate a standard factor model for each foreign equity return together
with the US market and then test for shifts in the relationship. In practice, tests for structural breaks
pick up parameter shifts that can be either discrete or time-varying with variation changes that are
sufficiently significant.7 To test for when these parameter distribution shifts occur, I use the
endogenous break point estimation approach of Bai and Perron (1998) to generate the series of co-
variation parameters over time. I build up these estimates to provide yearly asset pricing parameters of
countries and of foreign companies traded in the United States.
         To consider the economic significance of these parameter changes, I use the estimates to
examine the implications for a simple portfolio decision model in which a US investor could choose

6
  For example, Bekaert and Harvey (1995) and Baele (2005) estimate a time-varying Markov switching process in
international equity return relationships. Studies that examine the effects of specific event dates such as market
liberalizations, foreign speculators, or equity cross-listings include Bekaert and Harvey (1997,2000), Bekaert, Harvey and
Lumbsdaine (2002), Foerster and Karolyi (1999), and Henry (2000).
7
  Stock (1994) describes the difficulties between testing for structural breaks versus parametric changes that would suggest
non-stationarity. As Bai and Perron (2003a) show, the algorithm for the model to be estimated below can be extended to
threshold switching models.

                                                                                                                           3
between US and foreign portfolios. When restricted to holding foreign assets in the form of market
indices, I find that the optimal allocation in foreign market indices actually increases over time.
However, the optimal allocation into foreign stocks decreases when the investor is allowed to hold
foreign stocks that are traded in the US. Also, the lowest variance attainable by diversifying into
foreign portfolios has increased over time. These results suggest that the benefits to diversification
have declined both for stocks inside and outside the US.
           The paper also makes two other contributions. First, while the estimation in Bai and Perron
(1998) was developed for single equations, this paper extends the empirical analysis to multiple
equations and provides a framework for examining the cross-section of the parameters.
           The second contribution concerns a test for the independence of the world market effect in a
standard international two factor equity model. In particular, international returns are often modeled as
a function of a world market and local market factors.8 However, since local markets depend upon the
world market, a shift in the relationship between foreign market indices would also confound the
relationship between an individual foreign stock trading in the US and the US market. In this paper, I
show that the two factor model can be written as a nested relationship between foreign stocks and the
home market, and the home and foreign markets in turn. I propose a test for whether shifts in the
relationship between foreign stocks and the US are a result of changes at the macro level or at the
individual stock level.
           The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides estimates for the foreign markets. Section 2
gives the results including the foreign stocks in the United States. Section 3 examines the overall
implications for the portfolio potential for foreign stocks inside and outside the US. Concluding
remarks follow.
           Section 1: What is Happening to Diversification in Foreign Markets?
           The standard diversification puzzle has typically been examined with stock market indices in
foreign markets. I follow this approach first before examining the effects of individual foreign
company returns in the next section.
           1a. Empirical Framework and Motivation
           To consider the conventional approach in the literature, I start with a standard factor pricing
relationship:
rt = α + β ' f t + u t                                                                  (1)



8
    See for example Ferson and Harvey (1993) and Dumas and Solnik (1995).

                                                                                                             4
Where rt is the nominal excess return on the equity market of country ℓ at date t, f t is a vector of
factors at time t that affect the return on the equity market of country ℓ, βℓ is a vector of factor intensity
parameters, αℓ is a constant parameter and u t is a residual. This pricing relationship can be motivated in

various ways. From a general equilibrium viewpoint, when markets are complete, f t is a scalar latent

variable proportional to the stochastic discount rate.9 Alternatively, f t may represent a common
component across countries, but also include additional hedge factors arising from local risks. For
example, if real returns differ across countries due to deviations from purchasing power parity, β ' f
can represent the pricing to reflect the risk premia on portfolios that bear this risk, in addition to the
common pricing component across countries.10
         A benchmark model that has often been used to examine international equity market index
returns especially in the context of the gains to international diversification is:11
rt = α + β rtw + u t                                                                                (2)
The model is a single factor model where the benchmark depends on rwt, the return on a global world
equity portfolio. In this section, I use this framework to examine the potential portfolio allocation
changes in equity market indices. In the following section, I examine individual company stock returns
and include local factors described above as well.
         The connections between international equity markets appear to be increasing over time. Due to
crises and political changes, international pricing relationships have often experienced shifting patterns in
their co-movements. In addition, the pricing relationship between emerging market country returns and
the world market returns often appear to change around the time of opening in markets.12 While specific
events may herald a significant change in asset pricing relationships between countries, a more gradual
integration process may achieve the same effect.
         As stated at the outset, my goal is to minimize the structure on whether and how the factor
loadings, as in equation (2), change. By doing so, I allow the estimates to capture the cross-section and
time-series variation in international asset pricing relationships without preconditioning on liberalization
events or any presumption about whether international markets have become more integrated. As such, I

9
  See for example the discussion in Bekaert and Hodrick (1992).
10
   Adler and Dumas (1983) developed the classic model on this relationship. Dumas and Solnik (1995) and Vassalou
(2000) provide some empirical evidence showing that real PPP deviations are priced in the international market.
11
   See for example, Obstfeld (1994) and Henry (2003).
12
   For an early paper examining equity market liberalization, see Bonser-Neal, et al (1990). More recently, Henry (2000)
and Chari and Henry (2004) have studied the effect of market liberalization on market indices. Bekaert, Harvey and
Lumsdaine (2002) use the joint behavior of international returns in order to date implicit liberalization from integration.


                                                                                                                              5
use the data on equity returns across countries to ask whether and how these pricing relationships have
changed over time.
           For this purpose, I follow three steps. First, I test for breaks in the relationship between local
equity market returns and the world market. Second, for equity returns in the countries that reject the
hypothesis of no breaks, I implement the approach derived by Bai and Perron (1998, 2003a) to estimate
the break points in the relationship and provide confidence intervals for the breakpoints for each country.
Third, I use the parameter estimates to form hypothetical tangency and minimum variance portfolios to
see how the changes in asset pricing relationships would affect international allocation. In the next
section, I repeat this analysis for foreign firms that cross-list in the United States in order to determine
whether domestic investors achieve the same diversification.
1b. Econometric Analysis
           The estimator developed by Bai and Perron (1998) considers a single equation time series
regression equation with a given number of breaks in the parameters. I first describe the basic B-P
framework before explaining below how I extend this analysis to allow for multiple equations. In the
following section, I show how any possible shifts in the parameters in equation (2) can be used to
examine individual stock pricing relationships in a nested equation setting.
           Single-Equation Estimation: To examine potential breaks in the basic asset pricing relationship
in equation (2), I follow B-P in allowing for the possibility of up to a given number, m, breaks in the
parameters. I begin by considering the estimation for a specific country, ℓ.


rt = I(Tτ )[ατ + βτ rtw + uτ ,t ],               for τ = 1, …, m+1;      t = 1, …, T                  (3)

where I(Tτ) is a function that indicates whether time is within a set of time intervals Tτ for τ = 1, …,
m+1. Without loss of generality, the time intervals are arrayed so that:
I(Tτ)      = 1 if t ∈ {T(τ-1)+1, …, Tτ}
           = 0 otherwise
so that:
t = {1, … , T1, T1+1, …, T2, T2+1, …, T3, …, Tm, …, T}                                         (4)
 = { I -1 (T1 ), I-1 (T2 ),..., I-1 (Tm+1 ) }

Where I-1 (Tj ) is the inverse function of I(Tj), and T0 = 0 and Tm+1 = T.

           To economize on notation for developing the estimator which will also be used in the next
section, I subsume the country index ℓ and rewrite the general factor model in (1) as:
rt = δ ‘ ft + ut                                                                               (1’)
                                                                                                            6
where rt is the asset return series, ut is the residual, and δ is the parameter vector δ = {α , β }’ and where ft
is rewritten to include a constant as the first factor. Using this notation together with the model in (3) and
(4) implies that:
rt = δτ ‘ ft + ut                                                                                           (5)
where δτ is a fixed parameter vector for each period τ, τ = 1, …, m+1 on the intervals I-1(T1),I-1(T2) ….,
I-1(Tm+1). In general, the breakpoints T1, T2, …, Tm are unknowns. Bai and Perron (1998) show that the
breakpoints can be estimated consistently by minimizing over the sum of squared residuals for all
possible partitions of the data into m+1 different intervals. In other words, T1, T2, …., Tm can be
consistently estimated by solving the following minimization:
                                      ⎡ m +1 ⎛                                         ⎞⎤
{Tˆ ,Tˆ , ..., Tˆ } = arg min ⎢⎢∑ ⎜⎜ ∑
   1   2        m                                                     [rt − δτ 'f t ]2 ⎟ ⎥
                                                                                       ⎟
                                                                                                            (6)
                     T1 ,T2 ,...,Tm
                                      ⎣ τ =1 ⎝ t∈{T(τ −1) +1,...,Tτ }                  ⎠ ⎥⎦
Bai and Perron (1998) also derive the limiting distribution of these break point estimates which provide
confidence intervals on the breakpoint estimates.
           Multi-Equation Estimation: The Bai-Perron estimator described above was developed for an
individual time series. Since my goal is to develop a cross-sectional as well as time-series picture of the
covariation pattern in foreign relative to domestic returns, I extend this framework to multiple equations.
           Specifically, I examine the effects of each country index separately to build up a set for each
return of: (a) number of breaks; (b) break date estimates and their associated confidence intervals; and
(c) parameters per subperiod interval. Later I will use this panel of estimates to demonstrate the
implications for this distribution of returns on international portfolio choice.
           I first test for the number of breaks, mℓ, for each country market index. I then estimate the set of
break dates: (Tˆ1 , Tˆ 2 , ..., Tˆ m ) and δτ ∀ τ = 1, …, mℓ +1. In other words, rewriting equation (3) as a set

of equation over countries ℓ implies:


rt = I(Tτ )[ατ + βτ rtw + uτ ,t ],                                        for ℓ = 1, …, L, τ = 1, …, m +1   (3’)


Note that the number of parameter shifts, m, differ by country ℓ. Moreover, no restrictions are placed
on the variance of the residual, uτ ,t , over subperiods. Indeed, the variance will generally change over

subperiods, Tτ, and across countries, ℓ. In the empirical estimates below, the standard errors are also
corrected for a general conditional heteroskedasticity as in White (1980).
1c. Country-Level Data


                                                                                                                   7
        The goal of this paper is to look at the effects of potential changes in foreign asset pricing
relationships relative to the US market. I take the approach from a US perspective for two main
reasons. First, a great deal of research has focused upon diversification from the point of view of a US
investor, including some of the earliest research on home bias. It therefore seems natural to focus upon
this benchmark case. Second, the US market has the biggest market cap of any country in standard
world indexes. While I will use the US market as the measure of the “world” index below, estimation
using the Morgan Stanley World Index instead gives qualitatively similar results.
        For data analysis on the country indices, I use the Morgan Stanley Capitalization Weighted
indices for major countries.13 To compare these market indices with foreign stocks in the United
States, I examine only the foreign countries with foreign stocks on the New York Stock Exchange in
2004. This partition yields the 40 foreign countries listed in Appendix Table 1. Weekly returns are
constructed for each of these indices reconverted into US dollars from 1970, or the earliest available,
until April 2004. The returns are transformed into excess returns by subtracting the stock returns from
the weekly T-bill rate obtained from Ken French’s website. As explained above, the US market was
used to proxy for the “world” index. This equity market series was taken to be the S&P 500. More
information about these series is provided in Appendix 1.
1d. Break Tests
        Table 1 provides evidence for breaks in the asset pricing relationship in equation (3). Each
country’s equation is first tested for the number of breaks using the supF test described in Bai and
Perron (2003a). For each series, a sequential procedure estimates each break one at a time, and
estimation stops when the supF(τ+1|τ) test is no longer significant at the given marginal significance
level. For this analysis, I allow for up to four subperiods.14
        Panel A of Table 1 reports summary evidence for the “supF test” given by marginal
significance level (MSL) of 10%, 5%, and 2.5%. The second column of Panel A reports the
proportion of the countries that rejected the hypothesis of zero breaks. In a naturally occurring
distribution with no breaks, one would expect to reject the hypothesis of breaks about the same percent
of the time as given by the MSL. However, the proportion of the countries that reject no breaks ranges
from about 64% for 2.5% and 5% MSL to 72% for 10% MSL. Since the estimated proportion is
considerably higher than the MSL, these results suggest that the relationships are shifting over time by
more than would occur by chance.

13
  The index includes reinvested dividends converted into US dollars.
14
  As will be shown below, the country returns show little evidence of more than two breaks anyway, so this seems like a
fairly conservative assumption for the maximum number of breaks, m.

                                                                                                                          8
           The last three columns of Panel A report the proportion of countries that show evidence of one
break, two breaks and three breaks, respectively. Countries with one break make up the majority of the
cases ranging from 69% at 10% MSL to 78% at 2.5% MSL. On the other hand, the number of
countries with evidence of 3 breaks is quite small at only 4 to 7%. This evidence suggests that
assuming the number of breaks to be less than four is not overly restrictive.
1e. Breakpoint Statistics
           Given the number of breaks by country, I estimate the break date equations for each country
return series. Defining m̂ as the estimated number of parameter breaks for country ℓ, the result is a set

of m̂ break date estimates for ℓ = 1, …, L for given by

(Tˆ1 , Tˆ 2 , ..., Tˆ mˆ )                                                              (7a)

and parameter estimates for each interval τ = 1, …, m̂ +1 for country ℓ given by

{αˆτ , βˆτ , uˆ τ }                                                                     (7b)

Where the residual is normally distributed with possibly differing variance across intervals,
uτ ,t ∼ N (0, σ τ 2 )                                                                   (7c)

Thus, I estimate a set of parameters by subperiod along with break points and confidence intervals
around each estimate of the breakpoint and parameters.
           As equation (6) shows, the estimation of the break dates (7a) requires minimizing the sum of
squared residuals for all possible m partitions of the data. In practice, the estimator can have poor
properties when the partition becomes too small as Bai and Perron (2003b) show. They propose
imposing a constraint on the minimal length of a segment for calculating the sum of squares in the
argmin calculation in (6). This minimum is given as a percentage of the total number of observations for
a series so that the percentage “trimming” constraint ε is used to construct a minimal length of a
segment: h = ε T.            Bai and Perron (2003b) show that the size of this trimming factor depends upon the
number of breaks, m, and derive critical values based on this statistic. I chose ε = .15 as a conservative
constraint on the minimal sample length.15
           Panel B of Table 1 reports the mean and standard deviation of the break point estimates T1 and T2
across the countries.16 Under “Full Sample by Break,” I give the mean and standard deviation for all first
and second breaks. As the evidence shows, the mean of the first break is in November 1992 while the


15
   In Monte Carlo simulations, Bai and Perron find that the maximal value of m for ε = 0.15 is 5. Since m is 4 or less in
all the analysis in this paper, this appears relatively conservative.
16
   There were insufficient data points to estimate the mean and standard deviation for the third break point.

                                                                                                                            9
mean of the second break is November 1997. When the breaks are grouped by single break versus
double break countries, the evidence looks similar. The countries that appear to shift parameters only
once are on average centered on May 1993 while the countries with evidence of two breaks have their
first break centered at March 1991. Overall, the mean breaks occur in the early and late 1990s.
        The standard errors around the break dates give a sense of how tightly the break dates are
estimated. Panel B of Table 1 also reports the mean of the standard error of the break point estimates
across countries. The standard error means range from 5 months for the second break estimates to 12
months for the first break estimate when all first breaks are grouped together. To get a better picture of
the break-points, Figure1a plots the break-point estimates for each year by country along with its 95%
standard error bounds for the 5% marginal significance case. As the figure shows, most of the
countries have only one break but a few have two break points. For example, Belgium experiences a
break relative to the US in the late 1970s and then again in the late 1990s. The figure also shows that
many of the breaks in the Latin American and Asian country returns occur in the late 1990s.
        One way to look at how many breaks occur in different periods is to depict the frequency of
breaks in five year intervals. Figure 1b shows the frequency of breaks by the number of countries with
break points decomposed into the first break, second break and total. Figure 1c shows the same
information plotted by the percentage of total breaks over the period.            As the figure clearly
demonstrates, most of the country breaks occur in the late 1990s.
1f. Parameter Estimates
        While the results above show evidence that the relationship between US and foreign equity
markets shifted over time, they do not indicate how those relationships have changed. These changes
can be seen in the parameter estimates themselves. Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the set of
estimates of the beta parameter in (7b) for the MSL of 5%17. These statistics are reported for different
groupings of portfolios and across pseudo-periods between breaks. Note that these pseudo-subperiods
are not actual time periods. Rather, they correspond to a thought experiment in which the countries
with no breaks have parameters δ1 for the whole sample, countries with one break create a new

subperiod with estimates δ 2 at the same time, etc. This hypothetical period decomposition allows me
to examine the properties of the parameter distribution within breaks. Below I report the effects of
parameters aligned over time by year as well.
        More precisely, the pseudo-periods are formed by allocating the estimates for each country into
the maximum number of periods. In other words, defining this maximum as

17
 For the MSLs of 2.5% and 10% the estimates are virtually identical.

                                                                                                       10
mˆ ≡ Max{m1 ,..., m L } ,
      =1,.., L


the parameter estimates by pseudo-periods are given by:
δ = {δ1 , δ 2 ,..., δ m +1}                                                           for ℓ = 1, …, L              (8)

Where δτ = δτ                                                                         if τ ≤ m + 1

          δτ = δ m                                                                    if τ > m + 1

This assignment creates coefficient estimates for each country ℓ over each of the m+1 pseudo-
subperiods. Since we estimate the maximum number of breaks for any country to be 2, the number of
pseudo-periods is 3.
          Table 2 reports the breakdown by pseudo period and by market portfolio.18 Panel A shows the
Market Weighted Portfolios by totals and broken down by quartile from bottom to top.19 The mean
size of beta rises from 0.386 to 0.588, which could be interpreted as a general increase in covariation
between local markets and the US market. The break-down by market value quartile portfolios shows
a similar relationship in all but the lowest (1st ) Quartile. Panel A also reports the mean of the standard
errors across countries to be about 0.05. The table also reports the cross-sectional standard deviation
of the market weighted betas at around 0.003 for the total portfolio and about 0.05 for the quartiles.
          Panel B shows similar results for a market-weighted breakdown of developed countries versus
emerging markets. While the mean of the standard errors is higher for emerging markets, the general
tendency for mean beta to rise over time can be seen in both portfolios.
          Panel C details the breakdown of portfolios by region. The general tendency for country
portfolio betas to increase over time can be seen in all regions except for Latin America and Oceania.
          To see whether these estimates are sensitive to the choice of marginal significance level, Figure
2 depicts the mean of betas and their standard deviation for three different levels. As the figure shows,
the parameter estimates are virtually identical across MSLs. Figure A1 in the appendix shows the
same relationship for alphas.
1g. Parameters over time
          The results in Table 2 and Figure 2 are based upon pseudo-periods in which the parameters are
treated as though they coincide with distinct periods. However, since breaks occur at different times
for each country, they do not correspond to changes in calendar time.


18
   Since there is little evidence for 3 breaks, the results for Period 4 are virtually identical to Period 3 and are therefore not
reported.
19
   To ensure the countries remain in the same portfolios over time in this table, the market weights are taken at April 2004
values. Below, I examine a time-varying market weight of portfolios in which weights are updated annually.

                                                                                                                                 11
         To consider how the parameters change over time, I next take each return’s estimated
parameter vector and array them over time to form a time series of the parameters. That is, I form the
set of parameter vectors for each country and time period:
δˆ (t )= {δˆ1 (1), δˆ1 (2), ..., δˆ1 (Tˆ1 ),δˆ2 (Tˆ1 + 1), ..., δˆm (Tˆ m ), ..., δˆm (T)} ∀ = 1, ..., L; t = 1, ..., T (9)
Below, I consider the foreign portfolio distribution from the point of view of a US investor at a yearly
basis. For this purpose, I examine a subset of the parameter vectors in equation (9), by taking the
estimates at the end of each year.
         I report the plot of the time series and cross section of these estimates in Figures 3 below.
Figure 3a reports the estimates of β (t ) for an MSL of 5%. As the cross-section indicates, the betas of
local markets on the US market tended to increase over time, particularly in the late 1990s. Figure 3b
reports the same results for an MSL of 10% with almost the same results as for MSL of 5%. The
exception is that there are more breaks with a higher MSL so that some of the emerging markets
register negative betas in the late 1990s after the Asian crisis. In what follows, I will use the parameter
results for MSL 5%, although the overall results are robust to choices of MSL 2.5% and MSL 10%.
1h. Break Point Confidence Intervals
         The estimation provides confidence intervals for when breaks occur. Thus for each of the
estimates of break points in (7a) (Tˆ1 , Tˆ 2 , ..., Tˆ m ), ∀ L , I estimate 90% and 95% confidence intervals

around the break points. This provides upper and lower bounds for which the break points occur with
90% or 95% probability. Defining L(Break) as the number of countries with evidence of breaks, this
                                L ( Break )
estimation gives a set of         ∑ =1
                                              mˆ upper confidence interval bounds and lower confidence interval

bounds. Figure 4a depicts the total proportion of countries with upper bounds and lower bounds of
breaks in a given year. As the figure shows, lower bounds for breaks appear in three main groups: the
late 1970s to early 1980s; the early 1990s; and following the Asian crisis of 1997. A finer break-down
of the confidence intervals is given in Figure 4b where the proportions are decomposed into countries
with evidence of one break versus countries with two breaks. As this figure suggests, countries with
two breaks generally have the second one either during the 1991 to 1994 period or else the late 1990s.


1i. Economic Significance: Foreign Portfolio Choice
         Up to this point, I have explored the data from a statistical viewpoint to look at the changing
picture of a standard international asset pricing relationship. I now begin to look at the economic
significance of these changes. For this purpose, I ask how a US investor would allocate his portfolio
                                                                                                                              12
between domestic and foreign equity markets, given the betas and alphas estimated above. The
optimization gives a portfolio allocation based upon the distribution of returns from the portfolio as rt p :

rt p = ∑ k =1ωtk rt k
           K
                                                                                                (10)

where K is the number of assets and where ωtk is the portfolio weight from asset k.
          Below, I consider two different forms of this portfolio allocation decision. First, since
diversification has been the focus of much of the international home bias puzzle literature, I use the
estimates to consider the minimum variance portfolio attainable from the estimates. This portfolio
allocation estimate is useful because it provides a measure of how much the variance of the domestic
equity portfolio investment can be reduced by holding foreign stocks. Under the assumption that
returns are exogenous and iid, a standard assumption for CAPM versions of equation (1), it is well-
known that the weights on the minimum variance portfolio are given by:20
               ⎛ V −1ι ⎞
ωtMinVar = ⎜         −1 ⎟
                                                                                        (11)
               ⎝ ι 'V ι ⎠
where ωt is the K x 1 vector of optimal portfolio shares, ι is a K dimensional vector of ones, and V is
the variance-covariance matrix of returns.
          The second portfolio allocation decision I consider is based upon differing expected returns
across countries. In this case, standard portfolio theory shows that the optimal allocation lies on a
tangency line determined by the risk-free rate and the efficient frontier given by:
       ⎛ V −1 E (r ) ⎞
ωt = ⎜                ⎟                                                                  (12)
       ⎝ ι 'V E ( r ) ⎠
             −1



 where E(r) is the vector of expected equity returns.
          To focus upon the relationship between the US and foreign markets, I form a market-weighted

portfolio of the foreign markets, rt F = ∑
                                               L
                                                   x r , and use the US return as the residual portfolio. Then,
                                               =1 t t

using the mapping from parameter estimates to time series in equation (9), the mean vector E and the
variance-covariance matrix of returns V are computed. Appendix 2 details these computations.
          Figures 5 show the effects of the parameter estimates on the allocation into foreign markets
based upon the portfolios above. In Figure 5a, I first report the foreign portfolio allocation implied by
the parameter estimates for the minimum variance portfolio. The figure shows the allocation into
foreign stocks over time along with the confidence interval arising from the standard error of the

20
  For example, the solution to the minimum variance and the tangency portfolio described below are given in Campbell,
Lo, and MacKinlay (1996), Chapter 5.

                                                                                                                        13
portfolio of βℓ. The standard error calculations are explained in Appendix 2. The figure shows that
the optimal holding of the portfolio increases modestly from 60% in 1973 to 70% by 2003. More
dramatically, the allocation dips down from 1974 to 1987, but then follows a generally increasing trend
since 1987.
       This result may seem surprising given that the estimates of beta suggested that the covariance
of the US with the rest of the world should be increasing over time. Focusing on this relationship
would lead to the conclusion that allocation into foreign markets should decrease, not increase. To
explore this relationship more closely, I report the portfolio beta in Figure 6a. The beta of the foreign
returns does indeed increase. Figure 6b shows the resulting components in the foreign return variance
and the covariance of foreign returns to US returns. The green line shows that the covariance of the
foreign and US returns increase over the time period, albeit slowly. At the same time, however, the
residual non-diversifiable variance in foreign returns declines fairly quickly. Since 1987, this standard
deviation has declined dramatically, from about 5 basis points per week to 2 basis points per week. As
a result, allocation into foreign stocks becomes more desirable even though the covariance has also
increased. Figure 6c depicts the implied correlation of the domestic and foreign portfolios.
       The estimates show that the covariance of the US market with the rest of the world has
increased over time. This result would suggest that the optimal allocation into foreign markets should
decline. By contrast, a model of foreign portfolio allocation based upon the estimates shows an
increase in optimal portfolio diversification into foreign stocks. The reason is that even though the
covariance between markets has declined, the systematic idiosyncratic risk in foreign markets has
declined.
       Figure 5b depicts the constructed tangency portfolio using country mean estimates to measure
differences in expected returns. In this case, the swings in the portfolio allocation become more
exaggerated over time. When the diversification potential of foreign markets declines in 1987, it
coincides with a period when mean returns become negative. As a result, a US investor would want to
short the foreign equity portfolio.
      Section 2: What is Happening to Diversification into Foreign Stocks in US Markets?
       While the integration of international markets has coincided with higher covariation between
markets, it has also provided better ways to hedge foreign idiosyncratic risk. That is, the hedge
properties of foreign stocks relative to domestic stocks have declined but the non-diversifiable
component of risk in foreign markets has also declined. Based upon the parameter estimates above,
the net effect of these two opposing forces is that the diversification potential of foreign markets
increases.
                                                                                                        14
        The inability for diminishing diversification to provide an explanation for home bias suggests a
re-consideration of more conventional explanations such as transaction costs and information costs.
Since the early 1990s, a growing number of foreign stocks have begun to trade in the United States.
These foreign stocks trade on US exchanges with the same transactions costs as do domestic stocks.
On the NYSE, the companies must go through the same disclosure requirements as US companies.
These requirements include SEC registration and financial reporting according to US GAAP
accounting standards. Errunza et al (1999) emphasized the importance of domestically traded foreign
stocks as a potential way to circumvent transaction costs while reaping the same foreign portfolio
diversification.21 They found that domestically traded securities span the foreign market indices.
        If the asset pricing characteristics of foreign market indices can be duplicated by domestically-
traded assets, then the implications for home bias in light of the results above become even more
dramatic. Domestically traded assets can be acquired at comparable transactions costs and, yet,
financial integration has on net improved the portfolio diversification from holding foreign stocks.
        To examine whether these results hold up in light of the shifts in asset pricing relationships
found above, I reconsider the asset pricing relationships of domestically traded foreign stocks. Some
researchers have found that the behavior of foreign stocks change when they are listed in the United
States in that their betas with respect to the US market get closer to one.22 If so, the shift in betas could
result from a change in the relationship between the local market index and the US market as found
above, or it could be due to a foreign company-specific shift in its relationship to the US market.23 The
implications for the diversification potential of domestically-traded foreign stocks depend critically on
this distinction, however. If the shift is general to the entire foreign market, then the individual foreign
stocks are replicating the foreign market behavior found above. On the other hand, if the shift is
specific to the company, then the foreign stocks trading in the US market may represent a somewhat
different asset class than the rest of their local market.
        To examine these relationships, I first look at the empirical asset pricing relationships in
foreign firm equities that traded in the United States as of 2004. That is, I ask whether the presence
of foreign stocks in the US would change the desirability of investing in the foreign markets. As
above, the decision is made from the point of view of a US investor, but here I allow the investor to
also allocate the portfolio into domestically traded foreign stocks. For this purpose, I first test for

21
   Errunza et al (1999) also include a portfolio of domestic multinational corporations.
22
   See for example, Foerster and Karolyi (1999) who examine the impact upon local and world betas of foreign stocks after
cross-listing in the US.
23
   Lewis and Darbha (2004) examine the time of changes in the betas and compare them to listing dates finding that the
change in betas generally occurs after the listing date.

                                                                                                                       15
changes in the asset pricing relationships and then use these estimates to examine the effects on a
simple portfolio allocation model.
(2a) Data on Foreign Companies
         In order to examine the diversification potential of foreign companies in the US, I collected the
available time series for local market returns on all foreign companies listed on the NYSE in May
2004. By doing so, my analysis focuses upon the foreign companies that end up being listed in the US.
This approach allows me to consider the portfolio decision of a US investor who wishes to consider
only domestically available foreign stocks.24
         Foreign stocks trade on a variety of exchanges in the US, including the over the counter market
(OTC) and institutional investor-only markets (RADR, 144A). In this paper, I restrict the analysis to
foreign stocks on the public exchanges for two main reasons. First, my goal in this paper is to consider
diversification and, indirectly, home bias, from the viewpoint of a representative small US investor. I
therefore exclude foreign stocks that are only available to large institutional investors. Second, OTC
stocks do not require the same level of disclosure requirements as do domestic and foreign stocks on
the public exchanges. As such, domestic investors may consider these foreign stocks to have higher
costs associated with acquiring information.
         Exchange-traded foreign companies in the US primarily trade on the NYSE and NASDAQ.25 I
exclude NASDAQ stocks since recent research suggests that the “Tech Bubble” of the late 1999s may
have made the sources of risk in foreign stocks difficult to interpret.26 In this study, I use weekly stock
returns in foreign markets for parent non-US companies that have stocks trading on the New York
Stock Exchange. The time period is from January 1970 or the earliest date of availability to May 2004.
All return series are measured in US dollars.
         The data for this paper were collected in the following steps for non-Canadian companies. Step
(1) A data set of all foreign companies with stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange in the US
were obtained from the Bank of New York, the primary custodian bank for ADRs in this country. This
set was cross-checked with listings from the NYSE itself and JP Morgan, another ADR custodian bank.
All together there were 351 ADRs for 337 parent companies across 41 foreign countries. Step (2) For



24
   An alternative would be to examine available stocks on the US in each year and incorporate the possibility of de-listing.
I leave this analysis for future research.
25
   Currently, two foreign companies also trade on the AMEX.
26
   See the discussion on the sources of risk in Carrieri, Errunza, and Sarkissian (2006), Brooks and Del Negro (2005), and
Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2005). In 2004, the market value of foreign stocks on the NYSE and NASDAQ together
comprised 98% of the total market value across public exchanges. At the 2000 peak of NASDAQ, the foreign companies
hit a max of 27% of this total. Thus, the companies listed on NYSE comprise most of the foreign market cap in the US.

                                                                                                                          16
each of these companies, stock returns in the home market and market values for full available history
were collected from Datastream.27
         Canadian companies trade directly on US exchanges without ADR registration. As such, these
companies are not listed on custodian bank ADR directories. Andrew Karolyi kindly provided the hand-
collected names and identifying mneumonic codes for the Canadian companies listed in the US.28
Appendix Table A2 lists the total set of companies on the NYSE and their home countries.
          (2b) Empirical Framework and Motivation
         Examining the individual stock returns requires an extension of the standard factor model in
(1). For each individual foreign company i, the returns are given by loading on a factor model for the
local and US markets:

rti = α i + β i ′ f t + eit                   i = 1, …, N; ℓ = 1,…, L                                          (12)

where riℓt is the return on company i which is located in country ℓ. These returns depend upon a set of
factors that affect companies in country ℓ. A standard model often used to characterize company returns
internationally is one in which fℓt = {rℓt, rwt}. According to this approach, the domestic market captures
local risk factors that are not measured in the world return. Thus, the model would be written as:
rti = α i + β i rt + β iw rtw + eit                                                                            (12’)

However, as we have noted above, the joint distribution of {rt , rtw } has been unstable over the sample

period. If local stocks have a stable relationship with their local market over time but the local markets
experience shifts against the US markets, the local stocks will appear to have an unstable relationship
with the US market. This instability would just be a reflection of the overall local market relationship
with the US noted above. These country level breaks will then contaminate estimates about the
relationship between foreign stocks trading in the US and their relationship with the US market.
         To see this relationship, substitute the shifting country return process rℓt from (3’) into the
company return in (12’). This implies:

 rti = α i + β i I(Tτ )[ατ + βτ rtw + uτ ,t ]+β iw rtw + eit
rti = I(Tτ )[α i + β i ατ +(β i βτ +β iw )rtw + β i uτ ,t ] + eit                                              (13)
rti = a it + bti rtw + ε ti
Where



27
   I also collected the price in the US. Since this price moved very closely with the local return through arbitrage, I focus
upon the longer local market series.
28
   These data were used in Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004,2005).

                                                                                                                                17
a it ≡ α i + β i ατ
bti ≡ β i βτ +β iw
ε ti ≡ β i uτ ,t + eit
And where, as above, τ indexes the subinterval in which foreign market indices are stable against the US
market return. Equation (13) shows that even if the factor loadings of the foreign stocks on the local and
world market, α i , β i , are not time-varying, an estimate of these parameters would be since the factor

loadings of the local market on the world, ατ , βτ , are shifting.
           At the same time, there may be different reasons for the relationship between foreign stocks and
the US market to change relative to the overall local market. Using event studies, a vast literature on
international cross-listings has found that a company’s cost of capital tends to fall after cross-listing.
Moreover, the betas of the foreign stock increase against the US.29 Others such as Baruch and Saar
(forthcoming) have argued that the decision to list on an exchange arises from the perception that the
company is more similar to other stocks on a given exchange. Therefore, if there are shifts in individual
foreign stock returns as a result of listing in the US market, it is not clear when these shifts would occur.
           To maintain the agnostic approach taken above, I begin by asking whether foreign stocks listed
on US exchanges have a stable relationship with the US market once accounting for the breaks against
their local markets. For this purpose, note that equation (13) can be written as a set of restrictions on the
foreign stock return factor pricing equations:
rti = I(Tτ )[ατi + βτi ατ +(βτi βτ +βτiw )rtw +βτi uτ ,t ] + eit                                                  (13’)

where
ατi = α qi                                                                                                       (13a)
βτi = β qi                                                                                                        (13b)
βτiw = β qiw                                                                                                     (13c)
∀ τ ≠ q, τ ,q = 1, ..., m
           I therefore begin by estimating (13’) and testing restrictions (13a) and (13b) for each foreign
stock. Since some studies have focused upon ADRs alone and thereby excluded Canadian stocks, Table
3 reports the results for the non-Canadian firms. Panel A gives a summary of the number and proportion
of firms that come from countries with No Breaks (m=0), One Break (m=1), and Two Breaks (m=2),
respectively. Roughly 40% of the firms come from countries that did not show evidence of a change in



29
     See for example, Foerster and Karolyi (1999). Karolyi (2006) surveys the literature on international cross-listings.

                                                                                                                            18
asset pricing relationships with the US. Another 42% come from countries with one break, while only
18% of the firms come from countries that show evidence of two breaks.
       Table 3 Panel B reports the results of testing zero restrictions on the stock level world parameters,
broken down by country breaks and combined in the last column under “All.” 40% of the foreign stocks
reject the joint restriction that: α i = 0 = β i . However, when the restrictions are decomposed into the

parameters separately, only about 5% of the stocks can reject the hypothesis that α i = 0 at the 5% MSL,
which is comparable to the number that one would reject in a random sample. This proportion falls even
lower to 3% when the tests are conditioned on the breaks from the home country: Ho : I (Tτ )α i = 0 .

These results show that there is no evidence of excess returns of foreign companies in the US once
conditioned on local company returns.
       The results for β iw are more mixed. About 45% of the foreign stocks in the US reject the
hypothesis that the direct coefficient of the foreign stock on the US is different from zero. Note that
this can also be seen as a test that of the null hypothesis that the foreign stock depends upon the US
market only through the effect of the local market on the US: β i βτ . Interestingly, while this
restriction is rejected for approximately 45% of the foreign companies, this means that the returns over
50% of the companies cannot reject this restriction.
       Table 3 Panel C reports the proportion of firms that reject the restrictions given in (13a-c). The
first column reports the proportion rejecting the hypothesis that given in (13a) that alphas are constant
over time. Since very few stocks had evidence that these parameters were different from zero, it is not

surprisingly that only about 6% of the stocks rejected this hypothesis. Tests for constancy of β i and

β iw reject more often at 16% and 13%, respectively. I will further analyze these companies below.
       To understand the power of these tests, Table 3 Panel D gives summary information about
cross-sectional and time series numbers of observations for the foreign companies. The first entry in
each cell gives the summary statistics for all but the non-Canadian companies, while the second entry
gives the summary for all the foreign companies. The cross-sectional number of firms is 363 and these
break down into the number of breaks in the home company as described above. The table also reports
summary statistics for the number of time series observations per firm. These range from a minimum
of 62 to a maximum of 1670 observations. The mean and median of number of time series
observations are 800 and 634, respectively, for all of the foreign companies. Generally, the number of
observations of individual stocks is fewer than their home country indices, leading to the question of
whether there are enough observations within each country subperiod to have sufficient power for the

                                                                                                            19
tests in Panel C. To examine this issue, the right hand columns report the number of observations
decomposed by number of observations within the subperiods implied by the shifts in local markets
against the world. The minimum ranges from 62 for stocks for pseudo-subperiod 1 to 266 for stocks
during pseudo-subperiod 3. Similarly, the median number of observations per company range from
406 for τ = 1 to 266 for τ = 3. . Finally, the last row gives information about the total number of
observations as approximately 580,000 for the total sample, 335,000 for stocks from subperiod 1,
128,000 for stocks from subperiod 2, and 17,632 for stocks from subperiod 3. The number of
observations when Canadian companies are excluded is smaller, yet remains large. The number of
observations therefore suggests there should be sufficient power to detect shifts in parameters across
home country subperiods.
          Given the evidence for parameter instability across these subperiods for about 40% of the
foreign stocks, I next examine the behavior of returns for these individual stocks more closely. For
each of these companies, I estimate the following nested model:
rti = Ξ(κς )[ αςi +βςi rt + βςiw rtw + eςi ,t ],                 for i = 1, ..., N; ς =1,..., n i + 1   (14)


rt = I(Tτ )[ατ + βτ rtw + uτ ,t ],                            for ℓ = 1, …, L, τ = 1, …, m +1           (3’)


Equation (14) takes the two-factor international stock equation given in (13) but allows for the
possibility of shifts in the company level returns that differ from the home country shifts estimated
earlier and repeated here as (3’). Ξ(κς) is an indicator function similar to the indicator function I(Tτ) in
foreign markets. In particular, Ξ(κς) maps the subperiods over which firm level parameters are
constant into the time domain the subperiods. Note that since the estimation is conducted by firm, the
intervals should be specified as dependent upon the firm i. Subsuming these superscripts on the time
intervals κ without loss of generality, the mapping analogous to equation (4) is:
Ξ(κς) = 1 if t ∈ {κ(ζ-1)+1, …, κζ} for κζ ∈{κ1, κ2, …., κn }

where the estimates of κζ are:

                                           ⎡ ni +1 ⎛                       ⎞⎤
{κˆ1 ,κˆ2 , ..., κˆni } = arg min ⎢ ∑ ⎜⎜ ∑ [rti − δςi 'f t ]2 ⎟⎟⎥                                       (15)
                          κ1 ,κ 2 ,...,κ i ⎢ ς =1 t∈{κ ( ς −1) +1,...,κς }
                                        n ⎣        ⎝                       ⎠ ⎥⎦




                                                                                                               20
where κ o = 0, κ n j +1 = T . The equations in (15) contain both local home country returns and US market

returns. In turn, these variables are jointly unstable as documented above. For this reason, it is important
the condition the firm level estimation in (15) on these macro breaks. I describe this estimation next.
2c. Company Break Tests Statistics
       The cross-subinterval tests above found evidence for company-specific return instability. In
order to estimate the subperiods of relative stability in equation (15), I begin by testing for the number of
breaks in the equity pricing relationship, as above. Note that f t = {rt , rt w } and that equation (3’)
describes the relationship between the elements in this vector. Consistent estimates for this relationship
are given in Section 1. Constraining the factor process by these estimates, I first test for the number of
breaks in each company returns, ni, for the set of companies, i = 1, …, N.
       Results for the break date estimates are given in Table 4. At an MSL of 10%, 164 companies
reject the hypothesis of no breaks, with the numbers declining to 111 companies at an MSL of 2.5%. As
with the foreign markets, most of the foreign firms only reject the hypothesis that there is not more than
one break. Only one firm rejects the hypothesis at 2 or more breaks at the 5% MSL.
       The table also reports the mean of the break-point estimate and of the standard errors of the
estimates. The statistics for the break points are provided by marginal significance level of the number
of breaks. The first break has a mean in 1996, the second break in 1998 to 1999. There are insufficient
numbers of firms with three breaks to make inferences.
        There are greater differences when the companies are sorted into whether they show evidence of
single, double, or triple breaks. The single break companies have a mean break in 1997. The double
break companies generally show a first shift in the early 1990s with a second mean shift in 1999. The
triple break companies show a similar pattern but with an early break in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The mean of the standard error of these estimates range from four to nine months.
       Figure 7A gives a plot of the breakdates of the foreign companies, arrayed by home country. The
first break in the relationship between individual company returns against the US and on the home
market is by Kubota, a Japanese firm in 1977, while the last break is by Cunoc, a Hong Kong firm.
Figure 7B gives a plot of the number of initial breaks, second breaks and total breaks, while Figure 7C
shows the same information as a proportion of the companies that show instability. Clearly, most of the
companies show instability during the late 1990s and early 2000s.
       While the predominance of changes appears in the latter part of the sample, it should be
emphasized that most of the companies do not show any evidence of instability. At the peak period, only



                                                                                                          21
60 companies demonstrated a first or second break, out of a total of 363 companies or about 16% of the
total possible companies.
2e. Parameter Estimates
        The evidence above gives evidence of instability in the asset pricing relationships, but it does
not tell us about the pattern in the parameter relationships. For this purpose, Tables 5 and 6 report
cross-sectional statistics on the parameter estimates for various portfolios of foreign stocks, grouped
into the 4 break pseudo-periods described above.
Local Market Betas: Panel A shows the results for the coefficient of the i-th stock return on the local
stock market return, βiℓ. The first three rows provide summary statistics for a market-weighted portfolio while
the second set of rows do the same for an equally-weighted portfolio. In all cases, the mean of the local beta is
quite close to one. The mean of the standard error as well as the standard deviation of beta is quite small for the
market-weighted portfolio, although the equally weighted portfolio shows a great deal more variation. The rest
of the panel shows the results broken down into quartile portfolios. The mean of the top quartile is very close to
one, while the bottom quartile is lower at around .83 for the first subperiod. The top quartile has quite small
standard error means at less than 0.09, while the bottom quarter shows greater standard error means, but still less
than 0.14. The pattern suggests that the betas of the individual stocks on the local markets are quite close to 1
and these relationships have not changed much over time.
        Panel B shows the same statistics grouped into regional portfolios. While the means are very close to
one for Europe and Oceania, the means are somewhat lower for Africa & the Middle East and, for the first
subperiod, Latin America and Asia. These results suggest that there may be differences for emerging versus
developed markets.
        Panel C addresses this possibility where the results are reported for market weighted portfolios. The
mean of the local beta for emerging markets is closer to 0.85 for the first sub-period but increases to close to one
for the subsequent periods. In all of the sub-cases considered, the betas are relatively close to one and do not
decrease over time. This suggests that companies that list in the US move closely with their local markets.
Despite general shifts in international markets, the co-variation of the foreign stocks with their own country
indices has not changed much over time.
US Market Betas: Table 6 shows the same statistics for the cross-section of betas on the US market. The
means are all quite close to zero. This result is consistent with the zero restriction hypothesis tests in
Table 3 that found approximately 60% of the stocks could not reject the hypothesis that these estimates
are equal to zero.
        Most estimates in the literature find that direct estimates of foreign cross-listed stocks on the US
market are significantly greater than zero. It is therefore important to note that the estimates here are the
conditional direct effects of the stocks on the US market. To see this point, note that the standard

                                                                                                                    22
coefficient of foreign stocks on the US market return in equation (13) is comprised of three different
parameters: biw ≡ (β i β +β iw ) where biw is the composite coefficient. In this way, β i can be seen as

the standard CAPM beta of foreign stock returns on their local market return while β is the world

CAPM beta of the local market on the US market. As the country level estimates in Table 2 suggest, β

are significantly positive and the market weighted estimates range from about 0.4 to 0.6. Table 5 reports
that estimates of the stock level betas on their own markets, β i , are also generally significantly positive

and quite close to one. The product of these two betas, β i β , then measures the implied effect of the
foreign stocks on the US market that would be implied by standard CAPM relationships. As such, the
parameter β iw can be viewed as the marginal relationship between foreign stocks and the US market that
is not implied by these standard relationships. Not surprisingly, then, this direct effect is equal to zero in
many cases.
       In Panel A of Table 6, the mean of the parameter estimate for the market weighted portfolio
increases from 0.06 in Periods 1 and 2 to 0.08 in Periods 3 and 4. When this result is broken into
quartile-based portfolios, no overall relationship emerges. These differences combined with the fact that
developed country firms have more market weight than the emerging markets suggest that there may be
differences across regions. Panel B of Table 6 shows the break-down into regional portfolios. Indeed,
Europe, Asia and Oceania show a trend toward increasing betas on the US market, while the Latin
American and the Africa/Middle East portfolios show the opposite trend.
       Since Asia and Europe include some emerging market countries, Panel C breaks the firms into
developed versus emerging market portfolios. Both portfolios show a general decrease in mean between
the first pseudo-subperiod to the later subperiods.
       In summary, the marginal effect of foreign stocks on the US market is small and close to zero.
When broken into market-weighted developed and emerging market portfolios, these marginal effects
become smaller over time. This result may suggest that the foreign stocks listed in the US have become
more integrated with the US market over time.
(2g) Foreign Portfolio Allocation
       The analysis above describes how the parameters have changed over time, but do not give a
sense of the economic significance of the relationships. For this purpose, I use a similar mean-variance
optimization model as I did in the country indices above. However, I now allow the investors to hold a
portfolio of foreign stocks in the United States. The investor has a choice of combinations arising from
three different portfolios: (a) the domestic market; (b) a capitalization weighted average of foreign

                                                                                                           23
market indices; and (c) a capitalization weighted average of foreign markets listed in the United
States. As such, I take a similar optimization as considered in Section 1 but now include a new
portfolio formed from the market-weighted returns on the domestic-listed foreign stocks:

rt S = ∑ i =1 zti rti ,
             N
                                                                                                      (15)

where zti is the market cap weight from company i in the total portfolio of foreign companies listed on
the NYSE. The tangency portfolio weights of the domestic market, portfolio of foreign markets, and
portfolio of foreign stocks listed in the domestic market are given by equation (11), repeated here for
convenience:
ωt = Vt -1 E(rt)/ ι' Vt-1 E(rt)                                                                       (11)
                                          '
where now rt ≡ ⎡⎣ rt s , rt F , rt w ⎤⎦ so the optimal portfolio is given by (11) and:

E(rt) =     [    Ξ (κ ς ) ⎡⎣α ςi + βςiw E ( rt w ) ⎤⎦ , I (Tτ )[ατ + βτ E (rt w )] , E ( rt w )   ]   (16)

Vt = Et [ (rt- Et rt) (rt- Et rt)’             ]
           Figures 8 show the effects of the parameter estimates on the allocation into both the foreign
markets and the US listed foreign stocks. The figures depict the allocation into foreign stocks over
time in two different portfolios: the foreign markets and the domestically-listed foreign stocks. In
order to get a sense of the variability of these allocations, I used Monte Carlo simulations to obtain
95% confidence intervals as follows.
           First, the parameters: βℓ, βiℓ, βiw were drawn using the variance-covariance matrix from their
estimated joint distribution in each year. Second, these estimates together with their standard errors
were used to calculate the tangency portfolio for that run of the distribution. Third, after 10,000
generations of the tangency portfolio, the 95% confidence intervals were generated for each year.
Fourth, the first three steps were followed for each subsequent year up until 2004.
           I first report the minimum variance portfolio in Figure 8a. Thus, the allocation decision
between foreign and US stocks is made purely of changes in variance. Up until about 1994, the results
support the notion that there is under-investment in foreign assets. For most of this period, the
diversification benefits suggest that the US investor should be holding from 50% to 80% of his
portfolio in foreign assets. During 1992, the estimates even suggest that the domestic investor should
short the domestic market and go long a combination of foreign markets and foreign stocks listed in
the US. After 1994, this relationship changes dramatically. By the end of the sample, the parameter
estimates indicate that only about 20% of the US investor’s portfolio should be held in foreign assets in
order to achieve the minimum variance portfolio.

                                                                                                             24
       Figure 8a also shows the optimal relationship between holdings in foreign stocks in the US and
foreign stocks in foreign market indices. From 1974 to 1987, foreign stocks in the US outperform the
diversification of the foreign markets. The optimal holdings of the foreign stocks range around 40% of
the portfolio while optimal holdings of foreign market indices range around 25%. This relationship
reverses during 1987 to 1990, but after 1994, the optimal holdings of foreign markets and foreign
stocks in the US are approximately the same at around 10%.
       Figure 8b repeats this analysis for the tangency portfolio where the mean returns are allowed to
differ using the estimates from Section 1 above. The figure shows a similar time pattern between
portfolio investment in the US and the foreign markets as the minimum variance portfolio. During the
1970s and 1980s, the lower return in the US market means that a US investor would hold very little of
the domestic asset. This relationship switches dramatically in the late 1980s, before exhibiting the
same optimal short position during 1990-1993 as found in the minimum variance case. The high mean
in foreign mean during the period following 1994 attenuates the tendency to allocate portfolio to the
US market.
       When comparing the three asset results in Figures 8 with the two asset framework in Figures 5,
the results are strikingly different. As shown in Figures 5 when the only source of foreign
diversification is to hold the foreign market indices, the optimal allocation into foreign stocks increases
over time. As we saw above, even though the correlation across markets increased, the allocation into
foreign markets increased because of the decline in systematic risk in the foreign portfolio. By
contrast, when the investment set is expanded to include a portfolio of foreign stocks listed in the US,
the optimal allocation into foreign assets in total decline. I investigate the sources of this difference in
the next section.
3. Foreign Stocks Inside or Outside of the US?
       The portfolio allocations considered above are clearly just an alternative way to view the
distribution of the parameter estimates. Therefore, to understand the difference in results, I take a
closer look at this distribution over time and across stocks.
       (3a) Parameters Behind the Decisions
       To understand the parameters that determine these patterns, Figures 9 show the parameters and
standard errors for the market weighted portfolios of foreign market indices and foreign companies that
are listed in the US. Figure 10a shows that the estimate of the foreign market on the US, β , is
relatively stable over time, consistent with the country beta estimates in Figure 6a. On the other hand,
the estimate of the coefficient of the foreign stocks with their own markets, β i , , has increased from


                                                                                                           25
1982, peaking at above 1 in 2001. At the same time, the beta of the stocks on their own local
markets, β i , w , varied near zero. The aggregate measure of the relationship between foreign stocks and

the US market, biw ≡ (β i β +β iw ) , shows some variation, but generally rises faster than the local

country on the US market due to the increase in β i .
        These parameters together with the variance estimates of the components generate the portfolio
combinations. To understand the variance component for the portfolios, note that these components as
derived in Appendix 2 are given by:
        Cov (rt s , rt f ) = σ w2 Z t ' b twβ t ' Xt + Z t ' β it U t X t

         Cov ( rt s , rt w ) = σ w2 Z t 'b tw

        Cov( rt f , rt w ) = σ w2 Xt ' β t

Where U t ≡ Et (ut ut ') for u t ≡ [u1t , ... , u Lt ]' , the cross-country variance-covariance matrix;

σ w2 ≡ E (utw 2 ) ; Z t and Xt are, respectively, the N x 1 vector of the market weights of the foreign
stocks in the foreign stock portfolio and the Lx1 vector of market weights in the foreign stocks in the
US at time t; and where btw , βt are the vectors of portfolio parameters with typical element, b iw
                                                                                                 t ,β t .


         The covariances are depicted in Figure 9b. The covariance between foreign markets and the US
market return move quite closely with the covariance between foreign stocks in the US and the US
market return. This is not surprising since these covariances are both driven by similar movements in
coefficients and changes in market values. By contrast the covariance between foreign markets and the
foreign stocks in the US has increased dramatically since 1994 when they were actually negative. Note
that part of the changes in covariances between the two terms may arise from changes in the cross-
country variance-covariance matrix U.
        To examine these relationships, Figure 9c shows the time varying pattern of variance estimates of
these portfolios. Appendix 2 shows that the variances of the foreign portfolios is given by:
        Var (rt F ) = σ w2 Xt ' β t β t ' Xt + Xt ' U t Xt

        The variance of the foreign portfolio return, rt f , depends upon two terms. The first term evolves

according to variation in market weights of the foreign market indices, X, and the risk-loading of the
country indices on the world market, βt . This term captures the variation in the foreign return arising
from its dependence on the world return. The second term measures the effects of return variation from
comovements in returns across countries. In a standard CAPM framework, this would represent the
idiosyncratic risk that would be minimized in large portfolios.

                                                                                                            26
        Figure 9c shows the evolution of this estimate over time. The foreign portfolio variance shows a
marked increase following the 1987 stock market crash, but then generally declines afterward with a
slight elevation in the early 1990s. The figure also shows the contribution to this variance from the
residual covariance among countries, Xt ' U t Xt . As the figure shows, the systematic variance in this
country portfolio comprises a majority of the overall variance in the beginning in 1974. After 1987,
though, the contribution of this residual variance to the overall variance declines until about half by 2004.
        Similarly, the variance of the foreign stocks in the US is:
        Var ( rt s ) = σ w2 Z t ' b twb tw ' Z t + Z t ' β it U t β it ' Z t + Z t ' Ω t Z t

        The first two terms on the right hand side mirror the components found in the variance of foreign
market indices. That is, the first and second terms capture the risk arising from dependence of these
stocks on the US market and the systematic world comovement captured by Ut. By contrast, the last
component, Z t ' Ωt Zt , is the residual variation in foreign stocks after the effects of variation in US

market and foreign market risks have been taken out.
        Figure 9c shows this measure over time. The residual variance is small for most of the period
except for the period from 1987 to 1992. By the end of the sample, the contribution of this term to
overall variance is essentially zero. The overall variance of the foreign stocks in the US follows the
movement of the foreign market, but with more exaggerated swings.
        (3b) Interpreting the Portfolio Allocation
        Given the variance and covariance estimates over time, the portfolio allocations in Figure 8
become transparent. Following 1987, the systematic risk increases for foreign stocks both inside and
outside the US. As a result, the US investor would choose to hold more domestic stocks and less foreign
stocks, particularly those that are listed in the US. However, from 1990 onward, the variance of the
foreign stocks decline. Since there is a negative covariance between foreign stocks inside and outside the
US from 1991 to 1994, the US investor gets an extra diversification boost from holding onto both types
of foreign stocks and even shorts the domestic stock market in 1992. Subsequently, the covariance
between the two portfolios of foreign stocks increase and the US investor cannot achieve the same
diversification benefit.
        One way to see this relationship is to examine the attainable minimum variance portfolio over
time. This is depicted in Figure10a along with the St Dev of holding the US portfolio alone. Another
view at the same relationship is given in Figure 10b which shows the percentage reduction in standard
deviation at the minimum variance point for the US investor. This is given by: [StDev(US Return) –
StDev(MinVar)]/StDev(US Return). The figure compares the minimum variance point for portfolios

                                                                                                            27
using market indices as in Section 1 with the portfolio results using both sets of foreign stocks as in
Section 2.
        Figure 10b shows that the diversification gains decline between 1974 and 2004 for both sets of
stocks. However, there is a sharp increase in risk reduction in the early 1990s reaching about 35% of the
underlying risk based upon the total foreign stock portfolios. This reduction comes from the pattern
found in Figure 9 that the covariance between the two sets of foreign stocks becomes negative at the
same time that the variance of foreign stocks are declining. By the mid-1990s, this pattern reverses as
the two sets of portfolios become much more highly correlated.
        The minimum variance portfolio with foreign stocks indices alone follow a similar pattern, but
without the upswing in diversification benefit in 1992. Foreign stocks become less risky, but there is not
a set of foreign assets with low correlation such as the foreign stocks inside the US to allow the hedge
component. On the other hand, the diversification potential does not drop off as dramatically as when
US listed foreign stocks can be held. Rather, it rises slightly and stays at about 15%.
        This difference underlies the significantly different sizes of foreign portfolio holdings in the two
cases. When there is only one source of holding foreign assets, Figure 3 showed that the general decline
in systematic risk in the foreign portfolio makes the US investor put more weight in the foreign portfolio
over time. However, when there are two sources of foreign investment, the attractiveness of this
investment depends critically on the co-movement between these two portfolios. As long as the
correlation is small and negative, the US investor would like to hold both portfolios. On the other hand,
if the correlation increases over time, as it did after 1994, allocation of portfolio into one of the portfolios
will increase risk in the foreign portfolio allocation overall, thereby increasing the allocation at home.
        (3b) “Home-Grown Foreign Diversification”
        The results above show that the risk reduction properties of foreign assets have declined over
time. This relationship is especially pronounced when foreign stocks inside and outside the US are part
of the investment opportunity set.
        Errunza et al (1999) have proposed using “Home Grown” foreign assets as a substitute for
investing directly in foreign equity markets. Indeed, the results above suggest that the foreign equities
that trade in the US move very closely with their local markets. Therefore, I now consider the two asset
allocation model as in Section 1 but substitute foreign stocks listed in the US for the portfolio of foreign
markets. That is, I consider an investor choosing an allocation in two possible assets with return vector:
              '
rt ≡ ⎡⎣ rt s , rt w ⎤⎦ where the processes are the same as estimated above.



                                                                                                             28
       Figures 11 report the results of repeating the portfolio simulations excluding the foreign market
allocation. Comparing these results to the counterparts using foreign indices only in Figures 5
demonstrates a similar pattern, but with much greater time variation. For example, the pronounced
increase in variance in foreign stock inside the US following the crash of 1987 creates a more significant
decline in foreign allocation. Similarly, there is more variation in the estimates in the late 1990s and
early 2000s, and the standard errors show much greater sampling error. The mean allocation at the end
of the sample is roughly the same as the beginning and is comparable to the allocation in Figure 5a at the
end of the sample. However, the sampling error shows that the allocation could be as low as 0.3 or as
high as 0.9. Figure 11b also shows the effects upon the tangency portfolio implied by the means of
countries. Once again, the degree of variability is substantially greater than the foreign indices alone.
       Returning to the variance reduction properties of these portfolios, Figure 10b shows that during
the period following 1994 through 2003, a portfolio of foreign stocks outside the US, using foreign
market indices, dominates a portfolio of foreign stocks inside the US, using cross-listed stocks. By 2003,
however, the diversification properties are essentially the same for both portfolios.
       Overall, then, the foreign stocks listed within the US have similar diversification patterns as
foreign markets indices particularly following 1994. The primary differences between the foreign stocks
inside and outside the US are two-fold. First, the portfolio of foreign cross-listed stocks in the US has a
greater residual systematic risk than the portfolio of foreign market indices. Second, the sampling
uncertainty for the beta coefficients from the cross-listed stocks is greater than that of the foreign market
portfolio. As a result, the confidence intervals around the appropriate allocation into a portfolio of cross-
listed stocks are many times larger than those of the portfolio of foreign market indices.
        4. Conclusion
       In this paper, I have looked at the data on foreign returns from a US investor’s point of view to
consider the impact of changing covariances among international returns on the opportunities for
diversification. I examined the foreign markets first to consider the usual argument that domestic
residents hold a suboptimally low portfolio allocation in foreign stock indices. I have found that the
covariances among country stock markets have indeed shifted over time for a majority of the countries.
However, in contrast to the common perception that markets have become more integrated over time,
the covariance between foreign markets and the US market have increased only slightly from the
beginning to the end over the last twenty years. Moreover the standard deviation of the foreign
portfolio has declined over this time.
       To consider the economic significance of these parameter changes, I looked at a simple
portfolio decision model in which a US investor could choose between US and foreign market
                                                                                                            29
portfolios. With two different assumptions about the estimate of foreign means, I found that the
optimal allocation in foreign markets has actually increased over time. This may seem counter-
intuitive given that the higher degree of integration increases the correlation across markets. On the
other hand, the falling variance of foreign portfolios increases the allocation into foreign markets.
Overall, this second effect dominates the integration effect so that allocation into foreign markets
remains high.
       These results work against a resolution to the home bias puzzle due to greater integration. I
therefore looked at whether foreign stocks that list in the United States can explain the lack of foreign
investment. Errunza et al (1999) have argued that these stocks can explain the lack of investment in
foreign markets directly. I extended the model from above to examine the behavior of foreign stocks
listed in the United States. Perhaps surprisingly, I found that the estimates of covariation with the US
market have increased over time, even after conditioning on the general increase in covariation
between US and foreign markets.
       Using these parameter estimates to evaluate a simple three-asset model, I found that while the
allocation in the foreign markets do not decline much over time, the allocation into US listed foreign
stocks do decline, particularly in the 1990s. These results suggest that the diversification properties of
domestic-listed foreign stocks are inferior to investing in foreign markets directly. I then evaluated the
two asset model using the cross-listed foreign stocks instead of foreign market indices. I found that the
mean of allocation into foreign stocks do not decline over time, but the confidence intervals increase
substantially.
       A more important determinant of economic importance is whether these allocations in fact can
reduce the variability of the portfolio. For this purpose, I compared the risk reduction from three
possible foreign portfolios – foreign market indices, foreign cross-listed stocks, and both groups. Here
I found that the greatest gains in diversification improvement since 1994 have been in foreign market
indices over foreign cross-listed stocks or a combination of both groups. Of course, these results are
just a way to demonstrate the effects of the parameters. An unconstrained efficient portfolio decision
based upon the universe of foreign stocks would undoubtedly allow a larger reduction in risk.
Nevertheless, the analysis here points to some general trends in the foreign portfolio diversification
potentials. These trends could be summarized with the following results. First, international equity
markets have become more highly correlated. Second, foreign stocks inside the US have come more
correlated with the US over time. As a consequence of these trends, the attainable diversification from
foreign diversification is declining whether the investor holds foreign stocks inside or outside the US.


                                                                                                         30
                                    TABLE 1: Foreign Country Market Breaks

                         rℓt = I(Tτ)[αℓ + βℓ rwt+ uℓ,t],                          for ℓ = 1, …, L, τ = 1, …, 4


             Panel A: Distribution of Break Categories across Marginal Significance Levels

                                  Proportion of                          Proportional # of Breaks
                MSL              Total Countries
                                    Rejecting                  1 Break             2 Breaks            3 Breaks
                                  Ho: No Breaks

                10%                     0.722                  0.692                 0.231              0.077

                 5%                     0.639                  0.739                 0.261              0.043

                2.5%                    0.639                  0.783                 0.217              0.043




                          Panel B: Summary Statistics of Country Break Estimates

                                                                         Single Break
                    30          Full Sample by Break                                          Double Break Only
          Statistic                                                          Only
                               Break 1               Break 2                Break            Break 1      Break 2

         Mean Break            1992.11                1997.11              1993.05           1991.03      1997.11

         Mean StErr
                                   10                      5                 12                 6                5
         (in months)




30
     Estimates based upon 5% MSL case. Results for 2.5% and 10% are almost identical.

                                                                                                                     31
   TABLE 2: Foreign Country Market Breaks: Estimates of Beta
    rℓt = I(Tτ)[αℓ + βℓ rwt+ uℓ,t],                for ℓ = 1, …, L, τ = 1, …, 4
 Portfolio       βℓ Estimate          Period 1   Period 2         Period 3
                                       (τ = 1)    (τ = 2)          (τ = 3)
               Panel A: Market Weighted Total and by Quartile
                    Mean          0.386          0.572            0.588
 Market
                Std Err Mean      0.050          0.050            0.048
 Weighted
                 Std Dev Beta     0.003          0.003            0.003
                    Mean          0.400          0.486            0.327
1st Quartile    Std Err Mean      0.045          0.039            0.037
                Std Dev Beta      0.034          0.042            0.028
                    Mean          0.368          0.583            0.561
2nd Quartile    Std Err Mean      0.044          0.051            0.051
                Std Dev Beta      0.052          0.037            0.039
                    Mean          0.436          0.735            0.694
3rd Quartile    Std Err Mean      0.083          0.088            0.076
                Std Dev Beta      0.037          0.044            0.038
                    Mean          0.400          0.568            0.606
Top Quart       Std Err Mean      0.062          0.056            0.056
                Std Dev Beta      0.043          0.046            0.044
            Panel B: Market Weighted Developed Vs. Emerging
 Market            Mean         0.372          0.533              0.574
Weighted       Std Err Mean     0.040          0.041              0.041
Developed      Std Dev Beta     0.031          0.037              0.038
 Market            Mean         0.458          0.761              0.655
Weighted       Std Err Mean     0.104          0.093              0.085
Emerging       Std Dev Beta     0.012          0.021              0.016




                     Panel C: Market Weighted by Region
                     Mean         0.362          0.589            0.532
 Equally
                 Std Err Mean     0.092          0.078            0.071
 Weighted
                 Std Dev Beta     0.003          0.003            0.003
                     Mean         0.328          0.605            0.581
  Europe         Std Err Mean     0.057          0.058            0.049
                 Std Dev Beta     0.024          0.027            0.028
                     Mean         0.386          0.586            0.521
   Asia          Std Err Mean     0.093          0.096            0.095
                 Std Dev Beta     0.020          0.299            0.299
                     Mean         0.435          0.317            0.317
 Oceania         Std Err Mean     0.043          0.053            0.053
                 Std Dev Beta     0.112          0.116            0.116
                     Mean         0.533          0.626            0.459
  Latin
                 Std Err Mean     0.149          0.100            0.087
 America
                 Std Dev Beta     0.004          0.009            0.004
 Africa &            Mean         0.064          0.733            0.733
  Middle         Std Err Mean     0.172          0.088            0.088
   East          Std Dev Beta     0.003          0.003            0.003

                                                                                  32
TABLE 3: Foreign Market Breaks and Restrictions on Foreign Firm Pricing

   rt = I (Tτ )[ατ + βτ rt w + ut ,τ ],                         for ℓ = 1, …, L, τ = 1, …, m+1

   rti = α i + β i rt + β iw rt w + eti
   rti = α i + β i I (Tτ )ατ + ( β iw + β i I (Tτ ) βτ )rt w + β i I (Tτ )ut ,τ + eti


                 Panel A: Firms Decomposed by Country Break Category
           Statistic               No Breaks          One Break              Two               All
                                     m=0                m=1                 Breaks
                                                                             m=2
     Proportion of Firms                  0.402             0.415             0.183           1.000
       No of Firms          130          134          59           324
      Panel B. Proportion of Firms rejecting Zero Parameter Restrictions
                                                     Two
     Null Hypothesis     No Breaks One Break                       All
                                                   Breaks
    Ho: α i =0; β iw = 0   0.399        0.459       0.200         0.401
         Ho : α i = 0                     0.040             0.092             0.000           0.054
         Ho: β iw = 0                     0.457             0.495             0.267           0.452
      Ho : I (Tτ )α = 0
                     i
                                          0.058             0.050             0.007           0.032
      Ho:I (Tτ ) β   iw
                          =0              0.669             0.928             0.210           0.420
              Panel C: Proportion of Firms rejecting Constant Parameters
                                across Country Breaks
                                                            i        i                        δi ≡
      Null Hypothesis               δ   i
                                            ≡α    i     δ       ≡β         δ i ≡ β iw
                                                                                        {α i , β i , β iw }
               Ho:
    I (T j )δ i = I (Tk )δ i ,            0.060             0.163             0.132           0.397
           j ≠ k , ∀j , k




                                                                                                        33
                                Panel D: Number of Firm Stock Observations

                  First Entry = Total Excluding Canadian firms, Second Entry = Full Total
                                                        By Subperiods in Local Market Stock Return
  Category              Statistic          Total
                                                            τ=1              τ=2           τ=3

 No of Firms                               312             291               139           30
  per Time              Count
(Cross-Section)                            363             304               190           30

                                           772             576               461           294
                        Mean
                                           800             558               586           294

                                           564             406               361           266
     No of              Median
Observations                               634             388               505           266
 in I(Tτ) per
                                            62             62                 75           266
     Firm
(Time Series)            Min
                                            62             62                 75           266

                                           1625           1625               1255          346
                         Max
                                           1670           1625               1437          346

 Total No. of
Firm,Country                                481,792       167,640        128,046          17,632
Observations
                        Count
 (Time Series
  and Cross                                 580,478       339,208        222,652          17,632
   Section)




                                                                                         34
 TABLE 4: Foreign Company Stock Breaks Conditional on Local Market Breaks

       rt = I(Tτ )[ατ + βτ rtw + uτ ,t ];                          for = 1, ..., L, τ = 1, ..., 4

        rti = Ξ(κς )[ αςi +βςi rt + βςiw rtw + eςi ,t ],             for i = 1, ..., N; ς =1,..., 4

            Panel A: Summary Statistics of Breaks across Marginal Significance Levels

                                                           Single
                                                                         Double Break
                      Full Sample by Break                 Break                                   Triple Break Only
                                                                            Only
MSL Statistic                                              Only
                    Break        Break       Break                      Break         Break     Break     Break     Break
                                                           Break
                      1            2           3                          1             2         1         2         3
         Mean
                                1999.12
         Break      1996.02                 1998.05        1997.03     1993.03        1999.11   1984.01   1989.00   1998.05

         Mean
10%      StErr
                       8.0         4.7                                    7.0                     6.8       4.4
          (in                                  7.1           8.3                        4.8                           7.1
        months)
        No. of
        Stocks        164          35           4           129                 31                             4

         Mean
         Break      1996.06     1998.11     1998.08        1997.05     1992.06        1999.06   1978.11   1985.09   1998.08
         Mean
         StErr
5%                     6.8         4.8         4.2           7.0          5.7           4.6       8.2       8.6       4.2
          (in
        months)
         No. of
                      134          23           1           111                 22                             1
        Stocks
         Mean
                    1996.07     1999.12        NA          1997.02     1991.12        1999.12     NA        NA        NA
         Break
         Mean
         StErr
2.5%                   5.7         4.7         NA            5.8          5.0           4.7       NA        NA        NA
          (in
        months)
        No. of
                       111         13           0            98                  13                            0
        Stocks




                                                                                                          35
               TABLE 5: Foreign Stock Breaks and Local Market Betas




                          Panel A: Market-Weighted Portfolios

 Portfolio     βiℓ Estimate    Period 1       Period 2          Period 3   Period 4
                                (ς = 1)        (ς = 2)           (ς = 3)    (ς = 4)
                  Mean
                                 1.000         0.998             1.043      1.035
 Market
               Std Err Mean                    0.093             0.094      0.093
 Weighted                        0.082
               Std Dev Beta                    0.001             0.001      0.001
                                 0.001
                  Mean                         1.043             1.071      1.062
                                 0.899
 Equally
               Std Err Mean                    0.117             0.120      0.121
 Weighted                        0.103
               Std Dev Beta
                                 0.422         0.471             0.505      0.493
                  Mean                         0.985             1.013      1.002
                                 0.834
 Bottom
               Std Err Mean      0.125         0.138             0.139      0.140
 Quartile
               Std Dev Beta      0.003         0.004             0.003      0.003

                  Mean                         1.130             1.147      1.149
                                 0.870
2nd Quartile   Std Err Mean      0.119         0.135             0.141      0.142

               Std Dev Beta      0.002         0.003             0.003      0.003

                  Mean                         0.975             1.000      0.991
                                 0.880
3rd Quartile   Std Err Mean      0.098         0.102             0.106      0.106

               Std Dev Beta      0.003         0.003             0.004      0.004

                  Mean
                                 1.031         0.996             1.046      1.037
Top Quart      Std Err Mean      0.077         0.089             0.089      0.088

               Std Dev Beta      0.001         0.002             0.002      0.002




                                                                                      36
                           Panel B: Geographic Portfolios

Portfolio   βiℓ Estimate      Period 1       Period 2       Period 3   Period 4
Equally                        (ς = 1)        (ς = 2)        (ς = 3)    (ς = 4)
Weighted
               Mean            0.912          1.028          1.065      1.062
            Std Err Mean       0.101          0.123          0.127      0.127
 Europe
            Std Dev Beta       0.391          0.532          0.596      0.588
             No of Obs          150            150            150        150
               Mean            0.816          0.967          0.983      0.939
            Std Err Mean       0.101          0.100          0.099      0.098
  Asia
            Std Dev Beta       0.510          0.540          0.542      0.487
             No of Obs          62             62             62         62
               Mean            0.946          1.032          1.077      1.091
            Std Err Mean       0.080          0.090          0.091      0.092
Oceania
            Std Dev Beta       0.288          0.371          0.243      0.233
             No of Obs          12             12             12         12
               Mean            0.841          1.029          1.037      1.038

 Latin      Std Err Mean       0.101          0.113          0.118      0.120
America     Std Dev Beta       0.495          0.427          0.429      0.436
             No of Obs          89             89             89         89
               Mean            0.666          0.706          0.798      0.798
Africa &    Std Err Mean       0.077          0.074          0.072      0.072
 Middle
  East      Std Dev Beta       0.467          0.496          0.601      0.601
             No of Obs           9              9              9          9
                Panel C: Developed and Emerging Market Portfolios

Portfolio   βiℓ Estimate      Period 1       Period 2       Period 3   Period 4
                               (ς = 1)        (ς = 2)        (ς = 3)    (ς = 4)
               Mean            0.906          0.946          0.920      0.918
Developed
            Std Err Mean
 Markets                       0.072          0 082          0 083      0 083
            Std Dev Beta       0.001          0.001          0.001      0.001
               Mean            0.874          1.072          1.029      1.029
Emerging
            Std Err Mean
Markets                        0 087          0 095          0 093      0 093
            Std Dev Beta       0.004          0.014          0.009      0.009




                                                                                  37
                TABLE 6: Foreign Stock Breaks and US Market Betas

             rℓt = I(Tτ)[αℓ + βℓ rwt+ uℓ,t],                             for ℓ = 1, …, L, τ = 1, …, 4

             riℓt = Ξ(κς)[αiℓ + βiℓ uℓ,t + βiw rwt + ei,t],              for i = 1, …, N, ς = 1, …, 4
                              Panel A: Market-Weighted Portfolios

 Portfolio     βiw Estimate            Period 1               Period 2         Period 3        Period 4
                                        (ς = 1)                (ς = 2)          (ς = 3)         (ς = 4)
                   Mean                                        0.060            0.081            0.082
Market                                   0 061
               Std Err Mean
Weighted                                 0.002                 0.003            0.002            0.003
               Std Dev Beta                                    0.003            0.003            0.003
                                         0 001
                   Mean                   0.07                  0.05             0.06            0.06
Equally
               Std Err Mean
Weighted                                 0 149                 0.071            0.075            0.074
               Std Dev Beta               0.29                  0.33             0.34            0.35
                   Mean
 Bottom                                  0 097                 0 070            0 046            0 046
               Std Err Mean                                   <0.001           <0.001           <0.001
 Quartile                               <0.001
               Std Dev Beta                                    0.001            0.001            0.001
                                         0 001
                   Mean
                                         0 101                 0 052            0 070            0 070
nd
2 Quartile     Std Err Mean             <0.001                <0.001            0.001            0.001
              Std Dev: MW                                      0.002            0.002            0.002
                                         0 002
                   Mean
                                         0 051                 0 043           0 103             0 103
 rd
3 Quartile     Std Err Mean             <0.001                <0.001           <0.001           <0.001

               Std Dev Beta                                                     0.001            0.001
                                         0 001                 0 002
                   Mean                                        0.010            0.007            0.016
                                         0 045
Top Quart      Std Err Mean             <0.001                <0.001           <0.001           <0.001

               Std Dev Beta              0.001                 0.001            0.001            0.001




                                                                                                          38
                  Panel B: Geographic Equally Weighted Portfolios

Portfolio    βiw Estimate    Period 1       Period 2       Period 3      Period 4
                              (ς = 1)        (ς = 2)        (ς = 3)       (ς = 4)
                Mean
                               0 029         0 037          0 055         0 061
             Std Err Mean                    0.137          0.136         0.136
 Europe                        0 110
             Std Dev Beta                    0.368          0.371         0.378
                               0 267
             No of Firms                      148            148           148
                               148
                Mean                         0.087          0.123         0.123
                               0 192
             Std Err Mean                    0.154          0.154         0.154
  Asia                         0 188
             Std Dev Beta                    0.279          0.317         0.317
                               0 317
              No of Obs                        56             56           56
                                56
                Mean                         0.087          0.066         0.066
                               0 037
             Std Err Mean                    0.092          0.092         0.092
Oceania                        0 090
             Std Dev Beta                    0.293          0.298         0.298
                               0 278
              No of Obs                        12             12           12
                                12
                Mean                         0.052          0.059         0.059
                               0 079
 Latin       Std Err Mean                    0.177          0.170         0.171
                               0 201
America      Std Dev Beta
                               0 289         0.290          0.290         0.290
              No of Obs                        88             88           88
                                88
                Mean                         -0.190         -0.383        -0.383
                              -0 085
Africa &     Std Err Mean
                               0 119         0.128          0.128         0.128
 Middle
  East       Std Dev Beta                    0.420          0.336         0.336
                               0 311
              No of Obs          7             7              7             7

            Panel C: Developed and Emerging Market Weighted Portfolios

Portfolio    βiw Estimate    Period 1       Period 2       Period 3      Period 4
                              (ς = 1)        (ς = 2)        (ς = 3)       (ς = 4)
                Mean
 Market                        0 044         0 018          0 024         0 031
Weighted     Std Err Mean                    0.100          0.098         0.098
Developed                      0 086
             Std Dev Beta
                               0 002         0 002          0 002         0 002
                Mean
 Market                        0 068         0 005          0 024         0 024
Weighted     Std Err Mean      0.157         0.140          0.129         0.130
Emerging
             Std Dev Beta      0.003
                                             0 004          0 004         0 004


                                                                                    39
                                Figure 1A: Break Point Estimates by Country

2005
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975




                                                                                                                     LX
                           IR




                                                                                                                IN
                 BD




                                               FR




                                                                   FN

                                                                        IT

                                                                             PH




                                                                                                 HN

                                                                                                      BR

                                                                                                           AR
                                                         CL




                                                                                  NL
                      BG




                                                                                       KO




                                                                                                                          NZ
       CA

            DK




                                JP

                                     OE




                                                    TK



                                                              VE




                                                                                            SA




                                                                                                                               PE
                                          SW
1970
1965
1960
1955

                                                          Break 1       Break 2




                                                                                                                                    40
                                  Figure 1b: Frequency of Country                                                      Figure 1c: Proportion of Country
                                              Breaks                                                                                Breaks




                                                                                    # of Countries with Breaks
# of Countries with Breaks


                             14                                                                                  70%
                             12                                                                                  60%
                             10                                                                                  50%
                              8                                                                                  40%
                              6                                                                                  30%
                              4                                                                                  20%
                              2                                                                                  10%
                              0                                                                                   0%
                                  1978   1983   1988   1993   1998    2003   2008                                       1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008

                                         Break 1       Break 2       Break 1+2                                              % Break 1   % Break 2   % Break 1+2




                                                                                                                                                                  41
      Figure 2: Market-Weighted Country Betas on US Market

0.7


0.6


0.5
                                                             msl 10 Mean
                                                             msl 5 Mean
0.4
                                                             msl 2.5 Mean
                                                             msl 10 Std Dev
0.3                                                          msl 5 Std Dev
                                                             msl 2.5 Std Dev
0.2


0.1


 0
       Period 1    Period 2     Period 3     Period 4




                                                                               42
 Figure 3A: Local Market Betas on US (MSL = 5%)


                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                     1.3
                                                                                     1.1   1.3-1.5
                                                                                           1.1-1.3
                                                                                     0.9
                                                                                           0.9-1.1
                                                                                    0.7
                                                                                           0.7-0.9
                                                                                    0.5    0.5-0.7
                                                                                    0.3    0.3-0.5
                                                                                    0.1    0.1-0.3
                                                                                    -0.1   -0.1-0.1
45
                                                                                    -0.3   -0.3--0.1
     48
      Co                                                                            -0.5   -0.5--0.3
        un27




                                                                             2002
          try




                                                                      1998
                                                               1994
                                                        1990
                37




                                                 1986
                                          1982
                                   1978
                            1974
                     1970




                                                                                                       43
Figure 3B: Local Market Betas on US (MSL 10%)


                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                 1.3
                                                                                 1.1   1.3-1.5
                                                                                 0.9   1.1-1.3
                                                                                0.7    0.9-1.1
                                                                                0.5    0.7-0.9
                                                                                0.3    0.5-0.7
                                                                                       0.3-0.5
                                                                                0.1
                                                                                       0.1-0.3
                                                                                -0.1
                                                                                       -0.1-0.1
                                                                                -0.3
                                                                                       -0.3--0.1
                                                                                -0.5
45




                                                                                       -0.5--0.3
     33



     Co




                                                                         2000
          42


        un




                                                                  1995
           t




                                                           1990
                    27

               ry




                                                    1985
                         63




                                             1980
                                      1975
                                 37
                              1970




                                                                                                   44
                                Figure 4A: Country Break Frequency Totals
                                           (MSL = 5%, CI = 90%)
                          25%



                          20%
Proportion of Countries

                          15%
                                                                            Upper Bounds
                                                                            Lower Bounds
                          10%



                          5%



                          0%
                            70

                            73

                            76

                            79

                            82

                            85

                            88

                            91

                            94

                            97

                            00

                            03
                          19

                          19

                          19

                          19

                          19

                          19

                          19

                          19

                          19

                          19

                          20

                          20




                                                                                           45
                                          Figure 4B: Country Break Decomposition
                                                    (MSL = 5%, CI = 95%)
                          25%



                          20%
Proportion of Countries



                          15%                                                                                                                                 Break 2 - Upper
                                                                                                                                                              Break 2 - Lower
                                                                                                                                                              Break 1 - Upper
                          10%                                                                                                                                 Break 1- Lower



                          5%



                          0%
                                1970
                                       1972
                                              1974
                                                     1976
                                                            1978
                                                                   1980
                                                                          1982
                                                                                 1984
                                                                                        1986
                                                                                               1988
                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                    1994
                                                                                                                           1996
                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                2002
                                                                                                                                                       2004




                                                                                                                                                                                46
      Figure 5A: Foreign Allocation for Minimum Variance Portfolio

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      1974
      1975
      1976
      1977
      1978
      1979
      1980
      1981
      1982
      1983
      1984
      1985
      1986
      1987
      1988
      1989
      1990
      1991
      1992
      1993
      1994
      1995
      1996
      1997
      1998
      1999
      2000
      2001
      2002
      2003
      2004
             Upper 90% (FMkt)     Foreign Markets    Lower 90% (FMkt)




                                                                        47
       Figure 5B: Foreign Allocation using Country Mean Estimates

1.4

1.2

  1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

  0
       1974
       1975
       1976
       1977
       1978
       1979
       1980
       1981
       1982
       1983
       1984
       1985
       1986
       1987
       1988
       1989
       1990
       1991
       1992
       1993
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
       1999
       2000
       2001
       2002
       2003
       2004
-0.2

-0.4

              Upper 90% (FMkt)    Foreign Markets    Lower 90% (FMkt)




                                                                        48
                      0
                          0.1
                                0.2
                                      0.3
                                            0.4
                                                  0.5
                                                        0.6
                                                              0.7
                                                                    0.8




               1974
               1975
               1976
               1977
               1978
               1979




     95%
               1980
               1981
               1982
               1983
               1984
               1985
               1986
               1987
               1988
               1989
     beta(l)


               1990
               1991
               1992
               1993
               1994
                                                                          Figure 6A: Parameters over time




               1995
               1996
               1997
               1998
               1999
               2000
     -95%




               2001
               2002
               2003
               2004
49
                              Figure 6B: Residual and Foreign Portfolio Variance

                   0.07%

                   0.06%

                   0.05%
% Weekly Std Dev




                   0.04%

                   0.03%

                   0.02%

                   0.01%

                   0.00%
                       73

                              75

                                     77

                                            79

                                                   81

                                                          83

                                                                 85

                                                                        87

                                                                               89

                                                                                      91

                                                                                             93

                                                                                                    95

                                                                                                           97

                                                                                                                  99

                                                                                                                         01

                                                                                                                                03
                     19

                            19

                                   19

                                          19

                                                 19

                                                        19

                                                               19

                                                                      19

                                                                             19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                           19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                              20
                           Residual Variance               Foreign and US Covariance                       Foreign Variance




                                                                                                                                     50
               Figure 6C: Implied Correlation between US and Foreign

0.80

0.70

0.60

0.50

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00
   70

          72

                 74

                        76

                               78

                                      80

                                             82

                                                    84

                                                           86

                                                                  88

                                                                         90

                                                                                92

                                                                                       94

                                                                                              96

                                                                                                     98

                                                                                                            00

                                                                                                                   02

                                                                                                                          04
 19

        19

               19

                      19

                             19

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       19

                                                                              19

                                                                                     19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                               51
                                 1975
                                        1980
                                               1985
                                                      1990
                                                             1995
                                                                    2000
                                                                           2005
                   Kub
                 Tota ota
             Phi li l Sa
           Reedps E ltn
                      E ls
                   Enc a ev
                           na
                    A
           New eg on
                    s Co
                           rp
         Roy aAl li anz
     Bril li a l Dutc
              nc e           h
              Ang loChina
      Sm it             g
               h & ol d
              Pr ud Neph
                       e
             San t n tial
                      a
               Barcnder
         Ex te lay s
                   ndi ca
                           re
      Tra n Mas is a
                sc an
                        ada
                   A
           Sk T nd ina
                    elec o
              Al c           m
           Em b an Inc
        Pl ace rae r P n
                    r Dom
                   Al cat e
                           el
        Val e Tatneft
                   R Do
                           c
                   Re e
              Pc cw ps ol
                         Lt d
      CredNov arti s
                it S u
                        is se
                        Ax a
                  Mas e
                   Vi ca
             Telefven di
                      o
               Sc henic a
                         ring
         Apt S Sab
     Upm             atel li
                                                                                  Break 1




     Prem-Ky mme te
              i er F ne
                       ar
                Si em nel l
                          ens
        Chi n Nid ec
                  a Mo
                                                                                  Break 2




              Magn bi le
                        a In
                   Spi re tl
                 Uni le nt
                          ve
                     Bc p r
                      Wi prR
                    Hita o
                Kpn chi
                         Kon
                                                                                            Figure 7A: Break Point Estimates by Company




       San oTele Ctr
                  fi- Sy
                          nth
       Tele Teles p
                 S ude
                          s te
      Es pir            E
                i to S ne l
           Koo anto
       Coru r In dust
                  s Gro
               Thom        up
               Pec h s on
        Mas o i ney
                    n
            O rbi t i te Intl
                      al En
                             g
                       Vi tr
                   Am b o
              Br it is ev
                       h
              Tspa Air
        Bl ue . Gas
                   Sq u
                 Si no are
              Sy ng pec
              Metr enta
                       og
                Bbv as
              Fre s Arg
                      eni u
                   Al sto s
                           m
                        T
                   Tena dc
            Cnoo ris
                      c Ltd
                             .
52
                    Figure 7B: Frequency of Company Breaks

70


60


50


40                                                                  Break 1
                                                                    Break 2
30                                                                  Break 1+2


20


10


0
        1978     1983     1988     1993    1998    2003    2008




                   Figure 7C: Proportion of Company Breaks

60.0%


50.0%


40.0%

                                                                  % Break 1
30.0%                                                             % Break 2
                                                                  % Break 1+2

20.0%


10.0%


0.0%
          1978     1983     1988    1993    1998    2003   2008




                                                                      53
       Figure 8a: International Allocation-Minimum Variance Portfolio

  1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

  0
       1974
       1975
       1976
       1977
       1978
       1979
       1980
       1981
       1982
       1983
       1984
       1985
       1986
       1987
       1988




       1999
       1989




       2000
       1990




       2001
       1991




       2002
       1992
       1993




       2003
       2004
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

            Upper 95% (FinUS)      Foreign Stocks in US   Lower 95% (FinUS)
            Upper 95% (FMkt)       Foreign Market         Lower 95% (FMkt)
            Upper 95% (US)         US                     Lower 95% (US)




                                                                        54
       Figure 8b: International Allocation Using Foreign Country Estimates

  1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

  0
       1974
       1975
       1976
       1977
       1978
       1979
       1980
       1981
       1982
       1983
       1984
       1985
       1986
       1987
       1988




       1999
       1989




       2000
       1990




       2001
       1991




       2002
       1992




       2003
       1993




       2004
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

            Upper 95% (FinUS)        Foreign Stocks in US     Lower 95% (FinUS)
            Upper 95% (FMkt)         Foreign Market           Lower 95% (FMkt)
            Upper 95% (US)           US                       Lower 95% (US)




                                                                             55
                      Figure 9a: Foreign Portfolio Parameters over Time




1.2

 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
      1974

              1976

                       1978

                               1980

                                        1982

                                                 1984

                                                         1986

                                                                  1988

                                                                           1990

                                                                                   1992

                                                                                              1994

                                                                                                       1996

                                                                                                               1998

                                                                                                                        2000

                                                                                                                               2002

                                                                                                                                       2004
                                               βi,ℓ             βi,w              βℓ                 βℓβiℓ+βiw




                              Figure 9b: Covariance Estimates Over Time

0.14%

0.12%

0.10%

0.08%

0.06%

0.04%

0.02%

0.00%
        70

               72

                       74

                            76

                                   78

                                          80

                                                  82

                                                          84

                                                                  86

                                                                           88

                                                                               90

                                                                                         92

                                                                                            94

                                                                                                        96

                                                                                                                98

                                                                                                                        00

                                                                                                                             02

                                                                                                                                   04




-0.02%
      19

             19

                     19

                          19

                                 19

                                        19

                                                19

                                                        19

                                                                19

                                                                         19

                                                                             19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                          19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                 20




-0.04%

                                      Cov(FinUS,FMkt)                    Cov(FinUS,US)                 Cov(FMkt,US)




                                                                                                                                  56
                        Figure 9c: Variance Estimates Over Time

0.12%


0.10%


0.08%


0.06%


0.04%


0.02%


0.00%
    74

           76

                  78

                         80

                                82

                                       84

                                              86

                                                     88

                                                            90

                                                                   92

                                                                          94

                                                                                 96

                                                                                        98

                                                                                               00

                                                                                                      02

                                                                                                             04
  19

         19

                19

                       19

                              19

                                     19

                                            19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                           20
                 Var(FinUS)            Var(FMkt)             Var(FinUS Resid)                 Var(FMkt Resid)




                                                                                                           57
                                Figure 10a: St Dev of Portfolio

17.00%

16.00%

15.00%

14.00%

13.00%

12.00%

11.00%

10.00%

9.00%

8.00%
     74

            76

                   78

                          80

                                 82

                                        84

                                               86

                                                      88

                                                             90

                                                                    92

                                                                           94

                                                                                  96

                                                                                         98

                                                                                                00

                                                                                                       02

                                                                                                              04
   19

          19

                 19

                        19

                               19

                                      19

                                             19

                                                    19

                                                           19

                                                                  19

                                                                         19

                                                                                19

                                                                                       19

                                                                                              20

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                            20
          Foreign Stocks Inside and Outside US                    Foreign Stocks Outside US
          US Only                                                 Foreign Stocks Inside US



          Figure 10b: % Risk Reduction through Foreign Diversification

40.00%

35.00%

30.00%

25.00%

20.00%

15.00%

10.00%

5.00%

0.00%
      74

      76

      78

      80

      82

      84

      86

      88

      90

      92

      94

      96

      98

      00

      02

      04
   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   20

   20

   20




           Foreign Stocks Inside and Outside US                   Foreign Stocks Outside US
           Foreign Stocks Inside US




                                                                                                            58
      Figure 11a: Foreign Stocks in US - Minimum Variance Portfolio

 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
 0
      1974
      1975
      1976
      1977
      1978
      1979
      1980
      1981
      1982
      1983
      1984
      1985
      1986
      1987
      1988
      1989
      1990
      1991
      1992
      1993
      1994
      1995
      1996
      1997
      1998
      1999
      2000
      2001
      2002
      2003
      2004
                Upper 95% (FinUS)       Foreign      Lower 95% (FinUS)



      Figure 11b: Foreign Stocks in US Allocation Using Foreign Country
                               Mean Estimates

1.6

1.4

1.2

 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
      1974
      1975
      1976
      1977
      1978
      1979
      1980
      1981
      1982
      1983
      1984
      1985
      1986
      1987
      1988
      1989
      1990
      1991
      1992
      1993
      1994
      1995
      1996
      1997
      1998
      1999
      2000
      2001
      2002
      2003
      2004




                Upper 95% (FinUS)       Foreign      Lower 95% (FinUS)




                                                                          59
                             Appendix 1: Data Description

       The data on stock returns were compiled from Data stream for the market return
index. The country indices are Morgan Stanley Capital Weighted Indices for the
countries with foreign stocks listed in the United States. Appendix Table A1 reports
these countries along with their mneumonics.
       The data for the individual company stock returns were collected and cross-
checked from the websites of the NYSE and three ADR custodian depositaries: JP
Morgan, Citibank, and Bank of New York. For these companies, the stock return data
were compiled from Data Stream. Appendix Table A2 reports these companies along
with their primary country allocation.

                               Table A1: List of Foreign Countries

       Country                 Mneumonic       Country                Mneumonic
       Argentina                  AR           Israel                     IS
       Australia                  AU           Italy                     IT
       Austria                    OE           Japan                     JP
       Belgium                    BG           Korea                     KO
       Brazil                     BR           Luxembourg                LX
       Canada                     CA           Mexico                    MX
       Chile                      CL           Netherlands               NL
       China                      CH           New Zealand               NZ
       Columbia                   CB           Norway                    NW
       Denmark                    DK           Peru                      PE
       Finland                    FN           Philipines                PH
       France                     FR           Portugal                  PT
       Germany                    BD           Russia                    RS
       Ghana                      GH           South Africa              SA
       Greece                     GR           Spain                     ES
       Hong Kong                  HK           Switzerland               SW
       Hungary                    HN           Taiwan                    TA
       India                      IN           Turkey                    TK
       Indonesia                  ID           United Kingdom            UK
       Ireland                    IR           Venezuela                 VE




                                                                                       60
                          Table A2: List of Foreign Companies

     Company Name                    Country          Company Name            Country
  AUS.AND NZ.BANKING GP.                AU            BRASKEM PNA 1000          BR
       BHP BILLITON                    AU           BRASIL TELEC PN 1000        BR
       COLES MYER                      AU              PETROBRAS ON             BR
      HARDIE JAMES                     AU              PETROBRAS PN             BR
    NATIONAL AUS.BANK                  AU                VCP PN 1000            BR
                                                   CIA.SANMT.BASICO DE SP.
     NEWS CORP.PREF.                   AU                   (100                BR
   NEWS CORPORATION                    AU                SADIA S/A PN           BR
  ORBITAL ENGINE CORP.                 AU           TELE CTR OES PN 1000        BR
  TELSTRA CORPORATION                   AU             TELESP PN 1000           BR
    WESTPAC BANKING                    AU            BRASIL T PAR PN 1000       BR
         ALUMINA                       AU         TELE CELULAR SUL PN 1000      BR
     WMC RESOURCES                     AU           TELEMIG PART PN 1000        BR
   BBVA BANCO FRANCES                  AR            TELE NORTE PN 1000         BR
           IRSA                        AR           TELE LEST CL PN 1000        BR
       METROGAS B                      AR           TELE NORT CL PN 1000        BR
 NORTEL INVERSORA PFD B                 AR          TELE NORD CL PN 1000        BR
    PEREZ COMPANC 'B'                   AR          TELESP CL PA PN 1000        BR
     TELF.DE ARGN.'B'                   AR          TELE SUDESTE PN 1000        BR
     TELECOM ARGN.'B'                  AR             ULTRAPAR PN 1000          BR
                                                   UNIBANCO UNITS (1 PN & 1
    TSPA.GAS DEL SUR B                 AR                   PNB                 BR
          YPF 'D'                       AR           VALE R DOCE ON EJ          BR
        AMERSHAM                       UK            VALE R DOCE PNA EJ         BR
    ALLIED IRISH BANKS                  IR             BRIT.SKY BCAST.          UK
      ALLIED DOMECQ                    UK                 BT GROUP              UK
        AMVESCAP                       UK             CABLE & WIRELESS          UK
      ASTRAZENECA                      UK            BANCOLOMBIA PFCL.          CB
         DELHAIZE                      BG           CADBURY SCHWEPPES           UK
        BARCLAYS                       UK             CELLTECH GROUP            UK
     BRITISH AIRWAYS                   UK                 ANDINA 'B'            CL
        BG GROUP                       UK                 ANDINA 'A'            CL
     BRITISH ENERGY                    UK                  CTC 'A'              CL
     BANK OF IRELAND                    IR              CONCHATORO              CL
       BHP BILLITON                    UK              BANCO DE CHILE           CL
          BUNZL                        UK                CRISTALES              CL
        BOC GROUP                      UK                 CERVEZAS              CL
            BP                         UK                    D&S                CL
       ARACRUZ PNB                      BR                 ENERSIS              CL
      AMBEV ON 1000                    BR                  ENDESA               CL
      AMBEV PN 1000                    BR                    LAN                CL
      COPEL PNB 1000                   BR                  MASISA               CL
 CMPH.BRASL.DISTB.PN 1000              BR                 PROVIDA               CL
    BRADESCO PN 1000                   BR                 QUINENCO              CL
     PERDIGAO S/A PN                   BR               BSANTANDER              CL
   SID NACIONAL ON 1000                BR                  SQM 'A'              CL
       EMBRAER PN                      BR                  SQM 'B'              CL
  EMBRATEL PAR PN 1000                 BR               CORUS GROUP             UK
        GERDAU PN                      BR                  ALTANA               BD
      CEMIG PN 1000                    BR                  ALLIANZ              BD
BNC.ITAU HLDG.FINCA.PN 1000             BR                  BASF                BD

                                                                                  61
                    Table A2: List of Foreign Companies (cont.)
      Company Name                  Country             Company Name        Country
         BAYER                        BD              GALLAHER GROUP          UK
   DEUTSCHE TELEKOM                   BD              GLAXOSMITHKLINE         UK
          E ON                        BD             ABN AMRO HOLDING         NL
         EPCOS                        BD                   AEGON              NL
   FRESENIUS MED.CARE                 BD                 AHOLD KON.           NL
FRESENIUS MED.CARE PREF.              BD            CHICAGO BRIDGE & IRON     NL
 INFINEON TECHNOLOGIES                BD             REED ELSEVIER (AMS)      NL
  PFEIFFER VACUUM TECH.               BD              ING GROEP CERTS.        NL
          SAP                         BD             ISPAT INTERNATIONAL      NL
        SCHERING                      BD                     KLM              NL
       SGL CARBON                     BD                 BUHRMANN             NL
        SIEMENS                       BD                  KPN KON             NL
         DIAGEO                       UK            NEW SKIES SATTELITES      NL
     NOVO NORDISK B                   DK              PHILIPS ELTN.KON        NL
          TDC                         DK              ROYAL DUTCH PTL.        NL
          ELAN                        IR                   TPG NV             NL
     BBV ARGENTARIA                   ES              UNILEVER CERTS.         NL
         ENDESA                       ES              MOOLEN (VAN DER)        NL
       REPSOL YPF                     ES                   MATAV              HN
 SANTANDER CTL.HISPANO                ES                  HANSON              UK
       TELEFONICA                     ES            HSBC HDG. (ORD $0.50)     UK
   TELEFONICA MOVILES                 ES                 BENETTON             IT
         ENODIS                       UK           DUCATI MOTOR HOLDING       IT
         ALSTOM                       FR                    ENEL              IT
        DANONE                        FR                     ENI              IT
        ALCATEL                       FR                    FIAT              IT
      EQUANT (PAR)                    FR                   FIAT PV            IT
    VIVENDI UNIVERSAL                 FR                  FIAT RNC            IT
    FRANCE TELECOM                    FR                 LUXOTTICA            IT
COMPAGNIE GL GEOPHYSIQUE              FR                SAN PAOLO IMI         IT
          SUEZ                        FR                  TENARIS             IT
        LAFARGE                       FR                  INDOSAT             ID
          AXA                         FR                   TELKOM             ID
        PECHINEY                      FR                ICTL.HTLS.GP.         UK
    PUBLICIS GROUPE                   FR            IMPERIAL TOBACCO GP.      UK
         RHODIA                       FR              DR REDDYS LABS.         IN
        AVENTIS                       FR                 HDFC BANK            IN
          SCOR                        FR                  ICICI BANK          IN
    SODEXHO ALLIANCE                  FR            MAHANAGAR TEL.NIGAM       IN
STMICROELECTRONICS (PAR)              FR              SATYAM CMP.SVS.         IN
   SANOFI-SYNTHELABO                  FR            SILVERLINE TECHS.LTD.     IN
        TOTAL SA                      FR            VIDESH SANCHAR NIGAM      IN
        TECHNIP                       FR                   WIPRO              IN
        THOMSON                       FR            INTERNATIONAL POWER       UK
  VEOLIA ENVIRONNEMENT                FR              BLUE SQUARE ISR         IS
    COCA-COLA HLC.BT.                 GR            KOOR INDUSTRIES LTD       IS
    NAT.BK.OF GREECE                  GR                 ADVANTEST            JP
   OTE-HELLENIC TELC.                 GR                   CANON              JP
   ASHANTI GOLDFIELDS                 GH                   HITACHI            JP

                                                                              62
                     Table A2: List of Foreign Companies (cont.)
       Company Name                  Country          Company Name        Country
      HONDA MOTOR                      JP              BACHOCO UBL          MX
          KONAMI                       JP              CERAMIC ULD          MX
          KUBOTA                       JP                 CEL 'V'           MX
  MATSUSHITA ELEC.INDL.                JP               CEMEX CPO           MX
    MITSUB.TOK.FINL.GP.                JP              COMERCI UBC          MX
           NIDEC                       JP                DESC 'C'           MX
           NISSIN                      JP                ELEKTRA            MX
       NOMURA HDG.                     JP               FEMSA.UBD           MX
    NIPPON TELG. & TEL.                JP                CODUSA             MX
            ORIX                       JP                GRUMA 'B'          MX
         PIONEER                       JP                   ICA             MX
           SONY                        JP                IMSA UBC           MX
            TDK                        JP          COCA-COLA FEMSA 'L'      MX
     NTT DOCOMO INC                    JP                SAVIA 'A'          MX
      TOYOTA MOTOR                     JP                 TMM 'A'           MX
  ALUM.CORP.OF CHINA 'H'               CH               MASECA 'B'          MX
    APT SATELLITE HDG.                 HK              RCENTRO 'A'          MX
  ASIA SATELLITE TELECOM               HK                  SAB              MX
  SINOPEC BEJ YANHUA 'H'               CH              TLEVISA 'CPO'        MX
BRILLIANCE CHINA AUTV.HLDG.            HK               TELMEX 'L'          MX
  CHINA EASTERN AIRL. 'H'              CH              TVAZTCA CPO          MX
     SINOPEC CORP. 'H'                 CH                VITRO 'A'          MX
   CHINA MOBILE (HK) LTD.              HK             NORSK HYDRO          NW
        CNOOC LTD.                     HK               SMEDVIG A          NW
    CHINA STHN.AIRL. 'H'               CH               SMEDVIG B          NW
     CHINA TELECOM 'H'                 CH                STATOIL           NW
  GUANGSHEN RAILWAY 'H'                CH         NATIONAL GRID TRANSCO     UK
   HUANENG PWR.INTL. 'H'               CH                HEAD NV            OE
   JILIN CHEMICAL IND. 'H'             CH            TELEKOM AUSTRIA        OE
    PETROCHINA CO. 'H'                 CH                 MMO2              UK
SINOPEC SHAI.PETROCHEM. 'H'            CH                 BCP R             PT
       PCCW LIMITED                    HK           ELCTDAD.DE PORTL.       PT
       CHINA UNICOM                    HK            PT TELECOM SGPS        PT
  YANZHOU COAL MINING 'H'              CH           BUENAVENTURA CAP        PE
  KOREA ELECTRIC POWER                 KO            TELF.DEL PERU 'B'      PE
       KOOKMIN BK.                     KO            PREMIER FARNELL        UK
     KT CORPORATION                    KO           PHILP.LONG DSN.TEL.     PH
          POSCO                        KO           PHILP.LONG DSN.TEL.     PH
        SK TELECOM                     KO              PRUDENTIAL           UK
      LLOYDS TSB GP.                   UK                PEARSON            UK
      ESPIRITO SANTO                   LX              ANGLOGOLD            SA
       QUINSA PREF                     LX              GOLD FIELDS          SA
       STORA ENSO R                    FN          HARMONY GOLD MINING      SA
          METSO                        FN                 SAPPI             SA
           NOKIA                       FN                 SASOL             SA
      UPM-KYMMENE                      FN                TELKOM             SA
   MITCHELLS & BUTLERS                 UK             REED ELSEVIER         UK
           AMX 'L'                     MX                RIO TINTO          UK
           ASUR                        MX              ROSTELECOM           RS

                                                                                 63
                       Table A2: List of Foreign Companies (cont.)




                                   Country                                           Country
        Company Name              Mneumonic              Company Name               Mneumonic
          TATNEFT                    RS            KINROSS GOLD CORPORATION            CA
         VIMPELCOM                   RS            ENERPLUS RESOURCES FUND             CA
     ROYAL & SUN ALL.IN.             UK                  CGI GROUP INC                 CA
          ABB LTD. R                 SW             SHAW COMMUNICATIONS INC            CA
          ADECCO R                   SW          PRECISION DRILLING CORPORATION        CA
                                              POTASH CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN
        CENTERPULSE                  SW                        INC.                    CA
    CONVERIUM HOLDING R              SW                  PETRO-CANADA                  CA
     CIBA SPLTY.CHEMS. R             SW               CAMECO CORPORATION               CA
       CREDIT SUISSE R               SW           CHC HELICOPTER CORPORATION           CA
         NOVARTIS R                  SW       CANWEST GLOBAL COMMUNICATIONS CORP.      CA
                                                 PETROKAZAKHSTAN INCORPORATED
         SWISSCOM R                  SW                    (Hurricane)                 CA
         SERONO 'B'                  SW           RITCHIE BROS AUCTIONEERS INC.        CA
         SYNGENTA                    SW              GILDAN ACTIVEWEAR INC.            CA
   SHELL TRANSPORT & TRDG.           UK           NOVA CHEMICALS CORPORATION           CA
       SMITH & NEPHEW                UK             CELESTICA INCORPORATED             CA
           SPIRENT                   UK               TELUS CORPORATION                CA
                                              MASONITE INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION
      SCOTTISH POWER                 UK                     (Premdor)                  CA
          TURKCELL                   TK            ROGERS COMMUNICATIONS INC           CA
          TOMKINS                    UK             TRANSALTA CORPORATION              CA
        AU OPTRONICS                 TA                MERIDIAN GOLD INC               CA
    ADVD. SEMICON. ENGNR.            TA        CANADIAN NATIONAL RAILWAY COMPANY       CA
     CHUNGHWA TELECOM                TA                   ENBRIDGE INC                 CA
    TAIWAN SEMICON.MNFG.             TA                   NORANDA INC                  CA
     UNITED MICRO ELTN.              TA            TRANSCANADA CORPORATION             CA
        UNILEVER (UK)                UK             ABITIBI-CONSOLIDATED INC.          CA
       UNITED UTILITIES              UK                   DOMTAR INC.                  CA
           CANTV                     VE                      BCE INC                   CA
      VODAFONE GROUP                 UK                    ALCAN INC                   CA
         WOLSELEY                    UK                 PLACER DOME INC.               CA
   FLETCHER CHAL.FOR.PREF.           NZ         NORTHGATE MINERALS CORPORATION         CA
    FLETCH.CHAL.FORESTS              NZ               ENCANA CORPORATION               CA
 ROYAL GROUP TECHNOLOGIES
          LIMITED                    CA                     IPSCO INC                  CA
    BIOVAIL CORPORATION              CA                    NEXEN INC.                  CA
  CORUS ENTERTAINMENT INC            CA             FOUR SEASONS HOTELS INC            CA
SUNCOR ENERGY INCORPORATED           CA          NORTEL NETWORKS CORPORATION           CA
QUEBECOR WORLD INCORPORATED          CA                  GOLDCORP INC.                 CA
  INTERTAPE POLYMER GROUP
        INCORPORATED                 CA               TALISMAN ENERGY INC              CA
    AGRIUM INCORPORATED              CA            BARRICK GOLD CORPORATION            CA




                                                                                       64
                   Table A2: List of Foreign Companies (cont.)

            Company Name                  Country Mneumonic
           EXTENDICARE INC                       CA
   CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LTD                CA
                 INCO                            CA
   ZARLINK SEMICONDUCTOR INC (Mitel)             CA
       MAGNA INTERNATIONAL INC                   CA
          MDS INCORPORATED                       CA
   CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY LIMITED              CA
     FORDING CANADIAN COAL TRUST                 CA
           CP SHIPS LIMITED                      CA
FAIRMONT HOTELS & RESORT INCORPORATED            CA
      PENGROWTH ENERGY TRUST                     CA




                                                                 65
                    Figure A1: Country Alphas on US Market: Alpha Stats

             0.5


             0.4


             0.3
                                                                      msl 10-Mean
% Per Week




             0.2                                                      msl 10-St Dev
                                                                      msl 5-Mean
                                                                      msl 5-St Dev
             0.1
                                                                      msl 2.5-Mean
                                                                      msl 2.5-St Dev
               0
                    Period 1   Period 2    Period 3   Period 4

             -0.1


             -0.2




                                                                                   66
Appendix 2: Parameter Estimate - Implied Portfolio Model

            The estimates of the model were used to evaluate the decision for a representative
US investor who is deciding on how much to allocate into foreign stock portfolios.
            Under the assumptions of i.i.d., an investor who maximizes expected returns
subject to variance will choose to hold the tangency portfolio given by equation (12) in
the text:
ϖ = V −1 E (r )/ι ' V -1 E (r )                                                         (12)
where V is the variance-covariance matrix of returns and r is the column vector of
portfolio returns.
            Since I want to examine the pattern implied with parameters changing over time, I
examine the conditional version given as:
ϖ t = Vt −1 Et (rt+1 )/ι ' Vt −1 Et (rt+1 )                                             (A1)

Where t subscripts refer to the information set at time t. Thus, Et (rt+1 ) is the conditional

expectation at time t of the return vector realization at t+1 and Vt is the variance-
covariance matrix of returns
            This appendix describes the details of construction of these moments in the
following cases: (a) the two-asset model in Section 1, (b) the three asset model in
Section 2, and (c) the Monte Carlo simulation that provides the confidence intervals for
the model.


(a) Two Asset Model
            For the two asset model, the investor chooses between a market-weighted
portfolio of foreign market indices and the US market. In this case,
rt ≡ ⎡⎣ rt F , rt w ⎤⎦ ≡ ⎡⎣ Xt ' rt , rt w ⎤⎦                                           (A2)

Where rt is an L x 1 vector of the foreign market index returns at time t, Xt is an L x 1

vector of the market weights of the stock market indices in the foreign market portfolio at




                                                                                               67
time t. Note that the returns for each component of rℓt are given by the process in
equation (3) of the text:
rℓt = I(Tτ)[αℓ + βℓ rwt+ uℓ,t],                                    for ℓ = 1, …, L, τ = 1, …, m+1   (3)

where I(Tτ) is an indicator function that time is within a set of time intervals Tτ for τ = 1,
…, m+1. For notational convenience, I hereafter redefine the parameter vector generally
as: δ t = {δτ | t = I −1 (Tτ );τ = 1,..., m + 1}                                                    (A3)

Thus, δ t represents the mapping of the set of parameters within their time subsets Tτ into
the time domain t.
          Then the means and variances of the portfolio vector are given by:
E (rt ) = [ Xt '(α t + β t E ( rt w )), E ( rt w )]'                                                (A4)

And
     ⎛ σ 2 X ' β β ' X + Xt ' U t X t             σ w2 Xt ' βt ⎞
Vt = ⎜ w t t t2 t                                              ⎟                                    (A5)
     ⎝           σ w Xt ' β t                          σ w2 ⎠

Where α t and βt are the L x 1 vector of parameters α t and βt , respectively, for ℓ = 1, …,

L; U t ≡ Et (ut ut ') for u t ≡ [u1t , ... , u Lt ]' , the cross-country variance-covariance matrix;

and σ w2 ≡ E (utw 2 ) .31 Note that in the off-diagonal terms, we have used the fact that:

E (u t utw ) = 0 by construction in estimating equation (3).

          I then use the estimates from the model for each year to calculate the means in
(A4) and the variances in (A5) to form the tangency portfolio in (A1). The portfolios are
created for each year at the end of the year for the following year. The results are plotted
in Figures 5 and 6 in the text.
          These results are repeated for the minimum variance case where E(rw)= E(rF).
(b) Three Asset Model


31
  The calibration model assumes that the residuals to the processes are conditionally homoskedastic in the
time domain, though not in the cross-section. Therefore, the calibration model treats the portfolio variance
as changing over time in response to the evolution of the parameters δ t and Xt. However, these
assumptions are not imposed on the estimation results described in the text.




                                                                                                           68
            For the three asset model, the investor chooses between a market-weighted
portfolio of foreign stocks traded in the US, the portfolio of foreign market indices, and
the US market. In this case, I redefine the return vector to be:
rt ≡ ⎡⎣ rt S , rt F , rt w ⎤⎦ ≡ ⎡⎣ Z t ' rti , Xt ' rt , rt w ⎤⎦                                               (A2’)

Where rti is an N x 1 vector of foreign stock returns for companies listed in the US at

time t, Z t is an N x 1 vector of the market weights of the foreign stocks in the foreign
stock portfolio at time t.
            Note that the returns for each component of rti, are given by the process in
equation (14) of the text:
rti = Ξ (κ ς )[ α ςi +βςi rt + βςiw rtw + eςi ,t ],                     for i = 1, ..., N; ς =1,..., n i + 1
rti = a it + bti rtw + ε ti

where

a it ≡ α i + β i ατ
bti ≡ β i βτ +β iw
ε ti ≡ β i uτ ,t + eit
And where Ξ(κς) is an indicator function for the event that time t is within a set of time
intervals κ ς for ς = 1, …, n+1. I now redefine the parameter vector to map the set of

parameter vectors in both time subsets Tτ and κ ς into parameters in each date t. Thus, δ t

represents the mapping of parameters for countries within their time subsets Tτ into the

time domain t and for stocks within their time subsets κ ς .

            Then the mean of the portfolio vector is given by:
E (rt ) = [ Z t '(α it + b tw E ( rt w )), Xt '(α t + β t E (rt w )), E ( rt w )]'                             (A4’)

Where α it and b tw are the N x 1 vectors of parameters with typical component, a it , and bti ,

respectively, for i = 1, …, N. Then the variance of the three-asset version of the model
can be written:




                                                                                                                   69
     ⎛ σ w2 Zt ' btwbtw ' Zt + Zt ' βit U t βit ' Zt + Zt ' ΩZt   σ w2 Zt ' btwβt ' Xt + Zt ' βit U t Xt σ w2 Zt 'btw ⎞
     ⎜                                                                                                                ⎟
Vt = ⎜           σ w2 Zt ' btwβt ' Xt + Zt ' βit Ut Xt             σ w2 Xt ' βt βt ' Xt + Xt ' U t Xt σ w2 Xt ' βt ⎟
     ⎜⎜                                                                                                               ⎟⎟
      ⎝                       σ w2 Zt ' btw                                   σ w2 Xt ' βt                  σ w2       ⎠
                                                                                                              (A5’)
Where Ω ≡ E (et et ') for et ≡ [e1,t , ... , e tN, ]' and where I have used the fact that E (et rt w ) = 0
by construction in estimation of equation (14). Note that the lower right-hand corner
submatrix of (A5’) is the same as the covariance matrix in the two asset model given in
(A5).
         I then use the estimates from the model for each year to calculate the expected
return vector in (A4’) and the conditional variances in (A5’) to form the tangency
portfolio in (A1). The portfolios are created for each year at the end of the year for the
following year. The results are plotted in Figures 8, 9 and 10 in the text.
(c) Monte Carlo Simulations to Generate Confidence Intervals
To examine the confidence intervals of the calibration model, I used the model above
together with the distributions of the parameters. In particular, I used the distribution
from the joint distribution of the parameters given by the variation in the conditional
mean vector in (A4’) and in the conditional variance matrix in (A5’). The simulation was
conducted for each year in the following steps:
Step 1: For each year, I form the market weights, Z t and Xt , and form the implied mean
and variance-covariance matrix.
Step 2: I then use this mean and variance-covariance of the parameter estimates to
generate a realization of the parameter vector: { α it , β tw , α ti , , βti , w , βiℓt }.
Step 3: Given these generated parameters, I reconstruct the conditional means and
variances in (A4’) and (A5’) and then form the implied tangency portfolio.
Step 4: Steps 1 to 3 are repeated 10,000 times. The 5% and 95% ordinates from the
frequency distribution are retrieved and saved.
                     These steps are repeated for each year from 1970 to 2004.




                                                                                                                    70
                                       References
Adler, Michael; Dumas, Bernard, “International Portfolio Choice and Corporation
Finance: A Synthesis,” Journal of Finance, 38:3, June 1983, pp. 925-84.

Backus, David K.; Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, “International Real Business
Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 100:4, 1991, pp. 745-75.

Baele, Lieven, “Volatility Spillover Effects in European Equity Markets,” Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 40:2, June 2005, pp. 373-401.

Bai, Jushan; Perron, Pierre, “Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple
Structural Changes,” Econometrica, 66:1, January 1998, pp. 47-78.

Bai, Jushan; Perron, Pierre, “Computation and Analysis of Multiple Structural Change
Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18:1, Jan.-Feb. 2003a, pp. 1-22.

Bai, Jushan; Perron, Pierre, “Critical Values for Multiple Structural Change Tests,”
Econometrics Journal, 6:1, 2003b, pp. 72-78.

Baruch, Shmuel; Saar, Gideon. “Asset Returns and the Listing Choice of Firms,” Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Baxter, Marianne; Crucini, Mario J. “Business Cycles and the Asset Structure of Foreign
Trade,” International Economic Review, 36:4, November 1995, pp. 821-54.

Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R; “Time-Varying World Market Integration,”
Journal of Finance, 50:2, June 1995, pp. 403-44.

Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R, “Emerging Equity Market Volatility,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 43:1, January 1997, pp. 29-77.

Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R, “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity
Markets,” Journal of Finance, 55:2, April 2000, pp. 565-613.

Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R; Lumsdaine, Robin L., “Dating the Integration of
World Equity Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 65:2, August 2002, pp. 203-47.

Bekaert, Geert; Hodrick, Robert J., “Characterizing Predictable Components in Excess
Returns on Equity and Foreign Exchange Markets,” Journal of Finance, 47:2, June 1992,
pp. 467-509.

Bekaert, G; Hodrick, R., and Zhang, L., “International Stock Return Comovements,”
NBER Working Paper #311906, December 2005.




                                                                                       71
Bonser-Neal, Catherine; Brauer, Greggory; Neal, Robert; Wheatley, Simon;
“International Investment Restrictions and Closed-End Country Fund Prices,” Journal of
Finance, 45:2, June 1990, pp. 523-47.

Brooks, Robin; Del Negro, Marco. “Country versus Region Effects in International
Stock Returns.” Journal of Portfolio Management, 2005, 31:4, pp. 67-72.

Campbell, John Y; Lo, Andrew W; MacKinlay, A Craig. The econometrics of financial
markets, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997.

Carrieri, Francesca; Errunza, Vihang; Sarkissian, Sergei. "The Dynamics of Geographic
versus Sectoral Diversification: Is there a Link to the Real Economy?" Weiss Center
Working Paper #06-04, March 2006.

Chari, Anusha; Henry, Peter Blair. “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment,” Journal of Finance, 59:3, June 2004, pp. 1295-1324.

Cole, Harold L; Obstfeld, Maurice. “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing:
How Much Do Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 28:1,
August 1991, pp. 3-24.

Doidge, Craig; Karolyi, G. Andrew; Stulz, Rene’ M. "Why Are Foreign Firms Listed In
the U.S. Worth More?" Journal of Financial Economics, 2004, 71:2, pp.205-238.

Doidge, Craig; Karolyi, G. Andrew; Stulz, Rene’ M. “The Valuation Premium for Non-
US Stocks Listed in U.S. Markets,” NYSE Working Paper #05-01, September 2005.

Dumas, Bernard; Solnik, Bruno, “The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk,” Journal
of Finance, 50:2, June 1995, pp. 445-79.

Errunza, Vihung; K. Hogan and M.W. Hung, "Can the Gains from International
Diversification be Achieved Without Trading Abroad?" Journal of Finance, 1999, 54, pp.
2075-2107.

Ferson, Wayne E; Harvey, Campbell R. “The Risk and Predictability of International
Equity Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 6:3, 1993, pp. 527-66.

Foerster, Stephen; and G. Andrew Karolyi; “The Effects of Market Segmentation and
Investor Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence from Foreign Stocks Listing in the U.S.,”
Journal of Finance 54, 1999, pp. 981-1014.

French, Kenneth R; Poterba, James M. “Investor Diversification and International Equity
Markets,” American Economic Review, 81:2, May 1991, pp. 222-26.



                                                                                      72
Gehrig, Thomas, “An Information Based Explanation of the Domestic Bias in
International Equity Investment,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 95:1, 1993, pp.
97-109.

Henry, Peter Blair; “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, 55:2, April 2000, pp. 529-64.

Henry, Peter Blair, “Capital-Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and Economic
Growth,” American Economic Review, 93:2, May 2003, pp. 91-96.

Karolyi, G Andrew, “The World of Cross-Listings and Cross-Listings of the World:
Challenging Conventional Wisdom,” Review of Finance, 10:1, 2006, pp. 99-152.

Lewis, Karen K. “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal
of Economic Literature, June 1999, 37:2, pp. 571-608.

Lewis, Karen K.; Gangadhar Darbha, “International Equity Cross-Listings and Financial
Integration,” Wharton School Working Paper, 2004.

Obstfeld, Maurice, “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 84:5, December 1994, pp. 1310-29.

Pastor, Lubos, “Portfolio Selection and Asset Pricing Models,” Journal of Finance, 55:1,
February 2000, pp. 179-223.

Pesenti, Paolo; van Wincoop, Eric. “Can Nontradables Generate Substantial Home
Bias?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 34:1, February 2002, pp. 25-50.

Stock, James H. “Unit Roots, Structural Breaks and Trends,” Handbook of econometrics
4, 1994, pp. 2739-2841.

Stockman, Alan C; Tesar, Linda L. “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of
the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic
Review, 85:1, March 1995, pp. 168-85.

Tesar, Linda L; Werner, Ingrid M, “Home Bias and High Turnover,” Journal of
International Money and Finance, 14:4, August 1995, pp. 467-92.

Vassalou, Maria, “Exchange Rate and Foreign Inflation Risk Premiums in Global Equity
Returns,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 19:3, June 2000, pp. 433-70.

White, Halbert, “Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 48:4, May 1980, pp. 817-38.



                                                                                         73
