                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        EDUCATIONAL MISMATCH AMONG PH.D.S:
                          DETERMINANTS AND CONSEQUENCES

                                           Keith A. Bender
                                          John S. Heywood

                                        Working Paper 12693
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12693


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2006




The authors thank the National Science Foundation (NSF) and William Rayburn for helping to secure
access to the restricted data and Richard Freeman, Dan Hamermesh, Shulamit Kahn, Kostas Mavromaras
and the participants of seminars at the University of Aberdeen, Scotland, Lancaster University, England,
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, the National Bureau of Economic Research, and the NSF
for helpful comments. The use of NSF data does not imply NSF endorsement of the research methods
or conclusions contained in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Keith A. Bender and John S. Heywood. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Educational Mismatch Among Ph.D.s: Determinants and Consequences
Keith A. Bender and John S. Heywood
NBER Working Paper No. 12693
November 2006
JEL No. J24,J28,J44

                                           ABSTRACT

Using the Survey of Doctoral Recipients, the magnitude and consequences of job mismatch are estimated
for Ph.D.s in science. Approximately one-sixth of academics and nearly one-half of nonacademics
report some degree of mismatch. The influence of job mismatch is estimated for three job outcomes:
earnings, job satisfaction and turnover. Surprisingly large and robust influences emerge. Mismatch
is associated with substantially lower earnings, lower job satisfaction and a higher rate of turnover.
These results persist across a variety of specifications and hold for both academics and nonacademics.
Estimates of the determinants of mismatch indicate that older workers and those in rapidly changing
disciplines are more likely to be mismatched and there is a suggestion that women are more likely
to be mismatched.

Keith A. Bender
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
P.O. Box 413, Bolton Hall 814
Milwaukee, WI 53201
kabender@uwm.edu

John S. Heywood
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee
P.O. Box 413, Bolton Hall 814
Milwaukee, WI 53201
heywood@uwm.edu
                             Educational Mismatch among Ph.D.s:
                               Determinants and Consequences


                       Keith A. Bender        and       John S. Heywood


1. Introduction

According to assignment theory, the returns to investments in human capital vary dramatically

with the quality of the match between the worker and the job (see Sattinger 1993 and Belman

and Heywood 1997). Mismatches between worker skills and job requirements have substantial

costs as workers are either unable to fulfill job requirements or have skills that go unused.

Mismatches waste educational resources resulting in dissatisfied workers (Tsang 1987) and

higher turnover (McGoldrick and Robst 1996). Lower job satisfaction and higher turnover may

reduce formal training and lower labor productivity and so firms' profits (Groot 1993 and Sloane

et al. 1996). Finally, frustration over being mismatched may independently reduce worker effort

(Belfield 2000).

   In this paper we focus on workers with a Ph.D. in science and examine the predicted

consequences of mismatch. First, we examine these workers because they play a key role in

innovation and creating technological progress. As a consequence, economists have estimated

the determinants of productivity for scientists (Levin and Stephan 1991), the adequacy of their

supply (Stephan and Levin 1991, Stephan 1996, National Science Board 2003 and Teitelbaum

2004) and the rewards to their education (Stephan and Everhart 1998). Second, the homogeneity

of this sample allows us to control for variables excluded from typical estimates in examining the

consequences of mismatch. Third, managers concerned with maximizing the impact of their

research and development staff need to understand the relationship between mismatch, job




                                                 1
satisfaction since they influence productivity (Kim and Oh 2002). Finally, substantial

governmental resources are devoted to educating these workers and to improving their diversity.

Yet, concern grows as US university students pursuing advanced degrees in science become less

common and as trained scientists increasingly abandon scientific careers (Preston 2004).

   We are the first to use this group of workers to examine the three major consequences that

have been identified with mismatch: lower earnings, lower job satisfaction and turnover. The

findings are striking. Every measure of mismatch is associated with lower earnings, reduced job

satisfaction and greater turnover even after controlling for a wide range of other explanatory

variables and even given the relative homogeneity of our sample.

   Three major categories of theoretical conjecture explain why mismatches between workers

and jobs persist in equilibrium. First, government subsidization may result in "over education" in

which the general level of educational attainment exceeds that demanded (Freeman 1976).

Second, there may be information problems. If productivity is not known or is revealed only over

a lengthy period, workers may remain mismatched based on signals that need not reflect their

true productivity (Tsang and Levin 1985). Similarly, search and information costs may be large

enough that workers remain mismatched as a cheaper alternative to searching for a new job or to

the firm searching for a new employee. Finally, institutional theories of the labor market have

long contended that internal labor market considerations force employers to base earnings on

easily observable characteristics of the worker and job (Thurow 1975). Thus, institutional issues

within the firm help determine pay and allow mismatches to remain especially when specific

human capital investments bind the worker and firm together across a wide range of pay and

productivity relationships. These concerns may be particularly prominent in science occupations

in which the skill vintage changes rapidly hastening worker mismatch.




                                                 2
    A large empirical literature attempts to measure the consequences of mismatch. While the

measure by which workers have "too much education" varies (Belfield 2000, p. 35 – 37), Groot

and Maasen van den Brink (2000) provide a meta-analysis showing that the over-educated suffer

a 14 percent earnings penalty (also see Chevalier 2003, Dolton and Vignoles 200 and Battu et al.

1999). Yet mismatch goes beyond over-education. Borghans et al. (2000) shows that workers

holding a job unrelated to their field of education suffer significantly diminished earnings. Allen

and van der Velden (2001) measure the wage effects of skill mismatches controlling for both

educational levels and apparent educational mismatches showing that those with unused skills

earn significantly less.

    Psychological theories of expectation suggest that under utilized skills cause diminished job

satisfaction. Those with the greatest education and skills have the highest expectations for their

jobs and careers and are more easily disappointed (Tsang and Levin 1985 and Clark and Oswald

1996). Solomon et al. (1981) and Allen and van der Velden (2001) confirm that both under

utilized skills and skill deficits are associated with significantly diminished job satisfaction.

Belfield and Harris (2002) and Moshavi and Terborg (2003) find that the overeducated suffer

diminished job satisfaction. Yet, the evidence remains mixed as Buchel (2002) presents German

evidence that over-qualified employees have the same job satisfaction as those properly matched.

    Much of the original reason for examining subjective job satisfaction is that it influences real

economic variables including quit rates, shirking and absenteeism (Freeman 1978, Clark and

Oswald 1996). Thus, mismatched workers that have lower job satisfaction will be more likely to

search for a new job. Moreover, reduced productivity associated with mismatch may encourage

employers to seek alternative workers. The consequence is that the turnover rate among the

mismatched should be higher (Wobers 2003 and Allen and van der Velden 2001).




                                                   3
     Unlike the literature reviewed above, we go beyond simply identifying the consequences of

mismatch to ask which reasons for being mismatched have the greatest consequences. We find

that those mismatched because of the lack of jobs or family considerations suffer very large

reductions in wages and job satisfaction. Women who are mismatched because of family

considerations have particularly large reductions in earnings.

     We also estimate the causes of mismatch. The estimations suggest that the vintage of

scientific skills is a critical determinant. In general, scientists are more likely to be mismatched,

and the penalty for mismatch grows when they are older. There is evidence of the traditional

movement from the lab to management for workers in rapidly changing disciplines and the

suggestion that women are more likely to be mismatched all else equal.



2.   Data and Methodology

We draw our primary data from the 1997 and 1999 Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR)

conducted by the National Opinion Research Center for the National Science Foundation. The

SDR is a nationally representative sample of all Ph.D. graduates in the hard and social sciences

prior to 1997 living in the US. Collected in response to the National Research Council's demand

for data that allows the integration of occupational detail and academic training, the SDR is

conducted every other year. The 1997 SDR is the most recent wave asking questions about

overall job satisfaction. It is also the only wave asking what we identify as the secondary

mismatch indicators. We selected all currently employed scientists for which full information

was available yielding a sample of 31,845.1



1
 While much of the data from the SDR are publicly available, we add variables from the restricted use version.
These variables include annual earnings, detailed job codes, race/ethnicity, age and marital status. See the SDR
website at ‘http://sestat.nsf.gov/’ for details on both versions of the SDR data.


                                                         4
   The primary indicator of mismatch comes from responses to the question: "Thinking about

the relationship between your work and your education, to what extent is your work related to

your doctoral degree?" The possible responses are "closely related," "somewhat related" and

"not related." Those scientists working in jobs not related to their education are presumably

using less of the knowledge, training and skills learned in that education. In this critical sense

they may be identified as mismatched. As Table 1 shows, only 7.3 percent of the sample report

their education and job are not at all related, although another 23.4 percent report that their

education and job are only somewhat related.

   Two secondary mismatch indicators probe related aspects of the link between the workers'

scientific education and their current job. The first asks, "Thinking back to when you completed

your degree would you say your work during a typical week on your job is 1) very similar to

what you expected to be doing, 2) somewhat similar to what you expected to be doing or 3) not

very similar to what you expected to be doing." To the extent that expectations upon completing

the doctoral degree reflect the training and experience in their field, those who are far away from

their expectations may also be far away from their training or field. Obviously, expectations

could be imperfect and, if so, one might expect a weaker relationship between this question and

underlying mismatches. The means indicate that 20.6 percent report that their job is not very

similar to what they expected with another 32.5 reporting that their job is only somewhat similar

to what they expected.

   The other secondary question asks, "If you had the chance to do it over again, knowing what

you do now, how likely is it that you would choose the same field of study for your highest

degree?" The answers are "very likely," "somewhat likely" and "not likely at all." While this

question might simply be seen as identifying those who feel they made a bad career choice, it




                                                  5
seems reasonable that those who are mismatched would especially regret their choice of field.

Consistent with evidence that scientists leave their careers in large numbers (Preston 2004), only

slightly more than half of the sample report being very likely to repeat their study for their

highest degree. In sum, these three questions reflect slightly different aspects of the relationship

between education and the workers' current positions. Despite these differences, the three

measures appear highly correlated as we will show shortly.

     Table 2 presents cross-tabulations of the two secondary measures of mismatch with the

primary measure. The top panel shows that the distribution of expectations of the job given the

education is broadly similar to that on how closely the job and education relate. The diagonal

terms are the largest within each column and comprise roughly 60 percent of the sample. The

distribution of the likelihood of repeating the same education is bit less similar to the primary

indicator. The diagonal terms are not the largest in two columns and comprise a smaller share of

the sample. The less than perfect correlation suggests the three measures capture somewhat

different aspects of mismatch and that considering each may be valuable.

   Using these measures, we investigate the effect of mismatch on earnings, job satisfaction and

job change. The earnings measure is annual earnings in 1997 including all wages, salaries,

bonuses, overtime, commissions, consulting fees and net income from business and has an

average of over $70,000. The critical question on job satisfaction asks "How would you rate

your overall satisfaction with your principal job during the week of April 15th?" The choices are

"very dissatisfied," "somewhat dissatisfied," "somewhat satisfied," and "very satisfied." These

responses are ordered values from 1 to 4 with an average of 3.4. Job change information comes

from the 1999 survey which asks workers to identify one of the following: 1) their current job is

different than that held in the 1997 survey but with the same employer; 2) their current job is




                                                  6
different than that they held in the 1997 but with a different employer; 3) they hold the same job

and employer as in 1997 or 4) they hold the same job with a different employer. We view

positive answers to either of the first two options as evidence of a job change. A relatively large

share of sample, 18.3 percent, changed jobs within the two years. We also use only those who

changed employers and jobs as true job changes, and this does not alter the basic results.

     The bottom portion of Table 1 indicates the rich set of demographic and job dimension

variables that we use as controls in an effort to isolate the influence of the indicators of

mismatch. These include race, gender, age, marital status, regional variables, a very large vector

of job dimensions that might influence earnings, job satisfaction and turnover as well as detailed

discipline indicators (see Bender and Heywood 2006 for a detailed list of these indicators).

     Table 3 collects the primary mismatch indicator, earnings, job satisfaction and turnover.

The data is presented separately for each discipline and divided between those holding academic

and nonacademic jobs. Academics in general are much less likely to report any degree of

mismatch (this is true across all three mismatch indicators). Academic economists report the

lowest share of any degree mismatch at only 2.2 percent. Those working in computer science

report a very high degree of mismatch with two-thirds reporting a degree of mismatch. This may

reflect a vintage effect in which the discipline changes very quickly heightening the gap between

skills learned in school and those needed on the job. Such a possibility emphasizes the need to

control for the age of the worker. The single highest degree of mismatch is among those

nonacademics working in "other disciplines." This follows, in part, from construction. This

category includes disciplines other than those in the sciences. Thus, workers in this category are

necessarily working in disciplines other than that in which they were trained.




                                                  7
   In terms of the outcome variables, those groups with better matches on average also have

higher job satisfaction and lower job change. For example, academics, who say that they are

better matched on average, report modestly higher job satisfaction and have much lower

turnover. On the other hand, although more highly matched, academics earn less than

nonacademics in every discipline. Further investigation, simultaneously controlling for other

determinants of earnings, is warranted to see if this correlation holds.



3. Consequences of Mismatch

Table 4 presents typical log linear earnings equations revealing a number of anticipated results.

In both the academic and nonacademic sectors women and blacks earn less, all else equal.

Supervisors, those married, receiving pensions and working full time each earn more. Those

working in the government earn less than those working in the private nonacademic sector. Age

shows the standard concave pattern with earnings. Thus, for the academics in the sample, the

age coefficients do not reflect Ransom's (1993) finding that higher seniority for university

professors is associated with lower salaries, all else equal.

   The results indicate that among academics those who view their primary activity as teaching

earn less and that only those in management science earn more than the excluded group,

economists. Although not reported, those in hard science earn more than 20 percent less than

economists with the gap larger in percentage terms in the nonacademic sector than in the

academic sector.

   Importantly, a large decrement in earnings is associated with the critical mismatch variables.

If academic workers report that their education only relates somewhat, their earnings are 6.9




                                                  8
percent lower holding all else equal.2 The comparable earnings penalty for nonacademic

workers is 4.7 percent. If academic workers report that their education does not relate, their

earnings are 13.8 percent lower. The comparable earnings penalty for nonacademic workers is

9.8 percent. The greater penalty in academia may reflect a greater importance of appropriate

educational credentials or it may be that academic jobs not in a worker's Ph.D. field reflect a

greater degree of mismatch than is true for nonacademic jobs. Recalling that at least one

consensus estimate of the penalty associated with over-education was 14 percent, we are

estimating a mismatch penalty of roughly the same size. This is surprising as those estimates

were taken to measure the influence of having an unnecessary degree. While that may be true

for some of our mismatched workers, it need not be. Workers need only report that they are

working in an area (a subject matter) outside their degree.

       Job satisfaction measures force workers to consider elements of the job in addition to

earnings. These elements include fringe benefits, interactions with coworkers, the value of the

work itself, relations with supervisors, hours and intrinsic rewards to name only a few. As

Hamermesh (2000) argues, job satisfaction measures, at their best, hope to capture the sum of

utility derived from all aspects of the job.

       As the job satisfaction measure is an ordered response, the estimation follows a cumulative

normal in an ordered probit. The results in Table 4 confirm some expectations from past work

on job satisfaction but present a few surprises. Women do not emerge as the "contented

workers" that estimations on general populations often report (Clark 1997). Women in

nonacademic jobs have the same job satisfaction as men while women in academia report lower




2
    The coefficient β is transformed into a percentage change in earnings, e β − 1 .


                                                             9
job satisfaction holding all else constant.3 Blacks report lower job satisfaction as do those

working for larger employers. Many of the other results roughly follow the wage equations with

the married, supervisors, those working full time and those with pensions all reporting higher job

satisfaction. The pattern of discipline effects (suppressed to save space) also follows familiar

lines with those in engineering and the hard sciences reporting lower job satisfaction than the

excluded group, economists, and those in management reporting higher job satisfaction. The age

results do not follow the wage equation with job satisfaction declining with age but at a

decreasing rate. Job satisfaction declines well into mid career before starting to rebound. Ward

and Sloane (2000) find that satisfaction with salary decreases with age for male academics.

    The mismatch variables are associated with substantially lower job satisfaction. For both

academics and nonacademics, working in jobs not related to their education is associated with a

highly significant and large reduction in overall job satisfaction. The magnitude of this influence

is understood by making projections. If we assume all variables are held at their mean levels

except the mismatch variables, we can use the cut points and project the probability of being in

each satisfaction level. As an illustration, if we assume that academic workers have the mean

characteristics and are in jobs closely related to their education, they have a 0.655 probability of

reporting the highest level of satisfaction, very satisfied. If they hold jobs only somewhat related

to their education, the probability of reporting being very satisfied drops to 0.543. Finally, if

they hold a job not at all related to their education, the probability of reporting being very

satisfied is only 0.428. A complete set of projections is available from the authors, but it is

apparent that the marginal influence of mismatch on job satisfaction is very large.




3
 Bender and Heywood (2006) show that while women academics report lower job satisfaction than men, women in
government report the same satisfaction as men while women in business report greater satisfaction than men.


                                                     10
    As discussed, one advantage of the SDR is the ability to follow the workers two years after

the 1997 survey to determine whether or not they have changed their job. This measure of

turnover is a dichotomous measure and becomes the dependent variable in probit specifications

as shown in the last two columns of Table 4. These estimations repeat some familiar patterns.

Those who are supervisors and have fringe benefits are less likely to have changed jobs with the

latter perhaps reflecting deferred compensation that binds workers to employers.4 Job change

becomes more likely with age but eventually turns around and becomes less likely late in life.

This is the inverse of the statistical pattern between age and job satisfaction reinforcing previous

research that job satisfaction is inversely related to changing jobs. Black workers appear no

more likely to change jobs than do white workers while those in large firms are more likely to

change jobs.

    The critical mismatch variables reveal that those working positions not related to their

education have a higher probability of turnover than those in positions closely related to their

education: 9.0 percentage points higher for academics and 6.2 percentage points higher for

nonacademics. Given that the average turnover rate across the two subsamples is slightly above

18 percent, these are very large marginal effects. Again, there is a more muted effect for a

worker being in a field only somewhat related to their education. Among academics, these

workers are 4.5 percentage points more likely to change jobs and among nonacademics, these

workers are 4.2 percentage points more likely to change jobs. The marginal effects for both of

these degrees of mismatch are statistically significant for each subsample.5


4
  Such an implication makes sense to the extent that pensions are back-loaded (as in defined benefit plans – see
Lazear 1979) and to the extent that health insurance creates "job lock" making mobility difficult (Adams 2004).
5
  We altered our definition of job change restricting it to include only those workers who simultaneously changed
jobs and employers. This removes normal promotions from being classified as job changes but runs the risk of
excluding real job changes within an employer. The mismatch coefficients remain statistically significant and of the
same direction. Mismatch continues to increase the probability of job change.



                                                        11
   Our examination of the consequences of mismatch presents a consistent picture. Using this

primary indicator of mismatch, we find routine and robust partial correlations. Mismatch

remains associated with lower wages, lower job satisfaction and an increase probability of

changing jobs.

Other Indicators of Mismatch

   The other survey measures related to mismatch present a similar, if slightly less dramatic,

picture. Our estimates of the earnings equations used precisely the same set of controls as

reported in Table 4 but merely replaced the mismatch variables with their alternatives. As the

first panel in Table 5 shows in specification 2, academics who find their work not very similar to

their expectations at the time of degree completion have 9.2 percent lower earnings while

nonacademics who find their work not very similar to their expectations have 6.4 percent lower

earnings. Academics who report that they would not be very likely to repeat their Ph.D. degree in

the same field have 9.5 percent lower earnings while those nonacademics who report the same

thing have 8.7 percent lower earnings when compared to those very likely to repeat their degree.

All of the coefficients from which these percentage measures are statistically significant at the

five percent level and serve to further confirm the suggestion that mismatch among the highly

educated is associated with reduced earnings.

   The results on job satisfaction are more dramatic with substantially larger declines than those

associated with the original mismatch indicator. Academics whose work is not very similar to

their expectations have a 30.4 percentage point reduction in the probability of being in the

highest satisfaction category compared to those whose work is similar to their expectations (this

is now a marginal effect). Nonacademics whose work is not very similar to their expectations

have a 28.2 percentage point reduction in the probability of being in the highest satisfaction




                                                12
category. Those academics not very likely to repeat their degree have a 40.5 percentage point

reduction in the probability of being in the highest satisfaction category and those nonacademics

whose work is not similar to expectations have a 30.8 percentage point reduction in the same

probability. While these secondary measures may simply be alternative satisfaction measures, it

remains possible that they capture important elements of mismatch as each directs the respondent

to compare their work to an aspect of their education. To the extent this is correct, the results

serve to confirm those presented with the original indicator.

   The two secondary measures of mismatch also reinforce the results on job turnover. Those

academics whose expectations are not very similar are 7.4 percentage points more likely to

change jobs and those nonacademics whose expectations are not very similar are 10.9 percentage

points more likely to change jobs. Academics who would not be likely to repeat their graduate

education are 5.8 percentage points more likely to change jobs and nonacademics who are not

very likely to repeat their graduate education are 6.9 percentage points more likely to change

jobs compared to those who are very likely to repeat their graduate education. Thus, the

secondary measures show a somewhat different pattern on job change that suggests that

mismatch is more likely to result in job change for nonacademics than for academics.

Nonetheless, the general patterns are similar across all three measures and across all three

consequences. All of the coefficients for both levels of mismatch are statistically significant at

the one percent level.

The Role of Reasons for Mismatch

In this section we expand the dimensions of mismatch including in the analysis the reasons that

workers see themselves as mismatched. The SDR asks each respondent who identifies

themselves as in a job that does not at all relate to their education what is the most important




                                                 13
reason why they have taken such a job. The reasons (with percentages giving that reason in

parentheses) include: better pay and promotion opportunities (20.3%), better working conditions

(4.2%), the job's location (4.7%), family-related reasons (5.8%), a job is not available in their

doctoral field (24.5%), a change in career/professional interests (28.6%) or other (11.9%). The

vast majority of workers cite one of three responses: better pay and promotion, the lack of jobs or

changed interests. We transform these into a series of dummy variables to replace the previous

general measure of job and education not at all related.

   Table 6 summarizes earnings regressions in which the reasons for mismatch replace simply

being in a job not very closely related to one's education. It is clear that a change in career

interests is associated with the smallest decline in earnings while being mismatched to improve

pay and promotion opportunities shows up increasing earnings by slightly more than 7 percent.

Once these are controlled for, the other reasons for being mismatched are associated with

remarkably large declines in earnings. Workers mismatched because of no jobs in the field,

suffer a 28.1 percent penalty and those mismatched for family related reasons suffer a 36.4

percent penalty. Approximately one-quarter of those in jobs unrelated to their education identify

no jobs in their field and 7.3 percent of all respondents indicate that their jobs are unrelated to

their education. Thus, slightly less than two percent of the doctoral recipients report being

mismatched because of a lack of jobs in their field.

   The difference by gender is also highlighted in Table 6. The extremes are more pronounced

in the female sample. The gain associated with being mismatched because of a desire for better

pay and promotion shows women earning 22.6 percent more. At the same time, the loss

associated with being mismatched because of family reasons is a staggering 55.9 percent.




                                                  14
Women who cite their family as a reason for their job and education not being related are earning

less than half what would otherwise be the case.

    The augmented job satisfaction estimates reveal that mismatch is never associated with

greater job satisfaction even when it is associated with greater pay or promotion opportunities.

All of the coefficients in the right hand side of Table 6 are negative including that on pay and

promotion opportunities. This pattern suggests that those who leave their doctoral discipline

behind in order to earn more are not pleased with the decision. The need to meet budget

expenses or provide a better standard of living for one's family may come at the cost of working

in an area the scientist would rather pursue. Indeed, Preston (2004) highlights just this kind of

tradeoff in exploring those scientists who choose to work outside of science. While it need not

be the case that all of those mismatched in our sample have left science, working outside one's

education in order to earn more comes with reduced job satisfaction. When looking within

genders, it is clear that even for women who reported a more than 20 percent increase in earnings

associated with working outside their educational field in order to improve pay and promotion

opportunities, the move brought no improvement in job satisfaction. More generally, to the

extent that job satisfaction can be taken as an indicator of utility, the fact that mismatch is never

associated with increased utility (even when associated with increased income) further illustrates

its high social costs.6




6
  The augmented estimation of the turnover equations were also estimated. There were fewer statistically significant
reasons for mismatch. The importance of the absence of jobs and the change in career interests emerged as positive
determinants of turnover. There were no significant negative determinants of turnover and there were few
differences by gender.


                                                        15
4. Using the Panel Data

   One of the important aspects of the SDR is its longitudinal design. While not all variables

are available in all years, we undertake a series of panel estimates to confirm the largely cross-

sectional results of the previous sections. In particular, we are concerned that workers who are

less productive will naturally earn less and, perhaps, be less satisfied and subject to greater

turnover. Yet, the fact that they are less productive also makes such workers more likely to be

mismatched. To the extent that our controls in the cross sectional analysis above do not capture

differences in productivity, the associations we have shown run the risk of merely reflecting

fixed worker effects rather than the true influence of an exogenous mismatch.

   In order to examine this issue, we use five waves of the public use SDR sample for 1993,

1995, 1997, 1999 and 2001. As mentioned, job satisfaction is only available in 1997 and the

finest breakdown by discipline is unavailable in the public use data. An additional limitation of

the public use data is that annual earnings are rounded to the nearest thousand and top-coded at

$150,000. Recognizing these limitations, we use the public use data to estimate an earnings

equation across these five waves (in 2001 dollars). Accounting for individual fixed effects, the

unbalanced panel estimation examines the role of mismatch on earnings. The variables that are

constant across waves such as race and gender drop out of the estimation, while the coefficients

on the mismatch variables reflect the consequences of individual workers changing in the degree

of mismatch. However, these coefficients should be purged of the role of individual effects such

as lower productivity that might simultaneously generate both mismatch and lower earnings.

   Table 7 presents the estimations and reveals that all of the coefficients on the mismatch

variables remain negative and statistically significant. This happens despite the errors in

variables associated with the public use sample. Academics no longer show a larger earnings




                                                 16
penalty for mismatch. Women have a large penalty associated with being somewhat mismatched

but the penalty for education and job not relating at all is essentially the same for men and

women. Most notably, and as anticipated, controlling for fixed effects causes the coefficients

themselves to be smaller. Indeed the percentage penalty associated with mismatch is roughly

half the size, on average, as that estimated in the cross-section. We are quick to emphasize that

this should be taken with care as the specification and construction of the variables differ

between the two sets of estimations. Nonetheless, the fixed effect estimates emerge as smaller

but still routinely negative and statistically significant.

    In addition to controlling for fixed effects, the panel data can help inform the extent to which

mismatch reflects temporary disequilibrium. Rubb (2003) has estimated that less than one in

five overeducated worker moves to being matched within one year. Beginning with the group of

workers that are in jobs either not related or only somewhat related to their education in 1997,

only 25.7 percent reported closely related jobs in 1999 and only slightly more, 27.0 percent,

reported closely related jobs four years later in 2001. Thus, the vast majority of those

mismatched in the core year of our study remain so four years later suggesting that mismatch and

its consequences are persistent.7

The Influence of Age on the Penalty for Mismatch

The complementarity between education and the experience gained working in the field of one's

education may generate a quality and quantity of human capital not generated for those who are

mismatched. As this process of accumulating human capital and receiving a return on that

investment takes time, it seems sensible that the penalty to being mismatched may be small in

the early years of a career but grow larger in the later years of a career. To test this hypothesis

7
 The base group of workers in 1997 differs between these two years because of attrition that is substantial in the
SDR. We did examine the determinants of those who dropped out between 1997 and 1999 finding that mismatch
itself is not a significant determinant.


                                                        17
we added interactions between the mismatch indicators, how closely one's education and job

relate, and the age and age squared variables. These interactions were added to the earnings

specification.

   The results provide broad confirmation that the penalty associated with mismatch is larger

for older workers. The upper left panel of Figure 1 shows the predicted log earnings from a

cross-sectional estimate for a hypothetical female worker with mean female characteristics as she

ages. The upper right panel shows the same cross-sectional estimate for a hypothetical male

worker with mean male characteristics. The pattern generally shows the lower earnings for those

in jobs that only somewhat related and the still lower earnings of those in jobs that do not relate

at all. As anticipated, the size of the penalty associated with mismatch for older workers

typically exceeds that for younger workers. Men face a small penalty early in their careers for

being mismatched, but it grows dramatically. At age 62 the penalty for being in a job that does

not relate at all is $15,498 (20.9 percent) compared with only $725 (1.8 percent) at age 28.

Women appear to face a penalty that starts larger, grows quickly in the early years, leveling off

and actually shrinking slightly very late in their careers. Thus, at age 62 the penalty for being in

a job that does not relate at all is $5,411 (10.4 percent) compared with a large $2,912 (8.6

percent) at age 28.

   On the other hand, it might be argued that these cross-sectional estimates identify differences

across cohorts but give no guide as to what happens when a single cohort ages. The lower panels

of Figure 1 repeat the unbalanced panel wage estimations with the age-mismatch interactions for

the five waves taken from the public use sample. The coefficients on the interactions with age

come from the actual aging of workers as fixed effects hold worker specific determinants

constant. The pattern identified in the cross-sectional estimates is at least as evident in the fixed




                                                 18
effect panel estimates. The size of penalty grows as workers age. While the dollar values of the

penalties are smaller in the panel estimates, the tendency for the penalty to shrink slightly late in

the work life of women is absent. The estimations make clear that more than simple cohort

effects are reflected in the tendency for the mismatch penalty to grow as workers age.



5. Determinants of Mismatch

In an attempt to describe the mismatched we return to our broad mismatch measures and

estimate their determinants. For each of these variables, we use the broad controls examined to

date as potential determinants. As each of the mismatch variables has three ordered responses,

the estimations follow an ordered probit specification measuring the degree of mismatch. In

general, the results suggest that mismatch is likely to result from a dating of scientific skills.

   The first column of Table 8 estimates the extent of mismatch as measured by the closeness of

job and education. The results indicate that the likelihood of mismatch increases with age but at

a decreasing rate. However, the coefficients are such that the likelihood of mismatch increases

(the net coefficient across both terms is positive) until the age of 57. Thus, throughout most of a

scientist's work life the chance of mismatch increases with age. This pattern is reinforced by the

specifications using the other measures of mismatch and tends to indicate that mismatch is

associated with retaining an older vintage of scientific knowledge and skills.

   The married, those working full time and supervisors are less likely to report being

mismatched. Similarly, those in academia and government are less likely to report be

mismatched. Two of the three indicators suggest women are more likely to be mismatched all

else equal.




                                                  19
   Compared to those who do primarily research, those who have a primary activity of teaching

are less likely to be mismatched but those who manage are more likely to be mismatched. The

latter correlation would tend to support the commonly observed career path within private

industry where scientists move from the lab to the front office or within academia where they

leave the lab for administration. Again, this may reflect the vintage of scientific skills. This

transition might be evidenced by the fact that those in the largest employers are more likely to be

mismatched. These workplaces have the largest internal labor markets and longest career ladders

and can more easily make such transitions available to scientists. Interestingly, those who have a

primary activity of using the computer are also more likely to be mismatched. This may reflect

that some of those who are mismatched have been forced to reduce the scope of their knowledge

to a single activity often in a supportive rather than lead research role.

   Finally, the pattern of fields may be seen as further evidence on the role of vintage. The

fields that are least likely to be mismatched are economics (the base category) and other social

science while those among the most likely to be mismatched are hard science, computer science

and health science. Such a pattern might be expected if the vintage of knowledge is less crucial

in the former fields than in the latter fields. Another way of putting this is that the speed of

change in the former fields is much slower than in the latter fields making mismatch less likely.



6. Conclusions

   This paper has examined the consequences of job mismatch among the most highly educated

workers in the economy. These workers of the knowledge economy are often thought to be

critical for technological progress and growth. Understanding the consequences of mismatch is




                                                  20
important when considering governmental policies toward scientific education including issues

of subsidizing students, supporting universities and encouraging technology transfer.

   The evidence assembled here uses three related measures of mismatch from the Survey of

Doctoral Recipients and estimates their influence on three job outcomes: earnings, job

satisfaction and turnover. Mismatch is associated with worse outcomes: lower wages, lower job

satisfaction and higher turnover. This persists across substantial variations in estimation and

holds for academics and nonacademics and for men and women. The size of the influences was

surprisingly large with double digit percentage earnings reductions in earnings, being 20

percentage points less likely to report high job satisfaction and a 1/3 increase in the turnover rate.

The fixed effect panel estimates suggest a statistically significant earnings penalty of about half

the size estimated in the cross-section.

   While this paper has not tried to estimate rates of return (either public or private) on scientific

education, one cannot help but be concerned about the implications of these findings. The

primary mismatch variable indicates one in six academics report a degree of mismatch and

nearly one in two nonacademics report a degree of mismatch. Given the large share of

mismatched workers and the apparently severe consequences of mismatch a thorough review of

policy options would seem in order.

   Our attempts to estimate the determinants of mismatch suggest that there may be substantial

vintage effects at work as the fields in which the knowledge base changes most quickly appear to

be associated with a greater chance of being mismatched. Also, there appears to be confirmation

of the typical pattern of moving from the first line of science research into more administrative

positions as scientists age. Moreover, the influences of the reasons for mismatch are particularly

interesting. Those who are mismatched in an attempt to earn more, do earn more but remain less




                                                 21
satisfied. This is intriguing and suggests greater inquiry into exactly what these individual do

and whether they regret the decision to remain matched. If they do, it might be worth

considering the options for recreating matches.




                                                  22
                                           References

Adams, Scott J. 2004. "Employer-provided Health Insurance and Job Change," Contemporary
      Economic Policy, 22: 357 - 69.

Allen, Jim and Rolf van der Velden. 2001. "Education Mismatches versus Skill Mismatches,"
        Oxford Economic Papers 53: 434 – 52.

Battu, Harminder, Clive Belfield and Peter Sloane. 1999. "Over-education among Graduates: A
       Cohort View," Education Economics 7: 21 – 38.

Belfield, Clive R. 2000. Economic Principles for Education: Theory and Evidence, Cheltenham
        UK: Edward Elgar.

Belfield, Clive R. and R.D.F. Harris. 2002. "How well do Theories of Job Matching Explain
        Variations in Job Satisfaction across Educational Levels? Evidence for UK Graduates,"
        Applied Economics 34: 535 – 48.

Belman, Dale and John S. Heywood. 1997. "Sheepskin Effects by Cohort: Implications of Job-
      Matching in a Signaling Model," Oxford Economic Papers 49: 623 - 37.

Bender, Keith A. and John S. Heywood. 2006. "Job Satisfaction of the Highly Educated: The
      Role of Gender, Academic Tenure and Comparison Income," Scottish Journal of
      Political Economy, 53(2): 253 – 79.

Borghans, Lex, Allard Bruinshoofd and Andries de Grip. 2000. "Low Wages, Skills and the
      Utilization of Skills," in The Overeducated Worker, eds. Lex Borghans and Andries de
      Grip, Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar.

Buchel, F. 2002. "The Effects of Overeducation on Productivity in Germany: The Firm's
       Viewpoint," Economics of Education Review 21: 263 – 75.

Chevalier, Arnaud. 2003. "Measuring Over-education," Economica 70: 509 – 31.

Clark, Andrew E. 1997. "Job Satisfaction and Gender: Why are Women so Happy at Work?"
       Labour Economics 4: 341 – 72.

Clark, Andrew E. and Andrew J. Oswald. 1996. "Satisfaction and Comparison Income," Journal
       of Public Economics 61: 359 – 81.

Dolton, Peter and A. Vignoles. 2000. "The Incidence and Effects of Over-education in the UK
       Graduate Labor Market," Economics of Education Review 19: 179 – 98.

Freeman, Richard. 1978. "Job Satisfaction as an Economic Variable," American Economic
      Review 68: 135 – 41.




                                              23
Freeman, Richard. 1976. The Over-Educated American, New York: Academic Press.

Groot, Wim. 1993. "Overeducation the Returns to Enterprise Related Schooling," Economics of
       Education Review 12: 299 – 309.

Groot, Wim and Henriette Maasen van den Brink. 2000. "Over-education in the Labor Market: a
       Meta-Analysis," Economics of Education Review 19: 149 – 58.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 2000. "The Changing Distribution of Job Satisfaction," Journal of Human
     Resources 36: 1 – 40.

Kim, B. and H. Oh. 2002. "Economic compensation compositions preferred by R& D personnel
      of different R& D types and intrinsic values," R & D Management 32: 47 – 59.

Lazear, Edward P. 1979. "Why is there Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political Economy
       87: 1261 – 84,

Levin, Sharon and Paula Stephan. 1991. "Research Productivity over the Live Cycle: Evidence
       for Academic Scientists," American Economic Review 81: 114 – 32.

McGoldrick, K. and J. Robst. 1996. "Gender Differences in Overeducation: A Test of the Theory
     of Differential Overqualification," American Economic Review 86: 280 - 84.

Moshavi, D. and J. R. Terborg. 2002. "The Job Satisfaction and Performance of Contingent and
      Regular Customer Service Representatives: A Human Capital Approach," International
      Journal of Service Industry Management 13: 333 – 47.

National Science Board. 2003. The Science and Engineering Workforce: Realizing American's
       Potential. Arlington VA: National Science Foundation.

Preston, Anne E. 2004. Leaving Science: Occupational Exit From Scientific Careers, New York:
       Russell Sage Foundation.

Ransom, Michael. 1993. "Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor-Market," American
      Economic Review 83: 221 – 33.

Rubb, S. 2003. "Overeducation: A Short or Long run Phenomenon for Individuals?" Economics
       of Education Review 22: 389 – 94.

Sattinger, Michael. 1993. "Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings," Journal of
       Economic Literature 31: 851 – 80.

Sloane, Peter J., Harminder Battu and Paul Seaman. 1996. "Over-education and the Formal
       Education/Experience and Training Trade-off," Applied Economics Letters 3: 511 -515.




                                              24
Solomon, Lewis C., Laura Kent, Nancy L. Ochsner and Marog-Lea Hurwicz. 1981.
      Underemployed Ph.D.s, Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath and Company.

Stephan, Paula. 1996. "The Economics of Science," Journal of Economic Literature 34: 1199 -
       1235.

Stephan, Paula and S.S. Everhart. 1998. "The Changing Rewards to Science: The Case of
       Biotechnology," Small Business Economics 10: 141 – 51.

Stephan, Paula and Sharon Levin. 1991. "Ph.D. Supply," Issues in Science and Technology 7: 28
       – 29.

Teitelbaum, M.S. 2004. "Do We Need More Scientists?" in The US Scientific and Technical
       Workforce: Improving Data for Decision Making, eds. TK. Kelly, W.P. Buts, S. Carroll,
       D.M. Adamson and G. Bloom, Santa Monica CA: Rand Corporation.

Thurow, Lester. 1975. Generating Inequality, New York, NY: Basic Books.

Tsang, Mun C. and Harold Levin. 1985. "The Economics of Overeducation," Economics of
       Education Review 4: 93 – 104.

Tsang, Mun C. 1987. "The Impact of Underutilization of Education on Productivity: a Case
       Study of the US Bell Companies," Economics of Education Review 6: 239 -54.

Ward, Melanie and Peter J. Sloane. 2000. "Non-Pecuniary Advantages Versus Pecuniary
      Disadvantages: Job Satisfaction Among Male and Female Academics in Scottish
      Universities," Scottish Journal of Political Economy 47: 273 – 303.

Wolbers, M. 2003. "Job Mismatches and their Labor-Market Effects among School-Leavers in
      Europe," European Sociological Review 19: 249 – 66.




                                             25
Table 1: Means of the Variables

                                                All        Academic     Nonacademic
 Mismatch Variables
  Job and Education closely related (excl)      0.693         0.835         0.564
  Job and Education related                     0.234         0.141         0.319
  Job and education not related                 0.073         0.024         0.118
  Job very similar to expectations              0.469         0.617         0.333
  Job similar to expectations                   0.325         0.289         0.359
  Job not very similar to expectations          0.206         0.094         0.308
  Very likely to choose similar field           0.549         0.601         0.503
  Somewhat likely to choose similar field       0.302         0.281         0.320
  Not likely to choose similar field            0.149         0.118         0.177
 Dependent Variables
  Annual salary                               $70,449       $59,881       $80,070
                                              (48905)       (39116)       (54608)
  Satisfaction with job                          3.399         3.426         3.373
                                                (0.741)       (0.734)       (0.747)
  Changed jobs                                   0.183         0.136         0.226
 Demographic Variables
  Female                                        0.230         0.260         0.203
  White, non-Hispanic (excl)                    0.818         0.832         0.805
  Asian, non-Hispanic                           0.133         0.108         0.155
  Hispanic                                      0.023         0.027         0.019
  Black, non-Hispanic                           0.023         0.029         0.017
  Other race, non-Hispanic                      0.004         0.004         0.003
  Age                                          47.5          47.7          47.3
                                               (9.8)        (10.1)         (9.6)
  Age squared                                2352.1        2373.9        2332.3
                                             (966.4)       (989.6)       (944.4)
  Married                                       0.794         0.786         0.802
  Northeast region                              0.078         0.086         0.072
  Middle Atlantic region                        0.163         0.155         0.170
  East North Central region                     0.137         0.155         0.121
  West North Central region                     0.063         0.079         0.048
  South Atlantic region                         0.184         0.162         0.205
  East South Central region                     0.043         0.058         0.029
  West South Central region                     0.079         0.087         0.071
  Mountain region                               0.069         0.067         0.070
  Pacific region                                0.182         0.149         0.213
 Job Variables
   Supervisor                                   0.534         0.497         0.568
   Full time employment                         0.922         0.937         0.909
   Pension is available                         0.817         0.902         0.740
   Profit sharing is available                  0.882         0.953         0.818
   Employer size<1000 (excl)                    0.261         0.117         0.392
   Employer size>1000 & <5000                   0.044         0.051         0.038
   Employer size>5000                           0.695         0.831         0.571
   # memberships in prof. org.                  2.472         2.943         2.042
                                               (1.941)       (2.021)       (1.759)



                                                      26
   Academic Sector                                     0.477             1.000              0.000
   Business Sector (excl)                              0.103             0.000              0.197
   Government Sector                                   0.420             0.000              0.803
   Research is main work activity (excl)               0.407             0.371              0.439
   Teaching is main work activity                      0.218             0.450              0.007
   Management is main work activity                    0.161             0.092              0.225
   Computer work is main work activity                 0.048             0.013              0.080
   Other main activity                                 0.166             0.073              0.250
 Discipline Indicators
   Economics (excl)                                    0.030             0.040              0.020
   Computer                                            0.040             0.006              0.071
   Math                                                0.047             0.081              0.017
   ‘Hard’ Science                                      0.328             0.392              0.269
   Social Science (not Economics)                      0.171             0.198              0.146
   Engineering                                         0.135             0.093              0.172
   Management                                          0.137             0.077              0.192
   Health                                              0.028             0.023              0.032
   Teacher                                             0.040             0.081              0.003
   Other (nonscience) Occupation                       0.045             0.010              0.077
Note: All means are weighted using sample weights. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations for
continuous variables. ‘(excl)’ indicates that this variable was a reference variable in the regressions.




                                                        27
Table 2. Frequency Distribution between Three Mismatch Variables

                                                          How Related is Job and Education
                                         Not Closely Related     Closely Related      Very Closely Related
 Job not very similar to expectations          5.54                    9.14                 4.59
 Job similar to expectations                   0.79                   10.67                21.59
 Job very similar to expectations              0.64                    3.65                43.39

 Not likely to choose same field                2.78                    4.75                  7.39
 Somewhat likely to choose same field           2.10                    8.51                 19.95
 Very likely to choose same field               2.09                   10.21                 42.23




Table 3: Educational Mismatch, Earnings, Job Satisfaction and Turnover by Discipline and Sector

                                      % Closely
Discipline        Sector               Related        % Very Satisfied Average Salary         % Change Jobs
All               Academic               83.5               54.8               $59,881             13.6
                  Nonacademic            56.4               50.9                80,070             22.6
Economics         Academic               97.8               56.6                62,911             10.6
                  Nonacademic            76.5               55.1                88,308             19.5
Social Science    Academic               93.7               55.8                51,986             12.0
                  Nonacademic            88.7               55.7                63,918             14.6
Computer          Academic               38.4               59.9                63,172             26.9
Science           Nonacademic            28.6               43.5                78,025             26.1
Math              Academic               86.9               51.3                56,565             10.2
                  Nonacademic            68.7               50.2                76,758             18.2
Hard Science      Academic               85.9               54.1                56,067             14.4
                  Nonacademic            66.9               48.9                72,572             22.5
Engineering       Academic               87.7               53.8                68,200             11.6
                  Nonacademic            57.2               44.7                80,444             22.3
Management        Academic               55.7               63.9                90,202             18.4
                  Nonacademic            41.9               57.4               104,885             29.3
Health            Academic               50.5               55.6                80,098             19.9
                  Nonacademic            39.8               58.1               101,106             13.7
Other Disciplines Academic               35.0               45.0                39,462             22.9
                  Nonacademic            17.4               48.6                65,627             23.6
Note: % Change jobs – includes those who changed jobs regardless of whether or not they changed employers.




                                                       28
Table 4. Regressions Estimating the Consequences of Mismatch
                                     Ln(Annual Earnings)             Job Satisfaction           Changed Jobs?
                                                     Non-                         Non-                     Non-
 Variable                          Academic       academic      Academic        academic Academic       academic
 Job-Educ somewhat related         -0.072***      -0.048***     -0.327*** -0.347***         0.045***     0.042***
                                  (-5.55)        (-4.03)        (-9.32)       (-13.42)      (3.76)       (3.48)
 Job-Educ not related              -0.148**       -0.103**       -0.522**      -0.461***    0.090***     0.062***
                                  (-3.90)        (-4.76)        (-6.48)       (-10.77)      (3.12)       (3.27)
 Female                            -0.128***      -0.138***     -0.123***        0.026      0.029***     0.037***
                                  (-14.00)       (-9.44)        (-4.69)         (0.911)     (3.19)       (2.93)
 Asian, non-Hispanic               -0.065***      -0.029**      -0.120*** -0.141***         -0.021*     -0.039***
                                  (-4.65)        (-2.32)        (-3.49)        (-4.76)    (-1.71)      (-2.74)
 Hispanic                          -0.046***       0.008          0.058         -0.077      -0.002       -0.062**
                                  (-2.77)         (0.22)         (0.94)        (-1.14)    (-0.08)      (-2.53)
 Black, non-Hispanic               -0.028         -0.011        -0.163***       -0.141**    -0.017        0.023
                                  (-1.63)        (-0.35)        (-2.86)        (-2.01)    (-1.04)        (0.69)
 Other race, non-Hispanic          -0.151***      -0.011         -0.248*        -0.245      -0.004        0.135
                                  (-4.12)        (-0.17)        (-1.77)        (-1.38)    (-0.10)        (1.50)
 Age                                0.066***       0.087***     -0.057*** -0.065*** -0.041*** -0.044***
                                  (16.36)       (16.07)         (-5.64)        (-6.67)    (-12.78)     (-10.14)
 Age squared                       -6.6E-2*** -8.7E-2*** 7.1E-4*** 7.4E-4*** 4.1E-4*** 4.4E-4***
                                  (-12.57)      (-14.24)         (6.93)         (7.31)    (12.67)        (9.83)
 Married                            0.036***       0.098***       0.156***       0.149***   -0.016        0.012
                                   (3.63)         (6.45)         (5.46)         (5.16)    (-1.64)        (0.98)
 Supervisor                         0.123***       0.108***       0.110***       0.152*** -0.033*** -0.031***
                                  (14.51)         (9.11)         (4.22)         (6.07)    (-3.62)      (-2.76)
 Full time                          0.533***       0.632***      -0.037          0.105**    -0.051**    -0.071***
                                  (16.72)       (17.26)         (-0.74)         (2.24)    (-2.55)      (-3.34)
 Pension                            0.303***       0.132***       0.192***       0.132*** -0.059*** -0.051***
                                  (15.09)         (7.37)         (4.60)         (3.48)    (-3.77)      (-2.83)
 Health insurance                   0.427***       0.070**        0.055        -0.279***    -0.054**     0.063***
                                  (10.39)         (2.58)         (0.91)        (-5.95)    (-3.27)        (3.20)
 Profit sharing                     0.027          0.100***       0.109*         0.189***   -0.007       -0.025**
                                   (1.39)         (8.98)         (1.89)         (6.97)    (-0.39)      (-2.13)
 Empl size>1000 & <5000             0.044**       -0.013          0.041        -0.296***    -0.027       0.093***
                                   (1.97)        (-0.49)         (0.66)        (-5.34)    (-1.42)        (3.28)
 Empl size>5000                     0.048***       0.034**       -0.077**      -0.195***     0.023**     0.066***
                                   (3.41)         (2.41)        (-2.03)        (-6.44)      (2.02)       (4.83)
 # prof. memberships                0.032***       0.024***       0.028***       0.016**   -0.010***     -0.003
                                  (14.28)         (7.44)         (4.42)         (2.18)    (-4.91)      (-1.09)
 Gov’t, nonacademic                               -0.178***                     -0.023
                                                (-13.10)                       (-0.66)
 Teaching is main activity         -0.135***      -0.083         -0.050*         0.383***               -0.043***
                                  (-14.42)       (-0.93)        (-1.70)         (2.72)                 (-2.92)
 Manag. is main activity           -0.005         -0.003         -0.055        -0.097*** -0.041***       -0.040
                                  (-0.26)        (-0.17)        (-0.98)        (-2.70)    (-4.32)      (-0.65)
 Computer is main activity         -0.099**        0.033*        -0.257**       -0.092*      0.022       0.048***
                                  (-2.35)         (1.67)        (-2.33)        (-1.90)      (1.25)       (2.89)
 Other main activity                0.016          0.014         -0.017        -0.121***     0.013       -0.042**
                                   (0.75)         (0.76)        (-0.33)        (-3.30)      (0.38)     (-1.98)
Note: The number under the coefficient estimates are t-statistics. All estimates use sample weights and include
controls for region of the country. Significance: ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. Discipline
indicators estimated but not reported. Cut points and constants also estimated where appropriate.

                                                        29
Table 5: Comparing Consequences across Different Measures of Mismatch

                                                    Academic          Nonacademic
Log Annual Earnings Regression
Specification 1   Education relates                    -0.072***           -0.048***
                                                      (-5.55)             (-4.03)
                     Educ does not relate              -0.148***           -0.103***
                                                      (-3.90)             (-4.76)
Specification 2      Similar to expectations           -0.031***           -0.050***
                                                      (-3.57)             (-4.15)
                     Not very similar                  -0.096***           -0.066***
                                                      (-5.19)             (-4.67)
Specification 3      Somewhat likely                   -0.050***           -0.060***
                                                      (-5.67)             (-5.13)
                     Not very likely                   -0.100***           -0.091***
                                                      (-7.51)             (-5.89)

Job Satisfaction ordered probit regression (marginal effects)
Specification 1      Education relates               -0.130***            -0.138***
                                                     (9.39)             (-13.59)
                     Educ does not relate            -0.204***            -0.180***
                                                    (-6.83)             (-11.27)
Specification 2      Similar to expectations         -0.234***            -0.199***
                                                  (-23.60)              (-18.74)
                     Not very similar                -0.304***            -0.282***
                                                  (-19.48)              (-23.03)
Specification 3      Somewhat likely                 -0.238***            -0.179***
                                                  (-24.06)              (-18.23)
                     Not very likely                 -0.405***            -0.308***
                                                  (-37.37)              (-28.40)

Change Jobs probit regression (marginal effects)
Specification 1    Education relates                    0.045***             0.042***
                                                       (3.76)               (3.48)
                     Educ does not relate               0.090***             0.062***
                                                       (3.12)               (3.27)
Specification 2      Similar to expectations            0.038***             0.070***
                                                       (4.26)               (5.31)
                     Not very similar                   0.074***             0.109***
                                                       (4.48)               (7.13)
Specification 3      Somewhat likely                    0.039***             0.026***
                                                       (4.31)               (2.25)
                     Not very likely                    0.058***             0.070***
                                                       (4.07)               (4.83)
Notes: Each specification includes the covariates listed in Tables 4-6, except where the measures of educational
mismatch are replaced by the mismatch measures listed in this table. Significance: *** at the 1 percent level.
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics (for the earnings regression) or asymptotic z-statistics (job satisfaction and
change jobs regressions). The results for the job satisfaction ordered probits are marginal effects of the probability
of being in the highest job satisfaction category, holding all other variables at their mean value.




                                                          30
Table 6: Selected Earnings and Job Satisfaction Regressions Results – Simple and Augmented for Reasons for
Mismatch

                                                      Log Annual Earnings                  Job Satisfaction
                                                      Male          Female               Male           Female
Specification 1
 Job-Education Somewhat Related                     -0.039***         -0.069***        -0.144***        -0.120***
                                                   (-3.65)           (-3.59)         (-15.15)          (-8.05)
 Job-Education Not at all Related                   -0.094***         -0.116***        -0.188***        -0.165***
                                                   (-4.47)           (-2.73)         (-11.64)          (-6.37)
                2
 r-squared or       statistic                        0.353             0.336         952.40***        350.44***

Specification 2
 Job Education Somewhat Related                      -0.062***         -0.084***        -0.141***        -0.121***
                                                     (5.93)            (4.38)          (14.82)           (8.03)
 Pay and Promotion Opportunities                      0.050             0.203**         -0.135***        -0.059
                                                     (1.43)            (2.29)           (4.45)           (0.93)
 Working Conditions                                  -0.244***         -0.203           -0.007           -0.104
                                                     (2.82)            (1.14)           (0.10)           (1.05)
 Job Location                                        -0.313***         -0.220*          -0.249***        -0.045
                                                     (4.49)            (1.93)           (4.15)           (0.43)
 Family Related Reasons                              -0.228**          -0.444***        -0.285***        -0.183***
                                                     (2.47)            (3.77)           (5.39)           (3.20)
 Job Not Available in Field                          -0.257***         -0.201**         -0.335***        -0.353***
                                                     (6.27)            (2.48)          (16.60)         (11.35)
 Change in Career / Professional Interests           -0.058            -0.104           -0.034           -0.025
                                                     (1.59)            (1.52)           (1.17)           (0.49)
 Other Reason                                        -0.168**          -0.239**         -0.256***        -0.273***
                                                     (2.33)            (2.10)           (6.19)           (5.71)
 r-squared or 2 statistic                             0.377             0.368         1052.1***        405.9***
Notes: Significance: ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. Numbers under coefficient estimates
are t-statistics. Marginal effects from the job satisfaction ordered probit regressions are shown for the probability of
being in the highest job satisfaction category. The probability for males and females to be in the highest job
satisfaction category (based on average characteristics) is 0.537 and 0.502, respectively. All variables from Table 4
are also included in the estimations.




                                                          31
Table 7: Mismatch Earnings Penalties from Fixed Effects Regressions

 Variable                                   Full       Academic      Nonacademic        Female          Male
 Job-Education somewhat related          -0.019***     -0.020***      -0.017***        -0.019**       -0.011***
                                        (-5.58)       (-4.00)        (-3.38)          (-2.31)        (-2.95)
 Job-Education not at all related        -0.073***     -0.028**       -0.069***        -0.058***      -0.059***
                                       (-11.39)       (-2.42)        (-8.24)          (-3.92)        (-8.47)

 R-sq: within                               0.174          0.181          0.117           0.139         0.181
 R-sq: between                              0.267          0.308          0.163           0.174         0.216
 R-sq: overall                              0.245          0.280          0.155           0.166         0.198
 Variance of fixed effect                   0.469          0.444          0.525           0.525         0.457
 Variance of the error term                 0.314          0.264          0.328           0.363         0.297
 rho                                        0.691          0.738          0.719           0.677         0.704
Notes: Variables are in comparison to those who report their job and education are closely matched. The number
under the coefficient estimates are t-statistics. Significance: ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.
Data are from the 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001 SDR public use files. Earnings are in 2001 dollars. Other
controls include: age, age squared, supervises individuals, full time contract, US citizenship, main activity is
teaching, main activity is management, main activity is computer work, main activity is other, and principle job is
mid/top level manager. ‘rho’ is the proportion of the variance due to the fixed effect.




                                                         32
Table 8. Determinants of Mismatch

                                       Job and                        Likelihood of
                                    Education Not    Expectations     Not adopting
 Variable                              Related       Not Similar     the same Field
 Female                                  0.002            0.015***         0.009**
                                        (0.88)           (3.00)           (2.07)
 Asian, non-Hispanic                     3.3E-04         -0.020***         0.073***
                                        (0.17)          (-3.48)         (11.19)
 Hispanic                               -0.002           -0.004           -0.010
                                       (-0.66)          (-0.29)          (-0.93)
 Black, non-Hispanic                     0.002           -0.009            0.003
                                        (0.45)          (-0.76)           (0.23)
 Other race, non-Hispanic                0.005           -0.003            0.013
                                        (0.41)          (-0.10)           (0.49)
 Age                                     0.002***         0.016***         0.010***
                                        (3.77)           (8.98)           (6.42)
 Age squared                            -2.0E-5***     -1.4E-04***        -1.2E-4***
                                       (-3.24)          (-7.71)          (-7.59)
 Married                                -0.007***        -0.016***        -0.014***
                                       (-3.75)          (-3.02)          (-2.89)
 Supervisor                             -0.012***        -0.022***        -0.031***
                                       (-7.39)          (-4.76)          (-7.40)
 Full time                              -0.008**         -0.036***        -0.013
                                       (-2.27)          (-3.58)          (-1.56)
 Pension                                -0.013***        -0.008           -0.033***
                                       (-4.52)          (-1.09)          (-4.61)
 Health insurance                        0.002           -9.6E-04          0.023***
                                        (0.83)          (-0.10)           (2.88)
 Profit sharing                          0.004**          5.5E-04         -0.017***
                                        (2.18)           (0.09)          (-3.19)
 Employer size>1000 & <5000              0.006            0.011            0.015
                                        (1.32)           (0.97)           (1.42)
 Employer size>5000                      0.007***         0.005            0.016***
                                        (3.73)           (0.78)           (3.17)
 Academic                               -0.035***        -0.113***        -0.039***
                                     (-15.20)         (-17.67)           (-6.74)
 Government                             -0.010***        -0.010           -0.006
                                       (-4.65)          (-1.30)          (-0.84)
 Teaching is main activity              -0.012***        -0.020***        -0.014**
                                       (-5.69)          (-3.08)          (-2.54)
 Management is main activity             0.039***         0.155***         0.043***
                                      (10.13)          (15.80)            (5.69)
 Computer is main activity               0.060***         0.140***         0.068***
                                        (8.31)           (8.58)           (5.15)
 Other main activity                     0.024***         0.072***         0.036***
                                        (6.84)           (8.25)           (4.94)




                                                     33
 Table 8 continued
 Computer discipline                          0.257***          0.250***          0.020
                                             (8.56)            (8.46)            (1.09)
 Mathematics discipline                       0.051***          0.028            -0.002
                                             (3.81)            (1.50)           (-0.14)
 ‘Hard’ science discipline                    0.045***          0.048***          0.025*
                                             (5.39)            (3.07)            (1.92)
 Social Science discipline                   -0.016***         -0.072***         -0.011
                                            (-3.32)           (-5.72)           (-0.89)
 Engineering discipline                       0.078***          0.087***          0.006
                                             (5.73)            (4.63)            (0.43)
 Management science discipline                0.148***          0.209***          0.010
                                             (7.78)            (9.17)            (0.73)
 Health science discipline                    0.231***          0.109***         -0.003
                                             (7.86)            (4.37)           (-0.20)
 Teacher discipline                           0.144***          0.087***          0.029*
                                             (6.34)            (3.87)            (1.73)
 Other (nonscience) discipline                0.411***          0.446***          0.091***
                                           (12.21)           (15.66)             (4.47)
 Chi-squared                             4839.7***         4912.5***           903.6***
Note: The number under the coefficient estimates are t-statistics. The coefficients are the marginal effects of being
in the most mismatched category from ordered probit estimations. All estimates use sample weights and include
controls for the region of the country. Significance: ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.




                                                         34
Figure 1. Cross-Section and Panel Based Age-Earnings Profiles by Gender and Degree of Mismatch
                                                     Age-Earnings Profile by Degree of Mismatch for the Female Sample                                                                                                    Age-Earnings Profile by Degree of Mismatch for the Male Sample
                                                                           Based on Cross Section Estimates                                                                                                                                  Based on Cross Section Estimates


                             90000                                                                                                                                                             90000



                             80000                                                                                                                                                             80000



                             70000                                                                                                                                                             70000
 Projected Annual Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                   Projected Annual Earnings
                             60000                                                                                                                                                             60000



                             50000                                                                                                                                                             50000



                             40000                                                                                                                                                             40000



                             30000                                                                                                                                                             30000



                             20000                                                                                                                                                             20000
                                     25
                                     26
                                     27
                                     28
                                                29
                                                30
                                                31
                                                32
                                                            33
                                                            34
                                                            35
                                                            36
                                                                        37
                                                                        38
                                                                        39
                                                                        40
                                                                                     41
                                                                                     42
                                                                                     43
                                                                                     44
                                                                                                45
                                                                                                46
                                                                                                47
                                                                                                48
                                                                                                49
                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                51
                                                                                                                52
                                                                                                                53
                                                                                                                                54
                                                                                                                                55
                                                                                                                                56
                                                                                                                                57
                                                                                                                                       58
                                                                                                                                       59
                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                       61
                                                                                                                                                   62
                                                                                                                                                   63
                                                                                                                                                   64
                                                                                                                                                   65




                                                                                                                                                                                                       25
                                                                                                                                                                                                       26
                                                                                                                                                                                                       27
                                                                                                                                                                                                       28
                                                                                                                                                                                                       29
                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                       31
                                                                                                                                                                                                       32
                                                                                                                                                                                                       33
                                                                                                                                                                                                       34
                                                                                                                                                                                                       35
                                                                                                                                                                                                       36
                                                                                                                                                                                                       37
                                                                                                                                                                                                       38
                                                                                                                                                                                                       39
                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                       41
                                                                                                                                                                                                       42
                                                                                                                                                                                                       43
                                                                                                                                                                                                       44
                                                                                                                                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                                                                                                       46
                                                                                                                                                                                                       47
                                                                                                                                                                                                       48
                                                                                                                                                                                                       49
                                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                                                                                       51
                                                                                                                                                                                                       52
                                                                                                                                                                                                       53
                                                                                                                                                                                                       54
                                                                                                                                                                                                       55
                                                                                                                                                                                                       56
                                                                                                                                                                                                       57
                                                                                                                                                                                                       58
                                                                                                                                                                                                       59
                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                       61
                                                                                                                                                                                                       62
                                                                                                                                                                                                       63
                                                                                                                                                                                                       64
                                                                                                                                                                                                       65
                                                                                                Age                                                                                                                                                               Age

                                                                             Closely Relates    Relates       Does not relate                                                                                                                  Closely Relates    Relates       Does not relate




                                                     Age-Earnings Profile by Degree of Mismatch for the Female Sample
                                                                               Based on Panel Estimates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Age-Earnings Profiles by Degree of Mismatch for the Male Sample
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Based on Panel Estimates

                             90000
                                                                                                                                                                                               90000



                             80000
                                                                                                                                                                                               80000



                             70000                                                                                                                                                             70000
 Projected Annual Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                   Projected Annual Earnings

                             60000                                                                                                                                                             60000



                             50000                                                                                                                                                             50000



                             40000                                                                                                                                                             40000



                             30000                                                                                                                                                             30000



                             20000                                                                                                                                                             20000
                                     25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65                                        25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65
                                                                                                Age                                                                                                                                                               Age

                                                                             Closely Relates    Relates       Does not relate                                                                                                                  Closely Relates    Relates       Does not relate




                                                                                                                                                                  35
