                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE ECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

                                           Hamid Mehran
                                           Rene M. Stulz

                                        Working Paper 12695
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12695


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2006




Federal Reserve Bank of New York and The Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI. We are grateful
for comments from Steve Buser, Harry DeAngelo, Luc Laeven, Maureen McNichols, Ross Levine,
Alexander Ljungqvist, Roger Loh, Bill Schwert, Jerome Taillard, Kent Womack, Ayako Yasuda, and
two anonymous referees. We thank Roger Loh for excellent scientific assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2006 by Hamid Mehran and Rene M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Economics of Conflicts of Interest in Financial Institutions
Hamid Mehran and Rene M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 12695
November 2006
JEL No. G14,G21,G24,G28

                                                ABSTRACT

A conflict of interest exists when a party to a transaction could potentially make a gain from taking
actions that are detrimental to the other party in the transaction. This paper examines the economics
of conflicts of interest in financial institutions and reviews the growing empirical literature (mostly
focused on analysts) on the economic implications of these conflicts. Economic analysis shows that,
although conflicts of interest are omnipresent when contracting is costly and parties are imperfectly
informed, there are important factors that mitigate their impact and, strikingly, it is possible for customers
of financial institutions to benefit from the existence of such conflicts. The empirical literature reaches
conclusions that differ across types of conflicts of interest, but overall these conclusions are more ambivalent
and certainly more benign than the conclusions drawn by journalists and politicians from mostly anecdotal
evidence. Though much has been made of conflicts of interest arising from investment banking activities,
there is no consensus in the empirical literature supporting the view that conflicts resulting from these
activities had a systematic adverse impact on customers of financial institutions.

Hamid Mehran
33 Liberty Street
New York, New York 10045
Hamid.Mehran@ny.frb.org

Rene M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
      Since the turn of the century, much attention has been focused on conflicts of interest in the

financial industry. A Google search (July 2006) for “conflict of interest” has more than one

hundred and fifty million hits. The front pages of major newspapers and the evening news

discussed conflicts of interest. Politicians held hearings and made speeches. Lawsuits were filed

by the bushel. Laws and regulations were changed. Books were written. The Financial Times

summarized public sentiment with the headline “Shoot all the analysts”.1 No event symbolizes

this attention better than the Global Settlement reached on April 28, 2003 between the Securities

and Exchange Commission (SEC), the National Association of Security Dealers (NASD), the

New York State attorney, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), and state regulatory agencies

on the one hand, and ten of the most prominent financial institutions on the other hand.2 The

Global Settlement imposed penalties of more than $1.4 billion on these institutions and required

them to agree to practices presumed to limit the impact of conflicts of interest on securities

research.

      For economists, the recent attention paid to conflicts of interest in the financial industry raises

many questions. Do the many mechanisms that control conflicts of interest in market economies

fail to do so? If these mechanisms fail, does it mean that the conflicts have significant

implications for the prices at which securities trade? For the efficiency of capital markets? For the

welfare of customers of financial institutions? Were conflicts worse at the turn of the century than

at other times? If they were, why? Does diversification of activities within financial institutions

make conflicts of interest worse or better? Did attempts to affect the impact of conflicts of interest

through changes in laws and regulations make the customers of financial institutions better off?

Did these changes have unintended consequences that made U.S. capital markets less efficient

and less competitive?



1
    Cited in Boni and Womack (2002).
2
    Two additional institutions joined the agreement in 2004.


                                                       2
    In this paper, we define a conflict of interest as a situation where a party to a transaction

could potentially make a direct gain by taking actions that affect the other party adversely. For

example, in the context of sell-side analysts, a conflict of interest would arise if a financial

institution were to obtain a direct advantage, for instance, potential underwriting fees, from

offering biased research about a firm to customers of its analyst services.3 Some authors use a

much narrower definition of conflicts of interest. In particular, some define conflicts of interests

as situations in which a party with a fiduciary duty takes actions that are inconsistent with that

fiduciary duty. 4 Such a definition is not useful for economic analysis because it presumes that the

existence of incentives to take actions that are inconsistent with a fiduciary duty automatically

leads the fiduciary to take such actions. This is clearly not the case. Another definition assumes

that conflicts of interest arise if one party is somehow in a position of trust.5 This definition again

seems too limiting. If one party provides a service to another, is it really clear when the provider

is in a position of trust and when she is not?

    The existence of a conflict of interest within a financial institution does not mean that, in

equilibrium, the conflict will have an adverse impact on the customers of financial institutions.

Using analysts as an example, the existence of conflicts could lead institutions to provide better

forecasts so that customers benefit. Perhaps more importantly, many mechanisms help control

conflicts of interest and their impact. For instance, a financial institution’s concerns about its

reputation might lead it to control conflicts of interest so that they have no material impact on its

customers. Further, even if conflicts of interest affect the actions of financial institutions, they

may not hurt their customers because these customers can rationally take into account how these
3
  Sell-side analysts are analysts who typically work for brokerage firms. Buy-side analysts work for
institutional investors. In this paper, we focus almost exclusively on sell-side analysts. Consequently, we do
not make a distinction between both types of analysts in the rest of the paper and use the term analyst to
designate a sell-side analyst.
4
  West’s Encyclopedia of American Law defines conflicts of interest as “A term used to describe the
situation in which a public official or fiduciary who, contrary to the obligation and absolute duty to act for
the benefit of the public or a designated individual, exploits the relationship for personal benefit, typically
pecuniary.”
5
  The on-line version of the Merriam-Webster dictionary has the following definition: “a conflict between
the private interests and the official responsibilities of a person in a position of trust”.


                                                      3
conflicts affect what financial institutions do. It follows from this discussion that even though one

party could make a potential gain from taking actions that affect the other party in a transaction

adversely, it may choose not to do so because these actions have large indirect costs, and if it does

so, these actions may not hurt the other party because it may anticipate such actions.

Consequently, the nature of the impact of conflicts of interest on the customers of financial

institutions is an empirical issue.

    Information plays a critical role in transactions involving financial institutions. In many

transactions, financial institutions are better informed than their customers. Such information

asymmetries are a fertile ground for conflicts of interest. Whenever two parties transact, each

party wants to maximize its gain from the transaction. Each party takes into account the

incentives of the other party and is aware that the other party enters the transaction to profit from

it. When both parties have full information about the attributes of the good being transacted,

when that information is fully verifiable, and when contracting is costless, no party has incentives

to take actions that adversely affect the other party because the buyer receives exactly what she

pays for. For instance, if one party buys a gold bar from another party, it is easy for the buyer to

verify that she is receiving gold. There is a liquid market for gold which facilitates agreement of

the parties on a price. Once the gold is acquired, its value does not depend on actions of the seller.

    In the absence of full information, verifiability, and costless contracting, conflicts of interest

are omnipresent in economic transactions because the buyer may not be able to observe the

quality of the good purchased, the seller may affect the quality of the good in ways that are not

observable by the buyer, and the buyer may not be able to prove that the seller did so. However,

as long as the parties to a transaction form their expectations rationally, there is no reason for the

buyer to be victimized by the fact that the seller’s objective is to benefit as much as possible from

the transaction. The buyer will only enter the transaction at a price that is advantageous enough to

cover the risks associated with conflicts of interest. The seller bears the costs of conflicts of




                                                  4
interest and has incentives ex ante to reduce their incidence on the seller as long as it is cost-

effective to do so.

    In this paper, we assess the economic issues surrounding conflicts of interests within financial

institutions, review the existing literature, and explain how the papers collected in this special

issue improve our understanding of these issues. The papers in this issue are some of the papers

presented at a conference jointly organized by the Dice Center for Research in Financial

Economics at the Ohio State University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Journal

of Financial Economics in December 2004. There is a growing literature on conflicts of interest –

on SSRN, 397 papers had “conflicts of interest” in the title or in the abstract as of July 2006. Our

review is selective and should be viewed as such. It pays a lot more attention to the analyst

conflicts of interest than to other conflicts because they have attracted the most attention from the

public, from the regulators, and from academic researchers.6

    The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we define conflicts of interest and

provide examples of such conflicts in financial institutions. We then turn in Section 2 to the issue

of why these conflicts exist. In Section 3, we discuss the mechanisms that moderate and control

the adverse impact of these conflicts. We review in Section 4 the evidence on whether these

conflicts affect customers of financial institutions adversely. In Section 5, we evaluate how recent

changes in laws and regulations addressing these conflicts affect the welfare of customers of

financial institutions and the efficiency of capital markets. We conclude in Section 6.



1. What forms do conflicts of interest take in financial institutions?

    As emphasized by Bolton, Freixas, and Shapiro (this issue), financial institutions have better

information about the suitability of particular financial products for their customers than the

customers have. Conflicts of interest naturally follow from the difficulties that the customers of


6
  We focus on analysts only from the perspective of conflicts of interest. For a recent review of the analyst
literature in general, see Ramnath, Rock, and Shane (2006).


                                                     5
financial institutions have in ascertaining the quality of the advice given to them. Bolton, Freixas,

and Shapiro analyze the situation where the customer cannot assess the accuracy of the advice

received from a financial institution about whether a financial product is the most appropriate

product for her. In such a situation, conflicts of interest could taint the advice. For instance, if the

financial institution does not sell the product that is appropriate, but another institution does, its

representative might lose a commission and the financial institution would lose the profits

associated with the sale by recommending to the customer to go elsewhere. The representative

may hence recommend a product that imperfectly suits the needs of the customer.

    Analyst forecasts and recommendations do not completely fit into that framework.

Historically, the main consumers of analyst reports were institutional investors. Typically,

institutional investors can assess the quality of an analyst report and could even produce the

output they obtain from sell-side analysts if they had to. They rely on sell-side analysts because

their product provides different perspectives and they do not pay for it directly. However, since

the 1990s, some analyst output has become increasingly available to retail investors. With retail

investors, information asymmetries are magnified – the typical retail investor could not write an

analyst report on her own. This problem is aggravated by the fact that media outlets typically

focus on selected information from reports and ignore the caveats. For instance, websites such as

Yahoo! Finance freely make available stock recommendations from a large number of analysts.

Further, while a report may have important and detailed information about potential conflicts of

interest, such information does not fit in a 30-second summary by a journalist or interview of an

analyst.

    Many observers have argued, at least before the recent reforms, that the advice of analysts

was tainted when these analysts belonged to firms with investment banking operations or with

brokerage operations.7 It is claimed that by offering optimistic advice, analysts might have made


7
  The following quote represents this view: “Ostensibly, the job of the analysts was to recommend what
stocks investors should purchase. But throughout the 1990s, they gave credibility to the overvalued markets


                                                    6
it easier for investment bankers to develop and maintain profitable relationships with firms.

Anecdotes that analysts issued buy recommendations on stocks that they sold from their personal

trading accounts generated strong reactions in the press and the investing public. Though sales

from personal accounts can be consistent with legitimate portfolio rebalancing needs or liquidity

shocks, they can also be consistent with analysts disbelieving their own advice.

    Another conflict of interest for analysts arises from brokerage activities. A brokerage house

benefits from more trading. If investors follow the recommendations of analysts, upgrades may

be more likely to generate trading than downgrades when short-sales are expensive since, in that

case, the investors most likely to trade on a downgrade are those who already hold the stock.

Consequently, brokerage activities could make it advantageous for brokerage firms to produce

more optimistic forecasts and recommendations for stocks that are costly to sell short.

    Brokers can also have conflicts of interest separate from analyst conflicts of interest. They

may receive indirect compensation for directing customers to particular products. For instance, a

mutual fund may direct trades to a broker because it is grateful for the broker’s sale of fund

shares. This practice is known as directed brokerage.8 The broker’s advice may be biased if it

earns more by directing the investor to specific funds. The NASD has rules preventing brokers

from   taking    into   account   commissions      from    portfolio   transactions   when    making

recommendations to investors.

    Conflicts of interest are not limited to advice given to investors. Conflicts involving

investment managers and boards of mutual funds have been the subject of much attention as well.

As explained by Khorana, Tufano, and Wedge (this issue), individual mutual funds are organized

as separate corporate entities overseen by boards which have a fiduciary duty to the funds’

investors. The board of a mutual fund hires service providers, including most importantly the



to millions of new investors, who were largely unaware that the analysts had taken on a more conflicted
role of recommending stocks and helping their firms win the lucrative investment banking deals from the
same companies that helped pay their outsized salaries.”, Gasparino (2005), p. 8.
8
  See Mahoney (2004).


                                                  7
investment manager. The investment manager’s contract is renewed yearly. For instance, FMR

Co., better known as Fidelity, is the investment manager for Fidelity’s Magellan Fund. Magellan

Fund is organized as a trust. One of its trustees is Edward Johnson, the chairman of FMR Co.

Each trustee of Magellan is also a trustee on approximately 330 funds managed by Fidelity.

Khorana, Tufano, and Wedge point out that it is extremely unusual for the board of a mutual fund

to fire the investment manager and replace him or her by the investment manager of a different

family of funds.

    The relationship of the board members with the investment manager may therefore trump

their fiduciary duty to the investors in the fund, so that board members might be reluctant to take

action against a poor-performing investment manager. Board members who work for the

investment adviser would seem especially conflicted. In some situations, the investment manager

might even take actions that are detrimental to the funds’ shareholders but beneficial to the

management company. For instance, Mahoney (2004) cites the case of Invesco funds where the

fund complex apparently agreed that some investors could enter market timing trades over the

objections of individual fund managers who viewed these trades as detrimental to the

performance of the funds. Also, the investment manager might vote the shares of the funds it

manages to support management-initiated proposals that may be adverse to the interests of

shareholders to curry favor with management because they provide profitable services to

management’s firm, such as managing the firm’s 401(k) plan. The co-existence of asset

management activities and underwriting leads to a conflict of interest as well. An underwriter

could use its managed funds as a dumping ground for newly issued securities that are hard to

place.

    Conflicts of interest also exist when commercial banks act as underwriters. A bank could

benefit from helping a borrower to sell securities to repay its loans. Claims that conflicts of

interest led bank underwriters to sell bonds to the public from companies that they knew to be

weak led to the famous Pecora hearings and to the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933. The Gramm-


                                                8
Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 essentially repealed the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, so that banks can

again compete fully with investment banks for underwriting mandates and again face

underwriting conflicts of interest.

       The Global Settlement attempted to restrict the practice of spinning, where individuals from

institutions with investment banking activities would give shares in an IPO to executives who

might hire the underwriter later on. These shares would gain in value on the first day and the

beneficiaries of spinning would make a quick gain by selling them. More generally, large first-

day gains make IPO allocations valuable and the underwriter could have incentives to use these

allocations to its own benefit. The large first-day gains for IPOs raise the question of why the

underwriter did not increase the offering price, so that the issuing firm would receive larger

proceeds from the IPO. The finance literature suggests, among other explanations, that large first-

day gains may be advantageous to the issuing firm as a way to signal its quality so that it can sell

shares subsequently at a higher price. 9 However, this issue is controversial. The traditional

economic explanations for IPO underpricing seemed much more convincing before underpricing

became extremely large as the NASDAQ index approached its peak. New explanations have

emerged in response to these extremely large first-day returns, including behavioral explanations

(Loughran and Ritter, 2002) and agency explanations (for instance, Ljungqvist and Wilhelm,

2003).

       Some argue that the high return of IPO stocks on the day of the offering in the late 1990s and

early in 2000 were partly the result of underwriter conflicts of interest. It is claimed that

underwriters would have found it advantageous to generate excitement for new issues because

doing so would have increased subsequent equity issues and trading income, presumably at the

expense of investors who bought the issues in the after-market.10 This argument raises the

question of why underwriters find this advantageous or why they are only able to proceed this


9
    See Ritter and Welch (2002) for a survey of the IPO literature.
10
     See, for instance, Aggarwal, Purnanandam, and Wu (2005).


                                                        9
way episodically. Griffin, Harris, and Topaloglu (this issue) examine the trading of IPO stocks on

the first day. Using a proprietary dataset, they find that between 1997 and 2002 about one fifth of

the purchases but a much smaller fraction of the sales go through the lead underwriter on the day

of the IPO. The authors argue that their evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that investors

buy through the lead underwriter in exchange for or on the expectation of favorable IPO

allocations. One would expect, however, that investors who do more business with the lead

underwriter are more likely to buy on the day of the IPO since the whole organization of the lead

underwriter will be excited about the IPO and tout the stock. The authors investigate some

reasons that investors have to direct more trades towards the lead underwriter on the day of the

IPO and conclude that these reasons cannot explain their results.



2. Why do financial institutions engage in activities that lead to conflicts of interest?

    Conflicts of interest lead rational customers to discount the price they are willing to pay in

transactions with financial institutions if they believe that they will be adversely affected by these

conflicts. Consequently, conflicts have costs for financial institutions if they fail to control them

well. Financial institutions could eliminate many conflicts of interest by becoming specialized.

For instance, a firm could insure that conflicts of interest created by investment banking activities

do not affect its research by choosing not to have such activities. This is not the model that most

financial institutions have pursued. In fact, firms that were specialized have tried to expand their

scope of activities. To the extent that controlling conflicts of interest is expensive, financial

institutions must be willing to enter in activities which lead to such conflicts because there are

gains from doing so that cannot be captured by specialized financial institutions. In this section,

we therefore consider whether there is evidence of benefits to financial institutions from activities

that lead to conflicts of interest. Competition may force financial institutions to pass on these

benefits to their customers.




                                                 10
    If financial institutions were solely run for the benefit of their shareholders, one would have

to conclude that conflicts of interest persist in financial institutions because shareholders are

better off when conflicts exist than when they do not. A complicating factor is that those who lead

financial institutions have conflicts of interest also. They manage these institutions to make

themselves better off. When corporate governance works well, executives have strong incentives

to devote their efforts to increasing shareholder wealth. However, corporate governance does not

always work so well that one cannot exclude the possibility that managers may take actions that

benefit them at the expense of shareholders. For instance, managers might value investment

banking operations despite the conflicts of interest these operations create because they enhance

their prestige rather than because they create wealth for shareholders.

    To complicate matters further, financial institutions are regulated. Regulation can make it

harder for institutions to enter or exit various businesses. Further, the regulated nature of financial

institutions can make size advantageous for shareholders even when it would not be for

comparable unregulated institutions. In banking, for instance, it is at times argued that large banks

are more likely than small banks to be helped by the government if things go wrong, so that by

increasing their size, banks acquire a valuable put option from the government.

    The model of Bolton, Freixas, and Shapiro (this issue) predicts under which circumstances

conflicts of interest have less of an impact for an integrated financial institution than for a

specialized financial institution. The benefit of integration is that, if the financial institution offers

many products, it is more likely to offer the product that is relevant for a particular customer.

Consequently, the conflict of interest resulting from the fact that the institution makes more

money by recommending its own products becomes less relevant. A one-stop financial institution

would always have a product that meets the investor’s needs, so that it could recommend its

product to the investor without facing a conflict of interest. Nevertheless, not all products might

be equally profitable. In that case, the financial institution might prefer to recommend the more




                                                   11
profitable products. Hence, integrated banking, by itself, can only resolve the conflicts of interest

when margins are similar across products.

     There is a considerable literature in corporate finance on whether corporate diversification

creates value for shareholders. Typically, papers in this literature find that on average diversified

firms are valued less than a portfolio of comparable specialized firms, a finding called the

diversification discount, but authors disagree as to what it means.11 In general, the papers in the

corporate diversification literature exclude financial institutions from their samples because

financial ratios and valuation metrics for banks are not directly comparable to financial ratios and

valuation metrics for other firms, and because banks’ ability to diversify typically depends on the

changing regulatory environment. Laeven and Levine (this issue) investigate whether there is a

diversification discount for financial conglomerates using a sample of 43 countries. They pay

careful attention to a number of issues that the literature has shown might bias estimates of the

diversification discount or might alter its interpretation. They find that the Tobin’s q of financial

conglomerates falls as their preferred measure of diversity (based on the composition of assets)

increases, so that there is a diversification discount for financial conglomerates. This result holds

across the world but also on a U.S. sample. Based on their evidence, there is no reason to believe

that, on average, financial institutions create value for their shareholders when they become more

diversified. Event-study evidence on bank mergers in the U.S. is consistent with this conclusion

(see, for instance, DeLong, 2001).

     Activities within financial institutions that create conflicts of interest could be profitable for

them even though diversification does not seem to create shareholder wealth on average because

diversification may have costs that offset these benefits. Financial institutions gain from activities

that create conflicts of interest if they can re-use information obtained through one activity

profitably in another activity. Underwriting due diligence is cheaper but also more effective for a


11
   For early evidence on the diversification discount, see Lang and Stulz (1994) and Berger and Ofek
(1995).


                                                  12
bank that has intimate knowledge of the issuer from a lending relationship. Several papers

examine whether underwriters’ market share benefits from also making loans. Yasuda (2005)

finds that bank relationships have a positive and significant effect on underwriter choice above

and beyond the effect of the relationship on the fees paid by the issuer. Drucker and Puri (2005)

show that concurrent lending to an equity issuer allows underwriters to build relationships and

increases the probability of receiving future business. They also demonstrate that prior lending

relationships are important determinants of the underwriter selection decision of equity issuers.

Bharath, Dahiya, Saunders, and Srinivasan (this issue) find that lending relationships have an

extremely significant impact on whether a borrower will obtain future loans from a financial

conglomerate since the probability of a relationship lender providing a future loan is 40% in

contrast with a probability of 3% for a non-relationship lender. They also find that, though a

lending relationship affects the probability that a bank will be chosen as an underwriter, the effect

is less important than the loan effect they document. Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006)

also provide evidence that a prior lending relationship increases a bank’s probability of being

selected as an underwriter, but they show that prior underwriting relationships are more

important.

    The re-usability of the information acquired by a bank as a lender when it underwrites the

securities of the borrower has led to a large literature that examines whether borrowers benefit

from issuing securities with a bank that lends to them. A number of papers show that joint

production of lending and underwriting leads to a decrease in underwriting fees. Roten and

Mullineaux (2002) conclude that bank underwriting leads to lower underwriting fees in the period

1995-1998; Yasuda (2005) find a small reduction for the period 1993-1997. Narayanan, Rangan,

and Rangan (2004) show that from 1994 to 1997 the underwriting spread for seasoned equity

issues is lower when the lending bank is in the syndicate. Drucker and Puri (2005) demonstrate

that issuers issue equity at lower cost when the underwriter is also lending to them.




                                                 13
     Financial institutions can gain from diversification of activities that leads to analyst conflicts

of interest even if these conflicts have deadweight costs. Suppose that analysts in a financial

institution are unbiased, but outsiders do not know for sure. If these analysts belong to an

organization with investment bankers, investors might be somewhat skeptical of their advice,

inducing a cost to the financial institution from having both analysts and investment bankers.

However, the institution also benefits from having both research and investment banking: both

analysts and investment bankers have access to a flow of information that would not be available

in a specialized firm. There is no a priori reason why the benefits of having both investment

bankers and research would be smaller than the costs.

     Consider an analyst who is brought over the wall because of an ongoing deal. 12 The

understanding of the firms involved in the deal that the analyst brings to the table can be valuable

to the investment bankers. If the firm stopped making analyst forecasts and recommendations

available to its customers, the investment bankers would have to find another way to acquire the

information they receive from analysts. Doing so would not be straightforward unless the

investment bankers hired analysts but did not allow them to give advice to the public. 13 This

would increase the investment banking production costs of the financial institution and the advice

that investment bankers would receive would most likely be less valuable if interaction with

investors sharpens analysts’ understanding of firms and industries. By being brought over the

wall, analysts garner information about firms they would not have otherwise. Though they cannot

use that information to improve their immediate recommendations and forecasts directly, their

better understanding should presumably improve their future performance. With these

considerations, putting investment bankers and analysts under the same roof can be valuable to a

financial institution and might enable it to hire better analysts and investment bankers. It is

12
   Underwriting activities and research activities are supposed to be separated by a “Chinese wall”. An
analyst is brought over the wall when he participates in underwriting activities. For an analyst’s perspective
on being brought over the wall, see Reingold and Reingold (2006).
13
   Hiring outside consultants would have a host of problems since secrecy is often extremely important in
investment banking transactions.


                                                     14
certainly possible in theory that the consumers of analyst services receive a better product from

analysts subject to an investment banking conflict of interest than from independent analysts.

    There is clear evidence in the literature that firms shopping for an underwriter care about

analysts associated with the investment banks that they consider, so that joint production of

investment banking services and research can increase the demand for investment banking

services. Krigman, Shaw, and Womack (2001) surveyed firms that switched lead underwriters

after the IPO. They found that dissatisfaction with the provision of analyst services on their firm

played a major role in their decision to switch. In their survey, 88% of the CFOs of switching

firms listed a research reason as one of their top three reasons to switch. This does not mean that

CFOs are looking for biased coverage. In the survey, they seemed more concerned with the

frequency of coverage than with the nature of recommendations. The authors “conclude that

issuers place value on incremental and perceived high-quality research coverage by sell-side

analysts. They allocate their resources, in the form of underwriting fees, to increase and improve

this coverage.” (p. 278). Recent evidence by O’Brien, McNichols, and Lin (2005) is supportive of

this conclusion. They show that underwriters initiate coverage faster than other firms and

maintain it longer.

    The possibility that analysts who face conflicts of interest because of investment banking

activities could actually produce better information than others has empirical support. However,

the way financial economists have studied analyst output may limit the extent of supportive

evidence. Financial economists (with some notable exceptions, such as Asquith, Mikhail, and Au,

2005, who show that a measure of strength of arguments in an analyst’s report is significantly

related to the stock-price reaction to the report) have typically focused on few dimensions of the

output of analysts, namely earnings forecasts, growth forecasts, and recommendations. Yet, in

many ways, the other components of analyst reports may often be more useful to institutional

investors. In particular, institutional investors value an analyst’s industry knowledge more than




                                                15
his stock selection ability or his earnings forecasts.14 These harder-to-quantify components of

analyst reports may also be the ones where the understanding of the firm and industry are the

most valuable. Nevertheless, for earnings forecasts, growth forecasts, and recommendations,

there is some evidence that analysts’ output is better along some dimensions because of their

association with investment banking activities. For instance, Clarke, Khorana, Patel, and Rau

(2004) find that analysts from large investment banks tend to be more accurate in their earnings

forecasts and less biased. Jacob, Rock, and Weber (2003) reveal that investment bank analysts are

on average more accurate using forecasts from 1998 to 2001.



3. Factors that mitigate the adverse impact of conflicts of interests

     If buyers are rational, they will only pay a price for the good they purchase that insures that

they will not be hurt by conflicts of interest. To increase the selling price when the price is

discounted because the buyer believes that the seller may have taken actions that decrease the

value of the transaction to the buyer, the seller has incentives to take steps to commit to reducing

the impact of conflicts of interest.15 For instance, the seller of a used car might offer a warranty.

As is well-known, it is possible for conflicts of interest to prevent trade when the buyer believes

that actions by the seller could effectively make the good purchased worthless and the seller

cannot take actions to reduce the impact of conflicts of interest on the buyer.16 Therefore,

financial institutions benefit from taking actions that control the impact of conflicts of interest to

customers, but even when these actions are imperfect, customers may not suffer from conflicts of

interest when they rationally take into account their impact.




14
   Table 1 in Bagnoli, Watts, and Zhang (2006) shows the ranking of the usefulness of analyst output
dimensions from 1998 to 2003 by the voters in the Institutional Investor survey. Stock selection is the
second attribute in 1998 and the fifth attribute in 1999. Stock selection falls in importance in that table, so
that it is 11th attribute in 2003. In all years, industry knowledge is valued more than stock selection.
15
   See Grossman (1981).
16
   See Akerlof (1970).


                                                     16
    Let us go back to analyst conflicts of interest. Consider the hypothetical case where an

analyst will always do and say anything to make an investment banking deal happen. By acting

that way, he would lose credibility with investors, so that they would ignore his

recommendations. As a result, his usefulness to the investment banking clients of his firm would

disappear. This suggests that there is a real sense that, when conflicts of interest become extreme,

they cannot have an impact on the customers of financial institutions. Of course, this mechanism

would not work if customers systematically underestimate the adverse impact of conflicts, so that

we will have to consider this possibility.

    To be credible, an analyst has to build a reputation of providing valuable information to

investors. Jackson (2005) models reputation acquisition for analysts and shows that analysts

acquire reputation with greater forecast accuracy. An analyst with greater reputation will be leery

of tainting his advice and forecasts to help the investment bankers if they want to be helped that

way. In the extreme case, if reputation is extremely valuable and is fragile, the analyst would

always ignore pressures from investment bankers and always provide unbiased advice. With this

reasoning, conflicts of interest would typically have a small enough impact that they would leave

no significant traces in an analyst’s output as long as this analyst values his reputation

sufficiently. An analyst who puts low value on his reputation might, however, choose to offer

tainted advice even though it affects his reputation adversely when confronted with the possibility

of a sufficiently valuable short-term payoff from offering such advice.

    Reputation reduces the impact of conflicts of interest, but at times reputation can be for sale.

Conflicts of interest are likely to create the most problems when the benefits from not preserving

one’s reputation are highest. These benefits may be more likely to occur in unusual periods that

are not recognized as such – if a party to a transaction knows that it is advantageous for the other

party to behave in a way that endangers its reputation, the benefit to that party from behaving that

way will disappear since its actions will rationally be anticipated by the other party. For instance,

if an analyst will be compensated for shading the truth, shading the truth may be more


                                                 17
advantageous when high valuations make underwriting more profitable and the analyst expects

the high valuations to be temporary but investors do not. Hence, viewed from this perspective, it

may make sense that conflicts of interest would be more of a concern in periods such as the one

of the turn of the century, when valuations were extremely high. However, the dramatic increase

in valuations of the 1990s was followed by a crash. It is a well-established tradition that crashes

lead to intense searches for scapegoats. After all, that is how the Pecora hearings mentioned

earlier came about.

    Fang and Yasuda (2006a) examine the role of reputation as a disciplinary mechanism. For the

period 1983-2002, they find that All-American analysts do not see a degradation of their accuracy

during hot markets whereas other analysts do. It may be that All-Star analysts are just superior

and perform better in turbulent markets. However, the evidence is also consistent with them being

able to resist pressures from conflicts of interest in hot markets better than other analysts, or that

they face fewer such pressures.

    The labor market plays a role in reducing the impact of conflicts of interest. If analysts who

have more accurate forecasts are better rewarded by the labor market, analysts’ incentives to be

more accurate will limit the impact of conflicts of interest. Does accuracy pay for analysts? The

literature provides some evidence that analysts who are less accurate are more likely to separate

from their jobs. Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (1999) show that an analyst is more likely to turn

over if his accuracy declines relative to his peers, but the profitability of his recommendations

does not matter. Hong and Kubik (2003) go one step further and investigate whether an analyst is

more likely to move up or down, where a move up is one to a more prestigious firm. They find

that more accurate analysts are more likely to move up. Controlling for accuracy, the analysts

who issue more optimistic forecasts are more likely to move up. Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston

(2006) show that the importance of accuracy for career outcomes is much more limited in recent

years.




                                                 18
       Analysts have a clear metric showing success in their profession, namely their rankings in the

Institutional Investor annual poll. Reingold and Reingold (2006) show vividly the importance of

this poll for analysts. The best an analyst can hope for is to be selected to the All-Star team. 17

Analysts do not become All-Stars by offering tainted advice but by being helpful to institutional

investor clients. Firms are eager to hire analysts who perform well in that poll. So, analysts who

are also-ran are in danger of being replaced by analysts who do. An analyst’s ranking in the poll

is a major determinant of his compensation.18 Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2006) conclude

that All-Star status appears to be the most important driver of career outcomes for analysts.

Institutions advertise the success of their analysts in the poll. Analysts have repeated relationships

with the voters in the poll, so that institutional investors effectively monitor the analysts.

Typically, analysts visit the voters and talk to them constantly. If institutional investors were to

discover that an analyst gave them bad information on purpose, the damage to the relationship

would be immediate and long-lasting. Career concerns of analysts therefore naturally reduce the

impact of conflicts of interests. It is interesting to note that Clarke, Khorana, Patel, and Rau

(2006) find that All-Star analysts do not change their recommendation levels for firms when they

change jobs. Their result is consistent with analysts caring about their reputation sufficiently that

they repel pressures from investment bankers – or alternatively that these pressures are often not

there.

       The paper by Ljungqvist, Marston, Starks, Wei, and Yan (this issue) shows clearly that

analysts are responsive to the demands of institutional investors. They investigate

recommendations from 1994 to 2000. They find that recommendations relative to consensus are

positively related to investment banking relationships and brokerage pressures, but negatively

related to ownership by institutional shareholders. Further, they find evidence that earnings




17
     Strictly speaking, Institutional Investor gives the title of All-American analyst.
18
     See Stickel (1992).


                                                         19
forecasts are more accurate for firms with more institutional ownership and that ratings following

share price decreases are adjusted more quickly.

       We saw that there are conflicts of interest for mutual fund investment managers. Investment

managers get judged and compensated for their performance as investment managers. When they

are successful, the funds they manage increase and their compensation increases. The incentives

of portfolio managers therefore naturally limit the impact of conflicts of interest. However, one

might argue that regulations on the compensation of fund managers aggravate the impact of

conflicts of interest. The regulations make it difficult to compensate mutual fund managers for

their investment performance directly, so that they end up having compensation that is mostly

sensitive to the size of the fund they manage. 19

       We have focused so far on mechanisms that provide incentives to individuals to avoid

exploiting conflicts. However, financial institutions have incentives to control conflicts of interest

as well. If an institution can convince customers that conflicts of interest will not affect its actions

in a way that is costly to them, it will be able to sell its services and goods at a higher price. For

instance, a financial institution can create wealth for its shareholders by developing a reputation

for providing good advice. To the extent such a reputation is valuable, the institution would want

to protect it. Ljungqvist, Marston, Starks, Wei, and Yan (this issue) use two reputational capital

proxies for investment banking activities. Their first proxy is the share of the investment bank in

equity underwriting; their second proxy is the loyalty of underwriting clients. They find that there

is a negative relation between the optimism of analysts and the reputational capital of the

financial institution as measured by their proxies. This result is consistent with the prediction that

institutions with greater reputational capital control conflicts of interest better.

       Financial institutions also have incentives to develop a reputation in their certification role as

underwriters. Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1994) show how reputation enables investment banks to

be credible certifiers. Puri (1999) develops a model where banks and investment banks

19
     See Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2003).


                                                    20
underwrite securities. In that model, banks face a conflict of interest when they underwrite a

security issue by a firm to which they have lent money since they will gain from a successful

security issue either by having the loans repaid or by having the loans become more secure. In her

model, however, reputation concerns mitigate this conflict of interest: A bank would make a

short-run profit by underwriting a bad firm, but it would cost it in the long run.

    Competition would also seem to play a role in controlling conflicts of interest, but this role is

complex. For instance, an increase in competition in investment banking could lead investment

bankers to put more pressure on analysts. At the same time, financial institutions compete on the

value of their advice. If an institution gives bad advice on products or its analysts make poor

forecasts, other institutions have an incentive to inform customers of these facts. New highly

valuable businesses have been built to take advantage of situations where competitors had

conflicts of interest. For instance, boutique merger advisory firms have succeeded in part because

their advice is considered to be less conflicted since they do not have underwriting services to

sell. Bolton, Freixas, and Shapiro (this issue) argue that by providing credible information, a

specialist financial institution can differentiate itself and acquire market share.

    The last important mechanism that controls conflicts of interest is the role of regulatory

authorities and litigation. Regulatory actions can put an end to the career of an analyst. More

generally, for jobs that require employees to hold a license, that license can be withdrawn. In

addition, though, litigation can impose large costs on financial institutions. Should an institution

damage customers because of conflicts of interests, if the judicial system worked well, the

institution would have to make its customers whole, so that it would lose whatever benefits it

derived from conflicts of interests, and the litigation costs would mean that it would lose more

than these benefits. Of course, in practice, errors are possible, so that an institution might have to

compensate customers for damages that do not exist or might not be held wholly accountable for

damages it did inflict.




                                                  21
4. Do conflicts of interests have an adverse impact on customers of financial
   institutions?

    Conflicts of interest could be acute but have limited or no adverse impact on the provision of

services by financial institutions because of the forces we discussed that mitigate the impact of

these conflicts. However, even when conflicts of interest do affect the provision of services, they

may still not adversely affect the consumers of these services because customers take the conflicts

into account. To make this point clear, consider the output of financial analysts. Labor market

incentives could make the recommendations of an analyst unbiased. If an analyst’s

recommendations are biased despite labor market incentives, the bias in his recommendations

might have no impact on security prices because the capital markets discount them and might not

affect the investment decisions of investors because they take the bias into account. Hence,

researchers have investigated whether conflicts of interest have an adverse impact at two levels:

first, on the actions of financial institutions, and second, on the outcomes for customers of these

institutions. In this section, we review the literature which investigates the adverse impact of

conflicts of interest. The literature that focuses on the impact of conflicts of interest on analysts

and their customers is extremely large. To help the reader, we summarize the information

contained in the papers from that literature we discuss in Table 1. The papers in that literature are

divided into those papers that focus exclusively on how conflicts affects analyst forecasts and

recommendations of analysts (Panel A) and those papers that consider how conflicts affect the

returns of investors following analyst recommendations (Panel B).

    It has been believed for a long time that analysts are optimistic. For instance, Lloyd-Davies

and Canes (1978) show that analysts tend to have more positive recommendations than negative

ones and Fried and Givoly (1982) show that earnings forecasts are upward biased. Analyst

optimism may simply reflect behavioral biases. In particular, Affleck-Graves, Davis, and

Mendenhall (1990) provide evidence that individuals who have no reason to produce optimistic

earnings forecasts do so when confronted with a time-series of earnings (they call this the



                                                 22
“judgmental heuristics” bias). Evidence by Willis (2001) and Groysberg, Healy, Chapman, and

Gui (2005) showing that buy-side analysts also have optimistic forecasts would be consistent with

this view. However, it is worth noting that the evidence on optimism of analyst forecasts is, to

quote a review paper, “contextually defined and sample-period specific.”20 In particular, it

appears that the results of the literature are sensitive to the measure of earnings used – analysts

may choose not to forecast some transitory components of actual earnings, so that they may

appear to be overoptimistic if the components they do not forecast tend to be negative and are

included in the earnings compared to the analyst forecasts.

       There is evidence that optimistic biases for earnings forecasts have fallen over time. Brown

(2001) finds that median forecasts become slightly pessimistic over the period from 1984-1999.

Chan, Karceski, and Lakonishok (2006) attribute this evolution to conflicts of interest. They

argue that in strong bull markets analysts might have incentives to have pessimistic earnings

forecasts so that firms will be less likely to have negative earnings surprises since the market

penalizes negative surprises strongly. In their paper, analysts became more pessimistic over time.

However, despite becoming more pessimistic, analysts have become less likely to underpredict

earnings by more than two cents. This result suggests that the whole distribution of earnings

might have shifted, making it hard to evaluate the evolution of the distribution of forecasting

mistakes.

       Even if analysts were really issuing over-optimistic advice, there is evidence that investors

can interpret the relative information value of rankings. By giving high rankings, however,

analysts may have decreased the information value of these rankings. In contrast, the information

value of rankings seldom given may have increased. For instance, Lin and McNichols (1998) find

that hold rankings from affiliated analysts are more informative than hold rankings from

independent analysts for their sample period, plausibly because hold rankings from affiliated

analysts are really sell rankings since these analysts appear to be extremely reluctant to give sell

20
     See Ramnath, Rock, and Shane (2006), p. 66.


                                                   23
rankings during their sample period. Interestingly, Fang and Yasuda (2006b) find that buy

recommendations in general do not have information that is useful to investors in contrast to sell

recommendations. However, further supporting the importance of reputation, they find that buy

recommendations made by All-Star analysts are useful to investors. Evidence in Kadan,

Madureira, Wang, and Zach (2006) seems to suggest that investors saw through the scaling of the

ratings. They investigate an episode in which, in response or anticipation to regulatory changes,

financial institutions made large changes to their rating systems to have more balance and to

simplify them. They write that these changes amounted to “massive reclassification of

outstanding recommendations,” yet the recommendations “did not elicit significant price or

volume reactions”.

    Malmendier and Shanthikumar (this issue) attempt to determine who trades when analysts

change recommendations. They investigate trade imbalance for shares on days when analysts

make recommendations and separately measure imbalances for large and small trades. They find

that large traders, which would be mostly institutional investors, buy more on strong buy

recommendations but not on buy recommendations, and sell on hold recommendations. Though

large traders seem to take into account the optimistic bias of analysts in their rankings, small

traders do not. These traders buy both for strong buy and buy recommendations but,

paradoxically, fail to react significantly to sell recommendations of All-Star analysts. These

results suggests that more analysis is required to understand exactly why the small traders behave

the way they do.

    There is a considerable literature that investigates the relation between the properties of

analyst forecasts and recommendations and the investment banking activities of the firms they

belong to. This literature has followed two different approaches and reaches somewhat different

conclusions depending on the approach used. The first approach has been to use underwriting

relationships to identify conflicts of interest, so that studies compare the recommendations and

the properties of forecasts of analysts from an issuing firm’s underwriters to those of analysts


                                               24
unaffiliated to the firm’s underwriters. Dugar and Nathan (1995) identify for a sample of

companies the investment bank advising that company. For each analyst report produced by that

investment bank, they identify a report produced by an analyst not associated with that bank.

They find that the analysts from the firms’ investment banks have more optimistic earnings

forecasts and investment recommendations, but an investor following the recommendations from

these analysts would not perform worse and the market discounts their recommendations.

    Several papers examine analyst output following a securities offering. Lin and McNichols

(1998) study forecasts and recommendations for firms with secondary equity issues. They find

that analysts affiliated with lead underwriters have more optimistic recommendations and growth

forecasts, but their earnings forecasts are not more optimistic than those of unaffiliated analysts.

However, investors discount the recommendations of affiliated analysts and there is no difference

in the performance of stocks after the recommendations. Dechow, Hutton, and Sloan (2000)

conclude that long-term earnings growth forecasts of affiliated analysts are more optimistic.

Michaely and Womack (1999) examine IPOs and find that stocks highly recommended by

affiliated analysts perform poorly. They also find that investors discount the recommendations of

affiliated analysts, but in their case, investors do not recognize the full extent of the bias, so that

they underperform by following the advice of affiliated analysts. McNichols, O’Brien, and

Pamukcu (2006) replicate the Michaely and Womack study for the period from 1994 to 2001.

They find, like Michaely and Womack, that investors discount affiliated recommendations, but in

contrast to them, they find no evidence that the recommendations of affiliated analysts are less

valuable. In contrast, Bradley, Jordan, and Ritter (2006) examine IPOs from 1999 to 2000 and

find no evidence of a differential reaction between affiliated and unaffiliated analyst initiations

once they control for recommendation characteristics and timing.

    The second approach uses a broader lens to identify conflicts and assumes that the very

presence of investment banking and brokerage activities create conflicts. Generally, the authors

following this approach do not find evidence of bias when they consider earnings forecasts. This


                                                  25
literature demonstrates that there is little relation between optimism in earnings forecasts from

analysts of a financial institution and the importance of investment banking as a source of income

for that institution. For instance, Agrawal and Chen (2004) find no evidence that the accuracy or

bias in earnings forecasts are related to the importance of investment banking or brokerage

activities as sources of revenues in a financial institution. However, they show that the relative

optimism of long-term growth forecasts and the frequency of quarterly earnings forecast revisions

are positively related to the importance of brokerage activities in a financial institution. Cowen,

Groysberg, and Healy (2006), Jacob, Rock, and Weber (2003), and Clarke, Khorana, Patel, and

Rau (2004) find no evidence that conflicts of interest from investment banking make analysts

more optimistic or less precise.

    In a separate paper, Agrawal and Chen (2005) look at 110,000 recommendations issued by

4,000 analysts from 1994 to 2003 using the same approach. They find that conflicts of interest,

measured by the importance of investment banking income and brokerage income, are associated

with more optimistic recommendations. When they examine the reactions to recommendation

changes, they conclude that the capital markets discount this optimistic bias induced by conflicts

of interest. In fact, this discounting even increased during the 1990s. In their sample, the

investment performance of recommendations is not related to proxies for conflicts of interest.

    Irvine (2004) uses a dataset from the Toronto Stock Exchange which identifies the broker

associated with every trade. He concludes that buy recommendations generate relatively more

trading for the analyst’s brokerage firm, but forecast bias does not. Jackson (2005), in contrast,

using Australian data, finds that optimistic analysts generate more trades for their brokerage firm,

but high reputation analysts generate more trades too.

    Though it is often taken for granted that investment bankers pressure analysts when they can,

the evidence that investment banking clients actually want biased research seems limited to

anecdotes since academics have not been particularly successful in finding support for that view.

Consequently, the result in the literature that affiliated analysts are not more biased may simply


                                                26
be due to the possibility that the importance of investment banking pressures is overstated.

Ljungqvist, Marston, and Wilhelm (2006) investigate specifically whether more biased research

helps investment banks to obtain more underwriting mandates for the period from 1993 through

2002. They could not find “evidence that aggressive analyst behavior increase their bank’s

probability of winning an underwriting mandate.” They conclude that the main determinants of

the lead-bank choice are prior underwriting relationships and lending relationships. Clarke,

Khorana, Patel, and Rau (2006) also find no evidence that issuing optimistic earnings forecasts or

recommendations affect investment banking deal flow. However, Ljungqvist, Marston, and

Wilhelm (2005), show that providing coverage makes it more likely that a bank will be chosen as

a co-manager. Further, aggressive recommendations seem to make it more likely that a bank will

be chosen as co-manager for equity issues for which the lead-manager is a commercial bank but

not when the lead manager is an investment bank. For debt issues, aggressive recommendations

increase the likelihood of co-manager appointments regardless of the lead-manager’s identity.

    Overall, there is more evidence that recommendations are biased than evidence that earnings

forecasts are biased by affiliated analysts. However, even for recommendations, the literature

does not reach a consensus. Importantly, findings that analysts affiliated with underwriters are

more optimistic are not, by themselves, evidence that this optimism occurs because of conflicts of

interest. Other explanations are possible. For instance, such a finding could simply be evidence

that selection biases are at work. Suppose that, for a given firm, some analysts are optimistic

relative to the consensus and others are not. An underwriter would not be in a position to

participate in an underwriting if its analyst following the issuing firm has a hold or sell

recommendation on that firm. If an underwriter participates in an offering only if its analyst

following the offering firm does not have a hold or sell rating on the firm, ex post analysts

affiliated with underwriters will appear to be biased. Bajari and Krainer (2004) find that when

selection biases are taken into account, conflicts of interest due to investment banking (defined

more broadly than is typical) do not have a significant impact on analyst recommendations for


                                               27
firms in the NASDAQ 100 from 1998 to 2003. Bradshaw, Richardson, and Sloan (2006) find that

analysts are generally too optimistic for firms that have high external net financing. Among the

various plausible explanations for their finding, they suggest that firms choose to issue when

analysts are optimistic about them. They find no evidence, however, that this optimism is

somehow greater for affiliated analysts. However, it is important to note studies seem more likely

to find such differences when they compare analyst forecasts and recommendations closer to the

issuance date than the six-month window utilized by these authors.

    Barber, Lehavy, and Trueman (this issue) compare the recommendation performance of

analysts from firms with investment banking business to the recommendation performance of

analysts from independent research firms from 1996 to 2003. They find that investors would have

been better off by almost 8 percentage points annually (before transaction costs) when following

the buy recommendations of the independent analysts. However, all the evidence of the authors

for the better performance of independent analysts comes from the period after the peak of

NASDAQ and for stocks with recommendations of buy or better. In contrast, investors would

have done well to follow recommendations of hold or sell from analysts from investment banking

firms. The evidence the authors present differs substantially between firms that issued equity

either in an IPO or in a seasoned equity offering (SEO) and other firms. When the authors look at

the whole sample of firms, there is no evidence that following the buy recommendations of

analysts affiliated with investment banks would have led investors to have underperforming

portfolios, but investors following sell recommendations by affiliated analysts would have had

superior performance. In contrast, when the authors separate firms between those that issued

equity and those that did not, they find evidence that following the buy recommendations of

analysts affiliated with investment banks for issuing firms would have led to underperformance

while following that of independent analysts for issuing firms would have led investors to earn

positive abnormal returns. The authors interpret this evidence to be consistent with the view that

analysts associated with investment banks were reluctant to lower their ratings when stocks fell


                                               28
after the peak of NASDAQ because of conflicts of interest. At the same time, however, they

correctly point out that their results may “reflect hindsight bias, rather than evidence of biased

research”.

    Evidence of analysts keeping buy recommendations when stocks were collapsing is often

viewed as proof that analysts allowed conflicts of interests to influence their judgments. Yet, in

an efficient market, the fact that a stock’s price has fallen does not mean that it will keep falling.

Hence, poor past returns do not justify a sell recommendation. Other explanations are also

plausible. For instance, suppose that an analyst has a valuation model suggesting that a stock

price should be $100 when the stock trades at $80. For the stock price to increase to $100, the

market has to eventually agree with the analyst. Instead, the stock falls to $5. If, when the stock

trades at $5, none of the variables that enter the analyst’s pricing model have changed, the analyst

should view the stock as a bargain. An analyst who stays true to his valuation model would

recommend the stock as a purchase as long as his model tells him that the stock is worth

significantly more than $5. It does not logically follow, therefore, that an analyst who fails to

change his recommendation as a stock price has fallen is providing misleading or fraudulent

recommendations. It could also be that the price drop leads the analyst to revise his assumptions,

but not sufficiently to change the recommendation.

    Ljungqvist, Marston, Starks, Wei, and Yan (this issue) find no evidence that investment

banking conflicts of interest lead analysts to delay downgrades. In contrast, O’Brien, McNichols,

and Lin (2005) argue that analysts associated with investment banks are slower to downgrade

stocks. Ljungqvist, Marston, Starks, Wei, and Yan also find this result when they do not control

for institutional holdings for the firms followed by analysts. It seems then that whether one

concludes that analysts affiliated with institutions with investment bank activities delay

downgrades or not is sensitive to the variables one controls for. O’Brien, McNichols, and Lin

argue that if a selection bias explains their results, the only reason issuers would prefer analysts

who are slow to downgrade is “for the purpose of delaying the disclosure of negative information


                                                 29
to investors.” (p. 625). It could also be, however, that issuers prefer analysts who believe in their

valuations strongly. Such analysts might be more likely to support a stock after an IPO if it is

performing poorly. James and Karceski (2006) find evidence that affiliated analysts provide

strong support for IPOs that perform poorly in the aftermarket. It does not seem unreasonable to

think that such analysts might be less likely to change their opinion in the face of adverse stock

returns. This explanation might seem even more likely after the peak of NASDAQ. It would not

be surprising if investment banks were a magnet for analysts who thought that new technologies

had changed the investment landscape dramatically.

    The evidence on analysts we have reviewed so far is mixed. We saw some reasons why it is

so. There are also more technical reasons for why the evidence is so mixed. Studies typically use

short sample periods. Yet, some studies discussed in this paper show that results that hold in one

sample period may not hold in another one. While it may be that conflicts of interest have adverse

effects in some periods but not in others, one also has to be concerned that period-specific results

reflect selection biases or random variation that is poorly understood. Some authors include

earnings announcement dates in their studies while others do not. Some authors do a better job at

measuring earnings that correspond to earnings forecasted by analysts than others. The studies

also use different databases. There are some concerns about the quality and integrity of the

databases. Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2006) show that thousands of recommendations

which were associated with the name of analysts in 2002 on I/B/E/S are now no longer associated

with analyst names – i.e., they were made anonymous (the evidence of the authors suggest that

analysts are most likely responsible for the anonymization). The recommendations that were

made anonymous tend to be bolder and made by more senior analysts. These recommendations

are associated with poor performance. Strikingly, those analysts whose recommendations were

anonymized experienced better career outcomes than other analysts.

    The evidence on the adverse impact of conflicts of interest of banks acting as lenders and

underwriters is unambiguous. Overall, there is a consensus in the literature that, on average, these


                                                 30
adverse impacts do not exist. Recent research has shown that the bonds underwritten by bank

underwriters in the years before the Glass-Steagall Act performed as well, if not better, than the

bonds underwritten by investment banks, so that the claims that bank underwriters took advantage

of the public are not supported. 21 Puri (1994) shows that bank-underwritten bonds during that

period had a lower mortality rate than bonds underwritten by investment banks. Kroszner and

Rajan (1994) conclude that bank underwriting reduced the probability of default of a bond using a

matched sample of bonds. Further work on such conflicts of interest examines debt issues that

took place as banks were again given the opportunity to underwrite some debt issues in the 1980s

and in the 1990s before the Glass-Steagall Act was repealed. These studies find no evidence

supportive of the view that possible conflicts of interest by commercial banks adversely affected

investors. Hence, enabling banks to write loans as well as to underwrite securities does not have

an adverse effect on bank customers or investors.

           Davis and Kim (this issue) investigate how business ties between mutual fund investment

managers and firms these managers invest in affect how the shares of these firms are voted by

mutual fund managers. In the absence of conflicts of interest, one would expect the managers to

vote the shares for proposals that increase the value of the firms since doing so improves their

performance and makes the funds’ shareholders better off. However, if such proposals are

objected to by the management of the firms, the fund managers may offend the management of

the firms and lose business. For instance, if FMR handles all of the 401(k) business of a

corporation, the management of that corporation might be upset if FMR votes shares against the

management’s recommendation and it might retaliate by withdrawing the 401(k) business from

FMR. Davis and Kim have an extremely large dataset of votes by mutual funds. They find that

there is no relation between how likely an investment manager is to vote with the management of

a company and the business ties of that company with the investment manager. However, when

they look at the votes of funds across firms, they conclude that mutual funds associated with

21
     Drucker and Puri (2006) review the literature on bank underwriters.


                                                      31
investment management companies with more business ties to corporations are more likely to

vote with management overall. The pattern of votes is interesting because they seem to side with

management especially when there is no clear evidence from finance that the measures being

voted on have an effect on shareholder wealth.

       Khorana, Tufano, and Wedge (this issue) investigate how board characteristics affect the

probability that a fund will merge with a fund from another fund family. They find that mergers

of this type are more likely for underperforming funds. However, they also provide evidence that

boards with more independent directors are more likely to approve such mergers. Strikingly, this

effect is most pronounced when a board has only independent directors. The SEC has required

75% independence, though this regulation has faced difficulties in the courts. Apparently, the

presence of some non-independent directors can have a substantial effect on the decisions of a

mutual fund board. Also finding similar results are Ding and Wermers (2005), who investigate

how mutual fund performance is related to the composition of the mutual funds’ board. In their

paper, the performance of a mutual fund increases with the number of independent directors on its

board, and an underperforming manager is more likely to be replaced when the board has more

independent directors. It is striking that mutual fund studies find stronger evidence of an

association between board composition and performance than studies focuses on operating

firms.22

       There is no convincing evidence that underwriters choose to dump stocks they underwrite

into funds that their firms manage. Though both Ritter and Zhang (2006) and Johnson and

Marietta-Westberg (2005) show that funds managed by underwriting firms invest more in IPOs

underwritten by their firm than in others, both papers have evidence against what the former

authors call the “dumping” hypothesis. Most importantly, Johnson and Marietta-Westberg find

evidence that funds affiliated with underwriting firms earn significantly higher returns than funds

not affiliated with such firms.

22
     See, for instance, Bhagat and Black (2002).


                                                   32
5. Is there a role for law and regulation?

    If customers of financial institutions take into account the conflicts of interest appropriately,

the costs of these conflicts will be born by the owners of financial institutions so that these

institutions have incentives to invest in reducing the deadweight costs associated with these

conflicts. It is possible, however, that laws and regulations can decrease these deadweight costs

because competition among financial institutions could produce equilibria where these

deadweight costs cannot be reduced further without coordination. For instance, in the vein of

Stein (1989), one could think of an equilibrium where each institution pushes its analysts to be

optimistic about investment banking clients. However, this optimism has no impact in

equilibrium on investment banking market shares because everybody behaves in the same way

and has no impact on customers of analyst services because they discount the advice they receive.

Such an equilibrium would be inefficient and firms might not be able to reach an efficient

equilibrium without coordination by regulators.

    A more thorny issue is that not all investors may be sufficiently rational or sufficiently

informed to take into account the conflicts of interest of financial institutions in their investment

decisions. Historically, the output of analysts was targeted to institutional investors who seem to

be able to assess on their own the impact of conflicts of interest and to discipline analysts who

stray. Malmendier and Shanthikumar (this issue) view their results as evidence that retail

investors are not fully cognizant of the impact of conflicts of interest. Some might argue that

legislation should protect small investors even more than it does. Such a view might be

reasonable for a range of products. However, analyst conflicts of interest have been known about

for a long time. Investors know that different analysts have different views. They can make their

investment decisions accordingly. The efficiency of the stock market depends critically on

investors having incentives to acquire and exploit information. If, to protect small investors, it is

necessary to reduce the information produced by analysts and hence limit the information

available in the markets, the net outcome of regulation may be a reduction in market efficiency.


                                                  33
    Regulatory solutions impose costs on financial institutions. As a result, while deadweight

costs associated with conflicts of interest may decrease, they may be replaced with regulatory

costs. Financial analysts have an important role to play in producing information about

companies. Many regulatory changes have affected how they perform their job. When regulations

increase the cost of producing analyst services, fewer analyst services are produced. With rational

investors, less production of analyst services leads to a decrease in the efficiency of financial

markets. Further, analyst services can reduce corporate agency costs, so that decreased production

of these services can adversely affect valuations in the long-run and make it harder for companies

to finance their growth.

    Several papers have attempted to identify the impact of regulatory changes on analyst

coverage, bias, and precision. The Global Settlement imposed many changes on the signatory

firms. It forced firms to “physically separate their research and investment banking departments

to prevent the flow of information between the two groups…”. Such a requirement decreased the

potential legitimate synergies between investment banking and research discussed earlier. Boni

(2006) summarizes the changes in research for the 10 firms that were party to the Global

Settlement as follows. First, these firms reduced their coverage (though some of this reduction

may have come from delistings). In 2001, these financial institutions covered 996 companies.

Two years later, this number fell to 800. Second, the analysts did not become less optimistic.

Third, the stock-price impact of recommendation changes fell, so that analysts’ recommendations

became less informative. This evidence suggests that the Global Settlement might have succeeded

in making investors worse off and the capital markets less efficient. However, the Global

Settlement has many different provisions, so some provisions might have a positive impact.

Unfortunately, assessing the impact of the regulatory changes is complicated by the fact that not

all authors reach the same conclusions. More data will probably be required before we can obtain

a more definitive assessment of the impact of the regulatory changes. The samples used by

authors in existing studies have at most slightly more than two years of data with all the important


                                                34
new regulations in place. Some of the effects of these regulations may not be noticeable with such

a short sample period.

    The first important regulatory change affecting analysts was the promulgation of Regulation

Fair Disclosure (Reg FD), which became effective on October 23, 2000. Reg FD prohibits firms

from making selective disclosures. Its proponents argue that it leads to a level playing field

among investors. To the extent that analysts receive valuable information as a result of ties of

their financial institution with corporate clients, one would expect Reg FD to have made these

relationships less useful. Mohanram and Sunder (2006) conclude that the forecasting accuracy of

analysts who were more likely to have preferential access before Reg FD because of the financial

institutions they belonged to declined. Gintschel and Markov (2004) have similar results. As

banking corporate ties became less useful in producing information, corporate ties of financial

intermediaries not affected by Reg FD should have become more valuable. Accordingly, Jorion,

Liu, and Shi (2006) show that credit rating changes became more informative after Reg FD

because credit rating agencies are not subject to Reg FD and hence can receive selective

disclosures. More generally, authors investigating the impact of Reg FD find that analyst

forecasts have become less precise (Aggrawal, Chadha, and Chen, 2004; Gintschel and Markov,

2004), that analyst forecast dispersion has increased (Bailey, Li, Mao, and Zhong, 2003;

Mohanram and Sunder, 2006), that disagreement among analysts has increased (Bailey, Li, Mao,

and Zhong, 2003), that recommendation changes have less impact (Cornett, Teharanian, and

Yalcin, 2005), and that analysts follow fewer firms (Mohanranm and Sunder, 2006). Gomes,

Gorton, and Madureira (2006) conclude that by cutting off the selective disclosure channel Reg

FD increased the cost of capital of small firms. However, not all the evidence is negative, as some

authors show that information asymmetries around earnings announcements appear to have

decreased after Reg FD (Eleswarapu, Thompson, and Venkataraman, 2004) and that analysts

invest more in the production of idiosyncratic information (Mohanram and Sunder, 2006; Bailey,




                                                35
Li, Mao, and Zhong, 2003). Some authors also fail to find an impact of Reg FD on analyst

forecast dispersion and on analyst forecast errors (Heflin, Subramanyam, and Zhang, 2003).

    In early 2002, the NYSE and the NASD approved rules that required research reports to

include information on the distribution of recommendations of the issuing firms. Barber, Lehavy,

and Trueman (this issue) find that the fraction of buy and strong buy recommendations peaks in

2000 and decreases steadily from then on to the end of their sample period of June 2003. Barber,

Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman (2006) investigate the evolution of the distribution of

recommendations further. They find that the reduction in buys and strong buys is most

pronounced in the second half of 2002. They argue that this pattern cannot be explained by the

evolution of the economy but reflects instead the impact of the NYSE and NASD rules.

    Finally, Kadan, Madureira, Wang, and Zach (2006) compare analyst output before the

adoption of the regulations that were aimed at changing the conduct of research in financial firms

to analyst output afterwards. The authors consider a pre-regulation period from November 2000

to August 2002 and a post-regulation period from September 2002 to December 2004. They find

that the odds of an analyst issuing an optimistic recommendation during the pre-regulation period

increased by 38% for stocks that had undergone an IPO or SEO and an additional 10% if the

analyst was an affiliated analyst. These effects effectively disappear in the post-regulation period.

Focusing on IPO/SEO firms, they also show that the stock-price reactions to upgrades to buy or

strong buy are stronger in the post-regulation period, but the stock-price reactions to downgrades

to sell are weaker. They find that stock-price reactions to upgrades and downgrades are similar

for affiliated and non-affiliated firms in the post-regulation period. Unusual among existing

studies, they find no stock-price reactions to positive recommendations for IPO and SEO firms in

the pre-regulation period for both affiliated and non-affiliated analysts. This evidence suggests

that in the pre-regulation period they consider, the market discounted positive recommendations

for these firms completely and did not think that, somehow, affiliated analysts were more biased




                                                 36
than non-affiliated analysts. It may be that their short pre-regulation period, starting after Reg FD,

is unusual as it corresponds to a period of turmoil in the U.S. markets.



6. Conclusion

    In this paper, we define conflicts of interests generally as a situation where one party in a

transaction could potentially make a gain by taking actions detrimental to the other party.

Because taking advantage of conflicts of interest has indirect costs, for instance, reputation costs,

it does not follow that the party will take these actions. It is also possible that the other party

anticipates the actions taken, in which case it is not hurt by them. We show that there is a large

and growing literature on the economics of conflicts of interests. The conclusions reached by this

literature seem to depend on the type of conflict that is investigated as well as on the sample

period. At one extreme, the literature on the conflicts of interest arising because banks underwrite

securities for firms that have borrowed from them does not find evidence that this conflict has an

adverse impact. At the other extreme, the literature seems to find that independent boards for

mutual funds have value. In between, the literature on analysts finds a mix of results. Some

authors interpret their results as evidence that conflicts of interest matter for their sample, but

other authors reach opposite conclusions. It seems to us that a fair assessment of that literature is

that the majority of the papers do not suggest that the analyst conflict of interest arising from

investment banking activities had a systematic and persistent impact on the customers of analyst

services.

    Overall, the academic literature on conflicts of interest, using large samples, reaches

conclusions that are weaker and often more benign than the conclusions drawn by journalists and

politicians. Such an outcome is not surprising because there are important factors that mitigate the

impact of these conflicts of interest. First, financial institutions and individuals working for

financial institutions have incentives to limit the impact of these conflicts. Second, investors have

incentives to take into account conflicts of interest in their decisions and adjust recommendations


                                                 37
made to them for biases that might result from these conflicts. Nevertheless, the existence of

factors that mitigate the impact of conflicts of interests should not lure us into complacency.




                                                 38
References

Affleck-Graves, J., Davis L. R., Mendenhall, R. R., 1990. Forecasts of earnings per share:
    Possible sources of analyst superiority and bias. Contemporary Accounting Research 6, 501-
    517.

Aggarwal, R. K., Purnanandam, A. K., Wu, G., 2005. Underwriter manipulation in initial public
   offerings. Unpublished working paper, University of Minnesota.

Agrawal, A., Chadha, S., Chen, M. A., 2006. Who is afraid of Reg FD? The behavior and
   performance of sell-side analysts following the SEC's Fair Disclosure rules. Journal of
   Business, forthcoming.

Agrawal, A., Chen, M. A., 2004. Analyst conflicts and research quality. Unpublished working
   paper, University of Alabama.

Agrawal, A., Chen, M. A., 2005. Do analyst conflicts matter? Evidence from stock
   recommendations. Unpublished working paper, University of Alabama.

Akerlof, G. A., 1970. The market for 'lemons': Qualitative uncertainty and the market mechanism.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488-500.

Asquith, P., Mikhail, M. B., Au, A. S., 2005. Information content of equity analyst reports.
   Journal of Financial Economics 75, 245-282.

Bagnoli, M., Watts, S. G., Zhang, Y., 2006. Reg FD and the competitiveness of All-Star analysts.
   Unpublished working paper, Purdue University.

Bailey, W., Li, H., Mao, C. X., Zhong, R., 2003. Regulation Fair Disclosure and earnings
    information: Market, analyst, and corporate responses. Journal of Finance 58, 2487-2514.

Bajari, P., and Krainer, J., 2004. An empirical model of stock analysts’ recommendations: Market
    fundamentals, conflicts of interest, and peer effects. Unpublished working paper, National
    Bureau of Economic Research.

Barber, B., Lehavy, R. McNichols, M., Trueman, B., 2006. Buys, holds, and sells: The
   distribution of investment banks’ stock ratings and the implications for the profitability of
   analysts’ recommendations. Journal of Accounting & Economics 41, 87-117.

Barber, B., Lehavy, R., Trueman, B., this issue. Comparing the stock recommendation
   performance of investment banks and independent research firms.

Berger, P. G., Ofek, E., 1995. Diversification's effect on firm value. Journal of Financial
   Economics 37, 39-65.

Bhagat, S., Black, B. 2002. The non-correlation between board independence and long-term firm
   performance. Journal of Corporation Law 27, 231-273.

Bharath, S., Dahiya, S., Saunders, A., Srinivasan, A., this issue. So what do I get? The bank’s
   view of lending relationships.



                                              39
Bolton, P., Freixas, X., Shapiro, J., this issue. Conflicts of interest, information provision, and
    competition in banking.

Boni, L., 2006. Analyzing the analysts after the Global Settlement. In: Fuchita, Y., Litan, R. E.
   (Eds.), Financial Gatekeepers: Can They Protect Investors?, Brookings Institution Press and
   the Nomura Institute of Capital Markets Research.

Boni, L., Womack, K., 2002. Wall Street’s credibility problems: Misaligned incentives and
   dubious fixes? Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, 93-130.

Bradley, D. J., Jordan, B. D., Ritter, J. R., 2006. Analyst behavior following IPOs: The ‘bubble
   period’ evidence. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Bradshaw, M. T., Richardson, S. A., Sloan, R. G., 2006. The relation between corporate financing
   activities, analysts’ forecasts and stock returns. Journal of Accounting and Economics 42, 53-
   85.

Brown, L. D., 2001. A temporal analysis of earnings surprises. Journal of Accounting Research
   39, 221-241.

Chan, L. K. C., Karceski J., Lakonishok J., 2006. Analysts’ conflicts of interest and biases in
   earnings forecasts. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Chemmanur, T. J., Fulghieri, P., 1994. Investment bank reputation, information production, and
   financial intermediation. Journal of Finance 49, 57-79.

Clarke, J., Khorana, A., Patel, A., Rau, P. R., 2004. The good, the bad and the ugly? Differences
    in analyst behavior at investment banks, brokerages, and independent research firms.
    Unpublished working paper, Purdue University.

Clarke, J., Khorana, A., Patel, A., Rau, P. R., 2006. The impact of All-Star analyst job changes on
    their coverage choices and subsequent investment banking deal flow. Journal of Financial
    Economics, forthcoming.

Cornett, M. M., Tehranian, H., Yalcin, A., 2005. Regulation Fair Disclosure and the market’s
   reaction to analyst investment recommendation changes. Unpublished working paper, Boston
   College.

Cowen, A., Groysberg, B., Healy, P., 2006. Which types of analyst firms are more optimistic?
   Journal of Accounting and Economics 41, 119-146.

Davis, G. F., Kim, E. H., this issue. Business ties and proxy voting by mutual funds.

Dechow, P. M., Hutton, A. P., Sloan, R. G., 2000. The relation between analysts' forecasts of
   long-term earnings growth and stock price performance following equity offerings.
   Contemporary Accounting Research 17, 1-32.

DeLong, G., 2001. Stockholder gains from focusing versus diversifying bank mergers. Journal of
   Financial Economics 59, 221-252.




                                                40
Ding, B., Wermers, R., 2005. Mutual fund performance and governance structure: The role of
   portfolio managers and boards of directors. Unpublished working paper, University of
   Maryland.

Drucker, S., Puri, M., 2005. On the benefits of concurrent lending and underwriting. Journal of
   Finance 60, 2763-2799.

Drucker, S., Puri, M., 2006. Banks in capital markets: A survey. In: Eckbo, B. E. (Ed.),
   Handbook in Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, Elsevier/North-Holland,
   forthcoming.

Dugar, A., Nathan, S., 1995. The effects of investment banking relationships on financial
   analysts’ earnings forecasts and investment recommendations. Contemporary Accounting
   Research 12, 131-160.

Eleswarapu, V. R., Thompson, R., Venkataraman, K., 2004. The impact of Regulation Fair
    Disclosure: Trading costs and information asymmetry. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 39, 209-226.

Elton, E. J., Gruber M. J., Blake, C. 2003. Incentive fees and mutual funds. Journal of Finance 58,
    779-804.

Fang, L. H., Yasuda, A., 2006a. The effectiveness of reputation as a disciplinary device in sell-
   side research. Unpublished working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Fang, L. H., Yasuda, A., 2006b. Are stars’ opinions worth more? The relation between analyst
   reputation and recommendation values? Unpublished working paper, University of
   Pennsylvania.

Fried, D., Givoly, D., 1982. Financial analysts' forecasts of earnings: A better surrogate for
    market expectations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 4, 85-107.

Gasparino, C., 2005. Blood on the street. Free Press, New York.

Gintschel, A., Markov, S., 2004. The effectiveness of Regulation FD. Journal of Accounting and
    Economics 37, 293-314.

Griffin, J. M., Harris, J. H., Topaloglu, S., this issue. Why are IPO investors net buyers through
    lead underwriters?.

Gomes, A. R., Gorton G. B., Madureira L. SEC Regulation Fair Disclosure, information, and the
   cost of capital, unpublished working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania,
   Philadelphia, PA.

Grossman, S., 1981. The informational role of warranties and private disclosure about product
   quality. Journal of Law and Economics 24, 461-484.

Groysberg, B., Healy, P., Chapman, C., Gui, Y., 2005. Do buy-side analysts out-perform the sell-
   side? Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.




                                                41
Heflin, F., Subramanyam K. R., Zhang, Y. Regulation FD and the financial environment: Early
    evidence. Accounting Review 78, 1-37.

Hong, H., Kubik, J. D., 2003. Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns and biased earnings
   forecasts. Journal of Finance 58, 313-351.

Irvine, P. J., 2004. Analysts’ forecasts and brokerage-firm trading. Accounting Review 79, 125-
    149.

Jackson, A. R., 2005. Trade generation, reputation, and sell-side analysts. Journal of Finance 60,
    673-717.

Jacob, J., Rock, S., Weber, D. P., 2003. Do analysts at independent research firms make better
    earnings forecasts? Unpublished working paper, University of Colorado, Boulder.

James, C., Karceski, J., 2006, Strength of analyst coverage following IPOs. Journal of Financial
   Economics 81, 1-34.

Johnson, W.C., Marietta-Westberg J., 2005. Universal banking, asset management, and stock
   underwriting. Unpublished working paper, Michigan State University.

Jorion, P., Liu Z., Shi, C., 2006. Informational effects of regulation FD: Evidence from rating
    agencies, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Kadan, O., Madureira, L., Wang, R., Zach, T., 2006. Conflicts of interest and stock
   recommendations – The effects of the Global Settlement and related regulations. Unpublished
   working paper, Washington University, St. Louis.

Khorana, A., Tufano, P., Wedge, L., this issue. Board structure, mergers, and shareholder wealth:
   A study of the mutual fund industry.

Krigman, L., Shaw, W. H., Womack, K. L., 2001. Why do firms switch underwriters? Journal of
    Financial Economics 60, 245-284.

Kroszner, R., Rajan, R., 1994. Is the Glass-Steagall act justified? A study of the U.S. experience
   with universal banking before 1953. American Economic Review 84, 810-832.

Laeven, L., Levine, R., this issue. Is there a diversification discount in financial conglomerates?.

Lang, L. H. P., Stulz, R. M., 1994. Tobin's q, corporate diversification, and firm performance.
   Journal of Political Economy 102, 1248-1280.

Lin, H.-W., McNichols, M., 1998. Underwriting relationships, analysts’ earnings forecasts and
    investment recommendations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 101-127.

Ljungqvist, A., Malloy, C., Marston, F., 2006. Rewriting history. Unpublished working paper,
   New York University.

Ljungqvist, A., Marston, F., Starks, L. T., Wei, K., Yan, H., this issue. Conflicts of interest in
   sell-side research and the moderating role of institutional investors.



                                                 42
Ljungqvist, A., Marston, F., Wilhelm, W. J., 2005. Scaling the hierarchy: How and why
   investment banks compete for syndicate co-management appointments. Unpublished working
   paper, New York University.

Ljungqvist, A., Marston, F., Wilhelm, W. J.., 2006. Competing for securities underwriting
   mandates: Banking relationships and analyst recommendations. Journal of Finance 56, 301-
   340.

Ljungqvist, A., Wilhelm, W. J., 2003. IPO pricing in the Dot-com bubble. Journal of Finance 58,
   723-752.

Lloyd-Davies, P., Canes, M., 1978. Stock prices and the publication of second-hand information.
   Journal of Business 51, 43-56.

Loughran, T., Ritter, J. R., 2002. Why don't issuers get upset about leaving money on the table in
   IPOs? Review of Financial Studies 15, 413-444.

Mahoney, P. G., 2004. Manager-investor conflicts in mutual funds. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 18, 161-182.

Malmendier, U., Shanthikumar, D., this issue. Are investors naïve about incentives?.

McNichols, M., O’Brien, P. C., Pamukcu, O. M., 2006. That ship has sailed: Unaffiliated
  analysts’ recommendation performance for IPO firms. Unpublished working paper, Stanford
  University.

Michaely, R., Womack, K. L., 1999. Conflict of interest and the credibility of underwriter analyst
   recommendations. Review of Financial Studies 12, 653-686.

Mikhail, M. B., Walther, B. R., Willis, R. H., 1999. Does forecast accuracy matter to security
   analysts? Accounting Review 74, 185-200.

Mohanram, P., Sunder, S. V., 2006. How has Regulation FD affected the operations of financial
  analysts? Contemporary Accounting Research 23, 491-525.

Narayanan, R., Rangan, K., Rangan, N., 2004. The role of syndicate structure in bank
   underwriting. Journal of Financial Economics 72, 555-580.

O’Brien, P. C., McNichols, M., Lin, H.-W., 2005. Analyst impartiality and investment banking
   relationships. Journal of Accounting and Research 43, 623-650.

Puri, M., 1994. The long-term default performance of bank underwritten security issues. Journal
    of Banking and Finance 18, 397-418.

Puri, M., 1999. Commercial banks as underwriters: Implications for the going public process.
    Journal of Financial Economics 54, 133-163.

Ramnath, S., Rock, S., Shane, P., 2006. A review of research related to financial analysts’
   forecasts and stock recommendations. Unpublished working paper, Georgetown University.

Reingold, D., Reingold, J. 2006. Confessions of a Wall Street analyst. HarperCollins, New York.


                                               43
Ritter, J. R., Welch, I., 2002. A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations. Journal of
    Finance 57, 1795-1828.

Ritter, J. R., Zhang, D., 2006. Affiliated mutual funds and the allocation of initial public
    offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Roten, I., Mullineaux, D., 2002. Debt underwriting by commercial bank-affiliated firms and
   investment banks: More evidence. Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 689-718.

Stein, J. C., 1989. Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
    behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655-670.

Stickel, S. E., 1992. Reputation and performance among security analysts. Journal of Finance 47,
    1811-1836.

Willis, R. H., 2001. Mutual fund managers forecasting behavior. Journal of Accounting Research
    39, 707-725.

Yasuda, A., 2005. Do bank relationships affect the firm's underwriter choice in the corporate-
   bond underwriting. Journal of Finance 60, 1259-1292.




                                              44
                                                                     Table 1
                                           Papers on conflicted versus non-conflicted sell-side analysts
The papers are sorted by the beginning of the sample period within each panel. Panel A lists the papers focused on the impact of conflicts of interest on forecasts
and recommendations. Panel B lists the papers that draw conclusions on the impact of conflicts of interest on the stock return performance of recommendations
or on the market’s reaction to forecasts and recommendations. The last column for both panels provides our assessment of whether the paper shows that the
conflicts of interests afflicting sell-side analysts affect adversely the actions of analysts and/or investors. If a study considers only the impact of conflicts on
actions of analysts, we indicate that the conflicts have adverse effects if analysts are shown to have biased forecasts and/or recommendations because of the
conflicts. If a study considers the impact of conflicts on analyst actions and on investors, we determine if the conflicts have adverse effects based on whether
investors are affected adversely by the conflicts. If a study finds that analysts are biased because of conflicts but this has no impact on returns of investors, we
therefore conclude that the conflicts have no adverse effects. Admittedly, this assessment involves an element of arbitrariness. The conclusions listed are those of
the authors of the papers. The papers in bold are in this issue.

No.    Paper                       Sample Period, Data             Conclusions                                                                          Adverse
                                   Sources                                                                                                              Effects?
                                          Panel A: Conflicts of interest and biases in forecasts and recommendations
1.     Bradshaw, Richardson,       1975-2000, I/B/E/S, First       Over-optimism in analysts’ earnings forecasts, stock recommendations, and            Yes
       and Sloan (2006)            Call, SDC.                      target prices are systematically related to net corporate financing activities.
                                                                   Over-optimism is greatest for firms issuing equity and debt and least for firms
                                                                   repurchasing equity and debt.
2.     Chan, Karceski, and         1984-2004, I/B/E/S.             Analysts become more pessimistic over this sample period so that more firms          Yes
       Lakonishok (2006)                                           have positive earnings surprises. The predisposition to positive surprises is more
                                                                   pronounced for firms that are potential investment banking clients and for
                                                                   analysts from firms with investment banking business.
3.     Clarke, Khorana, Patel,     1988-1999, I/B/E/S,             All-Star analysts switching investment banks do not change their optimism in         No
       and Rau (2006)              Institutional Investor, SDC.    earnings forecasts or recommendation when joining a new bank, even though
                                                                   their coverage decisions change. No evidence that issuing optimistic earnings
                                                                   forecasts or recommendations affects investment banking deal flow.
4.     Jackson (2005)              1992-2002, I/B/E/S, SDC,        Analysts can generate more trade for their brokerage firms by either being more      No
                                   Australia Stock Exchange        optimistic or by acquiring a higher reputation through more accurate forecasts.
                                   Transaction Data.               Reputation is hence a mitigating force for conflicts of interests.
5.     Irvine (2004)               1993-1994, I/B/E/S,             Buy recommendations generate more trading for the analyst's brokerage firm.          Yes
                                   Toronto Stock Exchange          Earnings forecast bias (forecast minus actual earnings) cannot generate more
                                   Transaction Data.               trades but forecasts that deviate more from the consensus can.
No.   Paper                   Sample Period, Data           Conclusions                                                                           Adverse
                              Sources                                                                                                             Effects?
6.    Ljungqvist, Marston,    1993-2000, I/B/E/S,           Recommendations relative to consensus are positively related to investment            No
      Starks, Wei, and Yan    Thomson 13F, SDC.             banking relationships and brokerage pressures, but negatively related to
      (this issue)                                          ownership by institutional shareholders. Evidence that earnings forecasts
                                                            are more accurate for firms with more institutional ownership and that
                                                            ratings following share price decreases occur more quickly.
7.    Ljungqvist, Marston,    1993-2002, I/B/E/S, SDC,      Optimistic research attracts co-underwriter management appointments during            Yes
      and Wilhelm (2005)      LPC.                          the sample period. Co-management appointments, in turn, increase a bank’s
                                                            chances of winning more lucrative lead-management mandates in the future.
8.    Ljungqvist, Marston,    1993-2002, I/B/E/S, SDC,      No evidence that aggressively optimistic analyst recommendations increased            No
      and Wilhelm (2006)      LPC.                          their bank's probability of winning an underwriting mandate. Main determinant
                                                            of lead-bank choice is strength of prior underwriting and lending relationships.
9.    O'Brien, McNichols,     1994-2001, First Call, SDC.   Affiliated analysts downgrade their recommendations from a buy rating more            Yes
      and Lin (2005)                                        slowly than unaffiliated analysts subsequent to equity offerings.
10.   Malmendier and          1994-2001, I/B/E/S, SDC       Large traders react to strong buy recommendations, but not to buy                     Yes
      Shanthikumar (this      New Issues, TAQ.              recommendations. They sell on hold recommendations. Small traders take
      issue)                                                recommendations literally. Moreover, only large traders discount affiliated
                                                            recommendations more than unaffiliated ones. It appears that small
                                                            investors fail to adjust rationally for the incentive distortions of analysts.
11.   Agrawal and Chen        1994-2003, I/B/E/S, x-17a-5   Accuracy and bias in quarterly forecasts are unrelated to conflict magnitudes,        No
      (2004)                  SEC Filings.                  proxied by the analysts’ employers’ annual revenue breakdown among
                                                            investment banking, brokerage, and other businesses. Relative optimism in LTG
                                                            forecasts is positively related to the importance of brokerage business.
12.   James and Karceski      1996-2000, First Call, SDC.   IPO firms with poor aftermarket performance are given higher target prices and        Yes
      (2006)                                                strong buy recommendations especially from affiliated analysts. This typically
                                                            lasts for less than six months and shows that affiliated analysts provide ‘‘booster
                                                            shots’’ of stronger coverage for poor-performing firms.
13.   Cowen, Groysberg, and   1996-2002, First Call and     Analysts at firms that funded research through underwriting and trading               No
      Healy, (2006)           I/B/E/S, SDC, Nelson’s        activities actually make less optimistic forecasts and recommendations than
                              Directory of Investment       analysts at non-underwriting brokerage houses. Optimism is particularly low for
                              Research.                     bulge underwriter firm analysts, implying that firm reputation reduces research
                                                            optimism. Analyst optimism is at least partially driven by trading incentives, not
                                                            investment banking concerns.




                                                                          46
No.   Paper                      Sample Period, Data            Conclusions                                                                        Adverse
                                 Sources                                                                                                           Effects?
14.   Jacob, Rock, and Weber     1998-2001, I/B/E/S,            Forecasts of quarterly earnings, annual earnings, and long-term growth by          No
      (2003)                     Nelson’s Directory of          investment bank analysts are more accurate and less optimistic than those from
                                 Investment Research.           analysts employed by independent research firms. Higher skill levels and better
                                                                resources at investment banks dominate any alleged conflicts of interest.
15.   Bajari and Krainer         1998-2003, Nasdaq-100          Using a new approach that allows for peer group effects, they show that            No
      (2004)                     index firms, First Call,       recommendations depend most heavily on publicly observable information
                                 SDC.                           about the stocks and on industry norms, and not on the existence of an
                                                                investment banking deal.


                            Panel B: Studies of the stock performance of firms following analyst forecasts and recommendations
16.   Dechow, Hutton, and        1981-1990, I/B/E/S, SDC.       Affiliated analysts issue more optimistic long-term growth forecasts around        Yes
      Sloan (2000)                                              equity offerings for a sample of 1,179 equity offerings. Post-offering
                                                                underperformance is most pronounced for firms with the highest growth
                                                                forecasts made by affiliated analysts.
17.   Dugar and Nathan           1983-1988, Corporate and       Analysts from firms’ investment banks issue more optimistic earnings forecasts     No
      (1995)                     Industry Research Reports      and stock recommendations. An investor following the recommendations from
                                 and Investext, Corporate       these analysts does not have worse performance because the market discounts
                                 Finance Bluebook.              these recommendations.
18.   Lin and McNichols          1989-1994, I/B/E/S, SDC.       Evidence of a greater degree of optimism in affiliated sell-side analysts’ long-   No
      (1998)                                                    term growth forecasts and investment recommendations for stocks with
                                                                seasoned offerings, but no such evidence for one- or two-year-ahead earnings
                                                                forecasts. Hold recommendations from affiliated analysts are more informative
                                                                than holds from independent analysts, showing that investors treat affiliated
                                                                analysts holds as sells.
19.   Michaely and Womack        1990-1991, First Call,         Affiliated analysts buy recommendations perform more poorly than those of          Yes
      (1999)                     Investment Dealer’s Digest.    unaffiliated analysts for a sample of 391 IPOs. Investors partially discount the
                                                                recommendations by affiliated analysts and do not react as much to buy
                                                                recommendations issued by underwriter analysts compared to those issued by
                                                                non-underwriter analysts.




                                                                              47
20.   Clarke, Khorana, Patel,   1993-2002, I/B/E/S,           Analysts at large investment banks provide less optimistic and more accurate          No
      and Rau (2004)            Nelson’s Directory of         earnings forecasts, and are more likely to provide the first forecast for a firm in
                                Investment Research.          any given quarter. Abnormal returns following recommendations from these
                                                              large investment banks are also higher than those from other financial
                                                              institutions. Analysts do not change their optimism when moving to large
                                                              investment banks.
21.   Fang and Yasuda           1993-2003, I/B/E/S,           During the market downturn, analysts ranked by Institutional Investor from top-       No
      (2006a)                   Institutional Investor,       tier investment banks are quicker to downgrade their buy recommendations
                                Carter-Manaster rankings.     compared to their unranked colleagues. Ranked analysts have more profitable
                                                              stock recommendations. Personal reputation plays a disciplinary role in the face
                                                              of conflicts of interest in sell-side research.
22.   McNichols, O’Brien,       1994-2001, First Call, SDC.   No evidence that affiliated analyst recommendations earn lower abnormal buy-          No
      and Pamukcu (2006)                                      and-hold returns than those of unaffiliated analysts after the recommendations.
                                                              Unaffiliated analysts’ recommendations usually arrive too late to discriminate
                                                              between good and bad IPOs.
23.   Fang and Yasuda           1994-2003, I/B/E/S,           Investors can profit from following the buy recommendations of All-Star               No
      (2006b)                   Institutional Investor,       analysts from top-tier (reputable) banks while buys from other analyst
                                Carter-Manaster rankings.     subgroups are not profitable. Further, recommendations of All-Star analysts at
                                                              top-tier banks remain valuable during the market troughs. Therefore, reputation
                                                              exerts a mitigating role for conflicts of interest.
24.   Agrawal and Chen          1994-2003, I/B/E/S, x-17a-5   Using revenue breakdowns as proxies for conflicts of interests, they find that        No
      (2005)                    SEC Filings.                  the optimistic recommendation bias stemming from investment banking
                                                              conflicts is especially pronounced during the late-1990s. Reactions to
                                                              recommendation changes show that capital markets discount this optimistic
                                                              bias. The one-year return of revised recommendations is unrelated to conflicts
                                                              of interest.
25.   Barber, Lehavy, and       1996-2003, First Call,        The average abnormal return to independent research firms’ buy                        Yes
      Trueman (this issue)      SDC, Nelson’s Directory       recommendations exceeds that of investment bank buy recommendations
                                of Investment Research.       by 8% per year. This underperformance is more pronounced after the
                                                              market peak in March 2000 and for firms that recently issued equity. Sell
                                                              recommendations have the reverse result—investment banks issue more
                                                              profitable sell recommendations than independent research firms.
26.   Groysberg, Healy,         1997-2004, Anonymous          Buy-side analysts make more optimistic and less accurate earnings forecasts           No
      Chapman, and Gui          buy-side firm, I/B/E/S.       than sell-side analysts. Buy-side analysts’ buy and strong buy recommendations
      (2005)                                                  were less profitable than those of sell-side analysts.




                                                                           48
27.   Boni (2006)             1999-2004, I/B/E/S.        After the Global Research Analyst Settlement, the involved banks reduced their      Yes
                                                         coverage of firms, continued to be optimistic, and issued recommendations
                                                         changes that have lower price impacts. The Settlement seems to have done little
                                                         to change the recommendations made by the ten Ssettlement banks or the long-
                                                         term investment value of their recommendations for investors. Also, naïve
                                                         investors who trade on the level of analyst recommendations can be adversely
                                                         impacted both pre- and post-Settlement.
28.   Kadan, Madureira,       2000-2004, I/B/E/S, SDC.   The odds of an analyst issuing an optimistic recommendation during the pre-         Yes
      Wang, and Zach (2006)                              regulation period (Nov 2000-Aug 2002) increased by 38% for stocks that have
                                                         undergone an IPO or SEO and an additional 10% if the analyst is an affiliated
                                                         analyst. Effects disappear in the post-regulation period (Sep 2002-Dec 2004).
                                                         Price reactions to upgrades to buy are stronger in the post-regulation period for
                                                         IPO/SEO firms, but the stock-price reactions to downgrades to sell are weaker.
                                                         Stock-price reactions to upgrades and downgrades are similar for affiliated and
                                                         non-affiliated firm in the post-regulation period.




                                                                      49
