                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      INTERNATIONAL KNOWLEDGE FLOWS:
              EVIDENCE FROM AN INVENTOR-FIRM MATCHED DATA SET

                                          Jinyoung Kim
                                        Sangjoon John Lee
                                         Gerald Marschke

                                       Working Paper 12692
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12692


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Jinyoung Kim, Sangjoon John Lee, and Gerald Marschke. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from an Inventor-Firm Matched Data Set
Jinyoung Kim, Sangjoon John Lee, and Gerald Marschke
NBER Working Paper No. 12692
November 2006
JEL No. J62,O31,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

We describe the construction of a panel data set from the U.S. patent data that contains measures of
inventors' life-cycle R&D productivity--patents and patent citations. We match the data set to information
on the U.S. pharmaceutical and semiconductor firms for whom they work. In this paper we use these
data to examine the role of research personnel as a pathway for the diffusion of ideas from foreign
countries to U.S. innovators. In particular, we find in recent years an increase in the extent that U.S.
innovating firms collaborate with or employ researchers with foreign experience. This increase appears
to work primarily through an increase in U.S. firms' employment of foreign-residing researchers; the
fraction of research-active U.S. residents with foreign research experience appears to be falling, suggesting
that U.S. pharmaceutical and semiconductor firms are increasingly locating operations in foreign countries
to employ such researchers, as opposed to such researchers immigrating to the U.S. to work. In addition,
we investigate which U.S. firms conducting R&D build upon innovations originating abroad. We find
that employing or collaborating with researchers who have research experience abroad seems to facilitate
the use of output of non-U.S. R&D. We also find that in the semiconductor industry smaller and older
firms, and in the pharmaceutical industry, younger firms are more likely to access foreign R&D output.

Jinyoung Kim                                          Gerald Marschke
Department of Economics                               State University of New York - Albany
Korea University                                      and IZA
Anam-Dong 5-1, Sungbuk-ku                             Department of Economics
Seoul, Korea 136-701                                  BA 112A
jinykim@korea.ac.kr                                   1400 Washington Avenue
                                                      Albany, NY 12222-0001
Sangjoon John Lee                                     marschke@albany.edu
Alfred University
One Saxon Drive
Alfred NY 14802
sangjoon@alfred.edu
1. Introduction

        Understanding the nature of knowledge spillovers is an important area of research

because of its implications for economic growth and science and technology policy.                      The

importance of knowledge spillovers has been well recognized in the literature (for example,

Griliches, 1992). Knowledge spillovers can take place in a number of ways: through various

methods of communication (scholarly publications, the material published in universities’ patent

applications and the like) or through person-to-person contacts in informal settings.1 Knowledge

spillovers may also occur through employing or collaborating with researchers.

        Studies in both the economics and sociology of innovation literatures argue that new

technologies are frequently difficult to transmit to the uninitiated via spoken or written

communication (see Polyani, 1958, for an early discussion of the ‘tacitness’ of knowledge).

Often the most efficient means of transmission across organizational boundaries for tacit

knowledge is via person-to-person contact involving a transfer or exchange of personnel. Recent

findings that technological diffusion appears to be geographically limited (e.g., Jaffe, 1989; Jaffe,

Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993; Audretsch and Feldman, 1996; Zucker, Darby, and Brewer,

1998; and Mowery and Ziedonis, 2001) are often interpreted as evidence of the tacitness of

knowledge. Feldman (1994) suggests that tacit knowledge transmission can only take place

through intense communication and is facilitated by close location.

        More direct evidence exists that person-to-person interaction is important for the

diffusion of technology. Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh (2002) surveyed R&D managers on the

means by which they gather and assimilate new technologies. They find that firms access


1
  See Cohen, Nelson and Walsh (2002) on the various means by which innovating firms access know-how
developed externally. See Agrawal, Cockburn, and McHale (2003) for evidence of the importance of social
networks in promoting diffusion. Von Hippel (1988) documents how direct informal contacts between researchers
affect knowledge spillovers.


                                                     1
externally-located technology partly through the hiring of and collaboration with researchers

from the outside.       Moreover, they find that hiring/collaboration with outside scientists is

complementary to other means of accessing externally produced knowledge, such as through

informal communications with outsiders and more formal (such as consulting) relationships with

outsiders. Almeida and Kogut (1999) find that scientific references that firms cite in their patent

applications reflect the employment histories of their inventors, suggesting that ideas in the

semiconductor industry are spread by the movement of key engineers among firms, especially

within a geographical area.2 Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong (2001) find evidence of a pay-off to

firms that seek interactions with outside researchers. They find a positive impact on patent

productivity for biotech firms that collaborate with university researchers on research and

scholarly publications.

        We have constructed a scientist-based data set that will allow us to study the role of

research personnel as a pathway for the diffusion of ideas, among other aspects of innovation.

This paper details the construction of these data and then describes their use in an analysis of the

influence of foreign R&D on U.S. innovating firms. This paper is part of a larger project

examining empirically issues related to the labor market for scientists.

        The first half of the paper describes the construction of these data. The inventors behind

the patented invention, as well as their home addresses, are listed on each U.S. patent, as are the

firms to which the patent is assigned and the assignees’ nationalities of incorporation. The firm

to which the patent is assigned is in most cases the employer of the persons named in the

2
  See also the (indirect) evidence of a link between scientific mobility and technological diffusion in Kim and
Marschke (2005) and Moen (2005). Kim and Marschke find that firms are more likely to patent in environments
where scientists are more likely to switch employers, suggesting that workers do transmit technological know-how
when they move from one employer to another. Technical knowledge acquired by the scientist that can be
transmitted to future employers is a form of general human capital. Thus, like general human capital, scientists
should pay to acquire technological knowledge that they can exploit possibly with multiple employers with lower
wages. Moen finds some evidence of this: he shows that technical workers in R&D intensive firms in Norway
accept lower wages early in their career in exchange for higher wages later.


                                                       2
inventor field. We match names in the inventor fields of patents to construct a panel data set of

inventors that contains the patents in each year of the inventors’ careers. The resulting data set

allows us to track scientists geographically over the course of their career. These data afford us a

window on the migration of technological human capital across national borders, one possible

mechanism by which technology diffuses internationally.          Patent applications disclose any

knowledge they have of previous relevant inventions. Through its citations to previous patents

each patent documents the “prior art” upon which the new innovation builds, and because we

know each cited patent’s assignee type, we know in which sector and country the prior art

originated. These citations provide an additional window on the pathways of knowledge. In the

final stage of constructing our patent-inventor data set we merge in citations made by the patent

for each patent to which the inventor is named.

       One use to which we wish to put our data is in understanding the factors that influence

the innovating firm’s accessing of recent innovations developed externally. A focus of this part

of the analysis is the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries, two industries that are

especially prolific generators of innovations and patents. Thus the last stage of data construction

involves carefully matching the inventor data to data on publicly traded firms in these two

industries.

       After detailing our data construction efforts, we put our data to use investigating the

international transmission of technology through scientific labor markets.        For each patent

assigned to a U.S. firm, we can determine the country of the inventor’s residence at the time of

patent application, and whether they had ever been named as an inventor on a patent while

residing abroad. Inventing in a foreign country can be regarded as evidence of an inventor’s




                                                  3
exposure to research abroad. We also investigate which U.S. firms in our two industries cite

foreign-assigned patents as prior art and thus build upon innovations originating abroad.

       Our main findings are the following. We find that there has been an increase in recent

years of U.S. innovating firms employing or collaborating with researchers with foreign

experience.   This increase appears to work primarily through an increase in U.S. firms’

employment of foreign-residing researchers; the fraction of research-active U.S. residents with

foreign research experience appears to be falling, suggesting that U.S. pharmaceutical and

semiconductor firms are going to foreign countries to employ such researchers as opposed to

such researchers immigrating to the U.S. to work for U.S. firms. In addition we investigate the

firm-level determinants of accessing non-U.S. technological know-how. We find, for example,

that employing or collaborating with researchers with research experience abroad seems to

facilitate this access. Also, in the semiconductor industry, smaller and older firms and in the

pharmaceutical industry, younger firms are more likely to make use of the output of non-U.S.

R&D.

       The paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe the sources for the data

construction and the construction itself. Section 4 details some descriptive statistics of the data

set. Section 5 describes our analysis on the influence of foreign R&D on U.S. innovation.

Section 6 concludes.



2. Data Sources

       The data set we have created contains measures—patents and patent citations—of the

R&D productivity of individual researchers between 1975 and 1998 and includes information on

their advanced degrees in the natural sciences and engineering fields. These data also contain,

for patents assigned to publicly traded firms in the U.S. pharmaceutical (Primary SIC code 2834)


                                                4
or semiconductor industry (Primary SIC code 3674), information (e.g., firm size and R&D

expenditures) on the patents’ assignees. Budgetary and time constraints limited the number of

industries that we could include in our analysis.                   The pharmaceutical and semiconductor

industries were selected because they are especially prolific generators of innovations3 and their

products are relatively homogeneous4 compared to those of other industries.

         The data for this study come from six sources: (1) Patent Bibliographic data (Patents

BIB) released by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (U.S.PTO), which contains bibliographic

information on all U.S. utility patents issued from 1969 to 2002; (2) the ProQuest Digital

Dissertation Abstracts database, which contains information on the date, field, and type of degree

for those who earned degrees in all natural science and engineering fields between 1945-2003;

(3) the Compact D/SEC database from 1989 to 1997, which contains firm information taken

primarily from 10-K reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission; (4) the

Standard & Poor’s Annual Guide to Stocks-Directory of Obsolete Securities, which includes a

history of firm name changes, and merger and acquisition; (5) the Thomas Register, Mergent,

and Corptech data which report a firm’s founding year, and finally (6) the NBER Patent-

Citations data collected by Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001), which contain all citations made

by patents granted in 1975-1999. These data sources are described in detail below and variables

used in our study from each data source are in Table 1.



2.1. Patent Bibliographic data (Patents BIB)



3
  Based on NBER-Case Western University data of U.S. patents from 1963 to 1999, 15.3% of industry patents were
granted to the firms in the pharmaceutical industry and 14.8% were granted to those in the semiconductor industry.
4
  In a cross-sectional analysis involving multiple industries, differing technologies and patent propensities make
interpretation of results difficult. By limiting analysis to the patents and their inventors in a specific industry, we
resolve heterogeneity in the propensity to patent across industries, thus making comparisons of patents and citations
more meaningful.


                                                          5
       Patents BIB is one of the Cassis Series of optical disc products released by the U.S.PTO.

Patents BIB contains bibliographic information for U.S. utility patents issued since January 1969.

The information includes patent ID number, dates of the patent’s application and granting, patent

assignee, and geographic information on all inventors involved. The original optical disc we use

covers patents issued between 1969 and 2002, and contains over 3 million U.S. patents granted.

We use only the patents granted after January 1975 because detailed geographic information for

all inventors is available in Patents BIB only for patents granted after that date. Most foreign

innovating firms, especially those in Western Europe and in Japan apply for patents in the U.S.

in addition to their home countries so that U.S. patent data reflect nearly the universe of patented

innovations. The number of patents during this period is 2,493,610 (U.S. Patent No. 3,858,241

through 6,351,850), which together list 5,105,754 inventors (an average of 2.05 inventors listed

per patent).



2.2. ProQuest Digital Dissertation Abstracts

       This database contains information on the author and the title of dissertation, degree

conferring institution, date of degree, academic field, and type of degree (MA, MS, MBA, LLM,

Ph.D., or Ph.D. equivalent) for those who earned degrees between 1945 and 2003 from over

1,000 North American graduate schools and European universities. Before matching to Patent

BIB information of inventors, we took total 1,068,551 dissertation abstracts in all the natural

science and engineering fields among over 2 million doctoral dissertations and Masters theses in

all fields of the ProQuest database.




                                                 6
2.3. Compact D/SEC

       The Compact D/SEC contains about 12,000 firms that have at least $5 million in assets

and at least 500 shareholders of one class of stock of U.S. companies traded on the American

Stock Exchange, the NASDAQ, the New York Stock Exchange, or the Over-the-Counter

equities market. The data set provides financial and other information obtained from Annual

Reports, 10-K and 20-F filings, and Proxy Statements for those companies.            Most of the

companies included are American. Company records include directory information, primary and

secondary SIC codes, brief business descriptions, names of subsidiaries, names of top executives,

ownership data, financial data, and excerpts from annual reports and other SEC reports.



2.4. Standard & Poor’s Annual Guide to Stocks (S&P)

       The firm-level information from the Compact D/SEC data cannot be directly matched to

assignees in the Patents BIB data because parent firms patent sometimes under their own names

and other times under the names of their subsidiaries. Mergers and acquisitions at both the

parent firm and subsidiary levels and name changes further complicate linking the patent to firm-

level data. To track the ownership of firms over the entire period of our study, we use the

information in the Standard & Poor’s Annual Guide to Stocks. The S&P data provide histories

of firm ownership changes due to mergers and acquisitions, bankruptcy, dissolution, and name

changes, updated through December 2002.



2.5. NBER Patent-Citations

       Patent applicants are legally obligated to disclose any knowledge they have of previous

relevant inventions. Citations are of two kinds: to science (or prior science publications) and to




                                                7
technology (or previous patents). The patent examiner may add to the application relevant

citations omitted by the applicant. Thus, through the patent citations each patent documents the

“prior art” upon which the new innovation builds. Through the citations we can trace knowledge

flow, measure the “closeness” of technological innovations, and measure an innovation’s impact.

          The data collected by Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001) contain all citations made and

received by patents granted between 1975 and 1999. Their data contain a total of 16,522,438

citation records; the mean number of citations received by a patent is 5.07, ranging from a

minimum of 1 and a maximum of 779, respectively. The number of patents granted to the firms

identified in the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries between 1975 and 1999 is 244,158.

The mean citations received by a patent in these two industries is 8.13, ranging from a minimum

of 1 and a maximum of 631.



3. Data Set Construction Process

          This section discusses key issues that arise in assembling our data set from these six

sources. The assembly requires three steps. First, we create an inventor identifier in Patents BIB

because of the non-uniqueness of inventors’ names. The primary challenge in this step is

identifying who is who among inventors with same or similar names. The authors in the

Dissertation Abstract data are then matched with inventors in the Patents BIB data. Second, we

identify each firm’s ownership structure of subsidiaries and their name changes over the data

period to construct firm-level data, using the Compact D/SEC and the S&P data. In the final step,

we combine the inventor data and the firm data and then add the patent citation data where each

citing patent that was granted between 1975 and 1999 is matched to all patents cited by the

patent.




                                                 8
3.1. Identifying the same inventor among ‘same/similar’ names

       Over 5.1 million inventor names are contained in the U.S. patent data from January 1975

through February 2002. Each inventor name record includes the last name, first name, middle

name and suffix (Jr., Sr., etc.) of the inventor, as well as his/her street address, city, state, zip

code (often missing), and country of residence at the time of the granting of the patent.

       Identifying the same inventor in different records with same or similar names (for

example, John Maynard Keynes, John M. Keynes, John Keynes and John Keyens) is not an easy

task. Our matching method uses as much information in the patent data as possible to increase

the number of names matches without losing matching accuracy.                  Our name-matching

methodology is similar to that in Trajtenberg (2004).

       To start, we treat each entry that appears in the inventor name field of every patent in the

Patents BIB data as a unique inventor. Given N number of names in this name pool, we pair

each name with all other names, which generates N(N-1)/2 number of unique pairs. The 5.1

million names in the Patents BIB data (2.05 inventors per patent) thus produce 13 trillion unique

pairs. For each pair, we consider the two names as belonging to the same inventor if the

SOUNDEX codes of their last names and their full first names are the same, and at least one of

the following three conditions is met: (1) the full addresses for the pair of names are the same;

(2) one name from the pair is an inventor of a patent that is cited by another patent whose

inventors include the other name from the pair; or (3) the two names from the pair share the same

co-inventor. These three criteria in our name matching method are similar to the “Strong”

criteria of Trajtenberg (2004).




                                                 9
       SOUNDEX is a coded index for last names based on the way a last name sounds in

English rather than the way it is spelled. Last names that sound the same, but are spelled

differently, like SMITH and SMYTH, have the same SOUNDEX code. We use the SOUNDEX

coding method to expand the list of similar last names to overcome the potential for misspellings

and inconsistent foreign name translations to English; misspellings are common in the U.S.PTO

data as are names of non-Western European origin (see Appendix A for the detailed SOUNDEX

coding method).

       We also consider a pair of names as a match if two have the same full last and first names,

and at least one of the following two conditions is met: (1) the two have the same zip code; or (2)

they have the same full middle name. These two criteria correspond to the “Medium” criteria of

Trajtenberg (2004). As an additional step beyond the aforementioned pair-wise comparisons, we

treat a pair of inventors as mismatched if the middle name initials of the pair are different.

       Table 2 illustrates our name-matching procedure. Inventors 001 and 002 in Table 2 have

the same last and first names, and share the same co-inventor. Thus, the two records in this pair

are treated as the same inventor. Inventors 002 and 003 do not have the same full middle name

but share the same zip code, and thus the two inventors are treated as the same inventor.

Although inventors 002 and 005 share the same zip code, the middle name initials are different.

Therefore, the pair is not considered a match (they would not be considered a match by our

algorithm even if their street addresses were identical, possibly a case of a parent and a child).


Imposing transitivity

       Transitivity is imposed in the following sense: If name A is matched to name B and name

B is matched to name C, name A is then matched to name C. We iterate this process until all

possible transitivity matches are completed. After the transitivity procedure, we assign the same



                                                 10
inventor ID number for all the names matched. For instance, inventors 001 and 003 are not

linked in the initial round of name matching, but they are matched through transitivity because

inventors 001 and 002 are matched and inventors 002 and 003 are matched.

       Imposing transitivity, however, poses a possibility of name mismatch. Suppose, for

example, Adam E. Smith and Adam Smith are matched in one pair, and Adam J. Smith and the

same Adam Smith are matched in another pair. According to our transitivity procedure, Adam E.

Smith and Adam J. Smith are identified as a match although their middle name initials are

different. The number of matches through transitivity suffering from this problem appears to be

trivial, however: we find 126 cases where two inventors are matched although their middle

names were different out of 2.3 million uniquely identified inventors. Upon further investigation

of these cases, we found the mismatches are of three kinds. In the first kind, some middle names

in the Patents BIB data are incorrectly coded. For instance, our transitivity procedure matched

the names ‘Laszlo Andra Szporny’ and ‘Laszlo Eszter Szporny’ which appear to belong to the

same inventor according to other information. We found that this particular inventor does not

have a middle name, and the middle names attributed to him were in fact the first names of the

next co-inventors listed on his patents. In the second kind of mismatch, an inventor with two

middle names is coded in the Patents BIB data with one middle name in some cases and with the

other middle name in other cases. In the third kind, a mismatch occurs when two inventors with

the same last and first name but different middle names appear in the same patent. We corrected

by hand instances of the first two kinds of mismatch, but dropped from our data the observations

displaying the third kind of mismatch.

       Trajtenberg (2004) assigns scores for each matching criterion and considers a pair

matched only if its total score from all matching criteria exceeds a threshold. Because the choice




                                               11
of weights and the score threshold for a match is largely arbitrary, we do not use this scoring

method in our data construction. Our method also differs in that we do not use as a matching

criterion whether two inventors share the same assignee because name matching based on this

criterion might bias our measure of mobility among inventors. Instead we apply the rule that two

inventors are not treated as a match if their middle name initials differ. From our experience

with the patent data, imposing this rule is effective because the SOUNDEX coding system

sometimes so loosely specifies names that apparently different last names are considered a match.

        In the end, because of these differences, the number of distinct inventors identified with

our procedure is a little higher than the number of distinct inventors reported in Trajtenberg

(2004). We identified 2.3 million unique inventors (45%) out of 5.1 million names in the entire

patent data while Trajtenberg (2004) found 1.6 million distinctive inventors (37%) out of 4.3

million names. Note that our patent database is larger because it includes additional years, 2000-

2002.



Adding in Dissertation Abstracts information

        We next match names in the Dissertation Abstract data to the inventors in the patent data.

Each inventor identified through the above-described procedure may have a list of names

matched to him or her (for example, John Maynard Keynes, John M. Keynes, John Keynes) due

to names linked to each other by employing our matching criteria. Since the Dissertation

Abstract data contain for each individual a full name in a string instead of separate last, first and

middle name fields, we convert all the names under each inventor ID number in the patent data




                                                 12
to strings to search for them within the Dissertation Abstract data.6 When an inventor holds

multiple degrees, we assign the highest degree to the inventor. On rare occasions when multiple

names from the Dissertation Abstract data are matched to one ID number in the patent data, we

randomly pick one name. Out of 2.3 million unique inventors in our patent data, 5.3 percent

(122,168) are identified as holders of advanced degrees.



3.2. Identifying the ownership structure and combining patent-inventor data with firm data

         Because parent firms patent sometimes under their own names and at other times under

the names of their subsidiaries, combining the Patents BIB data with firm-level data in the

Compact D/SEC data is not straightforward. Mergers and acquisitions at both the parent firm

and subsidiary levels, common in these two industries during the 1990s, and name changes

complicate linking the patent to firm-level data. (The U.S.PTO does not maintain a unique

identifier for each patenting assignee at the parent firm level nor does it track assignee name

changes.) Thus, to use the firm-level information available in the Compact D/SEC data, the

names of parent firms and their subsidiaries and the ownership of firms must be tracked over the

entire period of the study.7

         To start, we identify mergers and acquisitions, and name changes of firms in the two

industries, pharmaceutical preparation (primary SIC code 2834) and semiconductor and related

devices (3674), over the period between 1989 and 1997, using the Standard & Poor’s data. We

also identify the ownership structure of subsidiaries of firms using subsidiaries information



6
  In addition, we impose conditions on the time frame of the inventor’s patenting history as follows: the inventor’s
last patent is no later than forty years following the dissertation date, and the first patent is no more than twenty
years before the dissertation date.
7
  NBER-CWRU researchers created a database of parent firms and their subsidiaries for all the names among
U.S.PTO patent assignees. However, they only linked subsidiaries based on the corporate ownership structure as it
existed in 1989.


                                                        13
available from the Compact D/SEC from 1989 to 1997.8 We can then relate each assignee in the

patent data to a firm in the Compact D/SEC data, which enables us to match each patent to a firm

in the Compact D/SEC data. We then combine firms’ founding years, obtained from Thomas

Register, Mergent, and Corptech, with the other firm-level information.

         As the final step, we add information on all citations from the NBER Patent-Citations

data collected by Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2001) where each citing patent that was granted

between 1975 and 1999 is matched to all patents cited by the patent.



4. Descriptive statistics

         Figure 1 provides a distribution of U.S. patents granted by year of application. The

annual number of patents granted dips sharply after 1997. This dip reflects a lag between the

application and granting dates. About 70 to 80 percent of all patent applications ultimately

granted are granted within the first three years of the application and 97 percent of all patent

applications are granted within the first four years of the application date (Hall, Griliches, and

Hausman, 1986). Between January 1975 and February 2002, 45.5% were granted to the U.S.

assignees and 37.4% were granted to foreign assignees (see Table 3). In Figure 2, we report the

number of patents granted to firms in each of our two industries. Note that in both industries the

number of patents granted annually rose over the period we study: the annual number of patents

granted between 1989 and 1998 rose from about one thousand patents annually, but by a factor

of two in the pharmaceutical industry and nearly seven in the semiconductor industry.

         Table 4 shows that the number of inventors named as an inventor to at least one patent

assigned to a firm in one of our two industries is 59,292 out of the 2,299,579 unique inventors in

8
  The subsidiary list reported in the Compact D/SEC is not always complete. For example, some subsidiaries appear
intermittently and some firms report subsidiaries every other year. Hence, we have treated a subsidiary as one for the
firm throughout the period 1989-1997, if it is reported once as a subsidiary of the firm.


                                                         14
our data (25,609 inventors in the pharmaceutical and 33,683 in the semiconductor industry). The

percentage of master’s or higher-degree holders in natural science and engineering is relatively

higher in these two industries. Among the 2,299,579 unique inventors in our data, 5.3% hold

masters or higher degrees (3% of inventors hold a Ph.D. or equivalent). Among the inventors in

the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries, 13.3% and 11.7%, respectively, hold an

advanced degree.

       Inventors working in these pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries are named as

inventors on more patents on average than inventors in other industries (see Table 4). An

inventor in a pharmaceutical firm is named as an inventor on average on 2.80 patents over our

sample period, whereas an inventor in the semiconductor industry appears on average on 2.60

patents. Inventors with advanced degrees are shown in Table 4 to have more patents than those

without advanced degrees. While advanced-degree holders in the pharmaceutical industry are

more productive in patent output, those in the semiconductor industry appear to be similar in

patent productivity to advanced-degree holders in other industries.

       We identified pharmaceutical and semiconductor firms in the Compact D/SEC data by

their primary SIC. We identified 447 parent firms and 5,331 subsidiary firms in the

pharmaceutical industry and 332 parent firms and 4,211 subsidiary firms in the semiconductor

industry. Firm information period is from 1989 because we had access to only the Compact

D/SEC data beginning in 1989. We then dropped all patent applications filed after 1997 because

we found that starting with application year 1998 the patent time series tailed off due to the

review lag at the U.S.PTO.

       Some sample statistics from the firms in the two industries in our data—the number of

selected firms and the number of employees, sales, and R&D expenditures—are reported in




                                               15
Table 5. For the year 1997, for example, the data show 221 firms in the pharmaceutical and 151

firms in the semiconductor industry, with 177 firms and 135 firms, respectively, reporting

positive R&D expenditures. Pharmaceutical industry firms are larger in terms of number of

employees, sales volume, and R&D expenditures.



5. International Knowledge Flow

       In this section, we test if the international migration of researchers facilitates knowledge

transfers across borders. Understanding the consequences of the immigration of scientists and

researchers to the U.S.—on not only for U.S. R&D productivity but for the wages and job

prospects of native workers and for national security—has important implications for policy-

making in the immigration, labor market, and education arenas. Understanding how knowledge

spillovers across countries work is of interest because of the role spillovers may play in

economic growth and because of its implications for science and technology policy. Knowledge

spillovers from the U.S. and Europe may be an important factor for the impressive growth rates

enjoyed in countries such as South Korea and Taiwan (Hu and Jaffe, 2003). As described in this

paper’s introduction, work done with patent citations suggests that knowledge flows may be

geographically localized (Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993). Some researchers have used

patent citations to try to understand these international knowledge spillovers (Jaffe and

Trajtenberg, 1998). We use the geographic mobility of scientists to track the transmission of

foreign knowledge from other countries to the U.S. and to obtain a better estimate of the

importance of international scientific labor markets as a mechanism of technological

transmission than has been possible previously.




                                                  16
       Table 6 shows the annual number of unique inventors named on U.S. domestic patents

for the years 1985 through 1997. It also shows the percentage of inventors who (1) at the time of

the patent application resided in a foreign country, (2) at the time of the patent application

resided in the U.S. and had been previously listed as a foreign-residing inventor on a successful

patent application, and (3) at the time of the patent application resided in the U.S. but had never

been previously listed as a foreign residing inventor on a successful patent application. Because

our data included patents granted in 1975 and later, we imposed a cut-off for the patents used to

define whether an inventor has foreign-experience at the time of the patent’s application. We

chose to consider only those inventors who are currently foreign residents or had been foreign

residents some time in the ten-year period prior to the date of the patent’s application because ten

years still leaves us a long period over which to conduct our analysis and because knowledge

acquired in a foreign country far in the past may not be very valuable.

       Table 6 shows a steady and swift increase in the number of unique inventors on U.S.

domestic patents between 1985 and 1997, from 42,368 to 119,556, which translates to an average

annual growth rate of 9 percent. Among those inventors with foreign experience, the percentage

of inventors with current foreign addresses increased steadily during the period from 8.15

percent to 9.11 percent while the percentage of U.S.-residing inventors with foreign experience

increased from 0.99 percent in 1985 to 1.30 percent in 1992, then dropping to 1.01 percent in

1997. Overall, the percentage of inventors with foreign experience increased (from 9.14 percent

in 1985 to 10.13 percent in 1997).

       Table 6 shows that the growth in the number of inventors in the pharmaceutical (13

percent annually) and semiconductor (31 percent annually) industries has been significantly

faster than for all industries combined. In the pharmaceutical industry the share of inventors with




                                                17
foreign experience grew rapidly although the increase is mostly in the share of inventors with

current foreign addresses and there is a decrease in the fraction of U.S.-residing inventors with

past foreign experience. This finding is not surprising given the increasing rate at which U.S.

pharmaceutical firms have been citing new laboratories abroad (Chacar and Lieberman, 2003)

and findings that collaborations among academic scientists have become more dispersed,

possibly due to improvements in telecommunications (Adams, Black, Clemmons, and Stephan,

2004). The semiconductor industry shows a similar pattern, but the changes are less pronounced

than in pharmaceutical industry.

       Figure 3A shows the average patent productivity of inventors in U.S. domestic patents by

foreign-experience type for all patents. We first note that U.S.-residing inventors with past

foreign experience have significantly higher patent-inventor ratio than other types of inventors.

There are at least two reasons for this. First, inventors with higher productivity are more likely

to migrate to the U.S. because of better compensation in the U.S. labor market or because of U.S.

immigration policies. Alternatively, foreign experience somehow improves the productivity of

researchers. Both the patent-inventor ratios for current foreign residents and for current U.S.

residents without foreign experience show a similar level. Figure 3A also shows that the patent

productivity for inventors with past foreign experience was steady at around 1.6 patents per

inventor until 1993 and then it rose to 2 patents per inventor in 1997. On the other hand, the

patent-inventor ratios for other types of inventors were stable or declined slightly over the period.

       Figures 3B and 3C repeat the analysis of Figure 3A but for the pharmaceutical and

semiconductor industries alone. These figures show the same gap between the productivity of

U.S.-residing inventors with foreign experience and the U.S.-residing inventors without foreign




                                                18
experience and the foreign- residing inventors. These figures also show the productivity of U.S.-

residing inventors with foreign experience increasing over the 1990s.

       Where Figures 3A-C tracks the productivity of inventors by their patent output, Figures

4A-C tracks how the quality of inventors’ output changes by inventor type. Figure 4A shows the

citations received in the 5-year period after application filing per patent by inventor type for all

industries over time. This figure covers only years of application up to 1992 because the NBER

citation data contain citations made by patents granted in years up to 1999 and we take into

account the 5-year period of citation and a 2-year gap between application and granting dates.

Between 1985 and 1992, the citations per patent rose for all three classes of inventors.

Throughout the 1985-1992 period, the average citations per patent produced was the highest for

U.S. residents with foreign experience and lowest for foreign residing inventors. In 1992, the

number of citations attracted by the average patent of a U.S. residing inventor with foreign-

patenting experience, of a U.S.-residing inventor without foreign patenting experience, and of a

foreign residing inventor, was about 6.5, 5, and 3.5 respectively. Thus, taken together, Figures

3A and 4A show that U.S.-residing inventors with foreign experience produce more patents on

average and patents of higher quality than the other two classes of inventors. Figures 4B and 4C

conduct the analysis separately for the pharmaceutical and semiconductor industries.           The

semiconductor industry shows the same ordering of inventor types, though the levels are higher

for each type. The pharmaceutical industry however shows no clear distinction between the two

classes of U.S.-residing inventors. Figure 4C does show that foreign-residing inventors produce

the lowest quality patents, by the citation measure.

       Is a patent more likely to cite foreign-assignee patents when its inventors have foreign

experience? We are interested in learning if knowledge spillovers from foreign countries are




                                                19
facilitated by direct exposure to inventors with foreign experience. Table 8 presents the results

of our estimation of the determinants of accessing foreign knowledge in two industries:

pharmaceutical and semiconductor industry. The unit of observation of the regression is a patent

applied for in year 1997. The dependent variable is the logit transformation of the fraction of

citations to patents that are assigned to foreign assignees (CITE_FRGN). The key regressor in

these regressions is a binary variable which takes 1 if at least one inventor on the patent is

currently residing or formerly resided in one of the foreign countries where foreign assignees of

cited patents are located (FRGN_EXP). Note that this regressor reflects not just whether an

inventor has foreign experience but which country the inventor has experience from.          We

speculate that knowledge spillover is country-specific.

       The regressions in Table 8 also include as right-hand side variables firm-level

characteristics in the year 1997. A measure of the size of the research operation, proxied by the

number of unique inventors named to patents awarded to the firm in 1997 (INVENTOR), is

included to examine whether large-scale R&D enterprises are more likely to rely on foreign

knowledge. We use the number of employees (EMPLOYEE) as an alternative measure of

organizational size at the firm level. Included are the R&D-inventor ratio (R&D/INV) and the

number of business lines in the firm (NSIC), measured by the number of secondary SIC’s

identified with the firm. We include the R&D-inventor ratio (R&D/INV) as a regressor because

a highly capitalized firm may rely on more advanced technology and thus may be more open to

foreign technology. We include NSIC as a regressor to estimate the impact of economies of

scope in the firm’s use of foreign knowledge. Our regressions also include two additional

regressors: the median experience of all inventors in the firm (MEXP) and years elapsed since




                                                20
the founding year of the firm (FIRMAGE).                     The means and standard deviations of the

independent and dependent variables, along with their definitions, are described in Table 7.9

        Column 1 in Table 8 for each industry panel shows the estimated relationship between

the fraction of a patent’s citations to foreign-assigned patents and the existence of foreign-

experienced inventors using OLS. Column 2 for each industry panel reports the estimates of the

determinants of the citation to foreign patents.

        One concern for our regression is that inventors are more likely to cite their own past

patents than other inventors’ patents, which may drive the estimated relationship between our

dependent variable and the key regressor, FRGN_EXP. In column 3 for each industry panel we

thus exclude patents which have the same inventors as those in their cited patents.

        The results in Table 8 show that a patent by inventors with foreign experience in both

industries is more likely to cite patents assigned to foreign firms from the same country where

the inventors are residing or resided in the past: FRGN_EXP has a significantly positive effect in

all models. This effect is still significant with the data without self-citing patents.

        The results show a negative effect of the size of the R&D enterprise on the fraction of

citations to foreign patents in the semiconductor industry. There is no significant effect of the

size of the R&D enterprise in the pharmaceutical industry. On the other hand, the coefficient

estimate on the firm size variable (EMPLOYEE) is insignificant in all models. The coefficient

estimate on logR&D/INV is generally positive but insignificant in all regressions.                            The

coefficient estimate on log NSIC is never significant by conventional criteria of significance.

The coefficient estimate on log MEXP is negative and significant for both industries. This may

partly reflect that it is more costly for older inventors to learn new technologies from abroad, or

9
 Note that the means of the variables reported in table 7 are not the averages across firms because our regressions
are at the patent level, not at the firm level. For instance, the mean value of INVENTOR and EMPLOYEE is
greater than the firm mean in 1997 because larger firms tend to have more patents.


                                                        21
it may be due to a vintage or a composition effect (e.g., areas of technology that experienced

innovators innovate in are somehow more “domestic”).           The coefficient estimate on log

FIRMAGE is significant for both industries but has different signs for the two industries. The

effect is negative in pharmaceutical industry while it is positive in semiconductor industry. That

is, we find that in the semiconductor industry older firms, and in the pharmaceutical industry,

younger firms are more likely to make use of the output of non-U.S. R&D.


6. Conclusion

       We describe the construction of a panel data set that links inventors to the U.S.

pharmaceutical and semiconductor firms for whom they work. These data contain measures of

inventors’ R&D productivity—patents and patent citations—as well as information on the firms

to which their patents are assigned. In this paper we use these data to examine the role of

research personnel as a pathway for the diffusion of ideas from foreign to U.S. innovators. In

particular, we find in recent years an increase in the extent that U.S. innovators employ or

collaborate with researchers with foreign R&D experience. This increase appears to work

primarily through an increase in U.S. firms’ employment of foreign-residing researchers; the

fraction of research-active U.S. residents with foreign research experience appears to be falling,

suggesting that U.S. pharmaceutical and semiconductor firms are increasingly locating

operations in foreign countries to employ such researchers, as opposed to such researchers

immigrating to the U.S. to work. In addition we investigate the firm-level determinants of

accessing non-U.S. technological know-how, as measured by the prevalence of citations to

patents on innovations originating outside the U.S. We find that employing researchers who

have research experience abroad seems to facilitate this access.       We also find that in the




                                               22
semiconductor industry smaller and older firms, and in the pharmaceutical industry, younger

firms are more likely to make use of the output of non-U.S. R&D.

       We anticipate this data set will be useful in addressing other important questions. These

data will allow us to investigate the consequences of the mobility of R&D personnel on firm

R&D. What is the impact, for example, of the arrival of a researcher with a particular set of

R&D experiences on the character and quantity R&D done by a firm? We will be able to

address this question because we know each scientist’s patenting history, both in terms of

quantity but we also know the kinds of technologies underlying the innovations. This data set

will allow us to directly observe the importance of inter-firm mobility for technological diffusion.

From the perspective of the scientist, this data set will allow us to examine the determinants of

inter-firm mobility. The panel nature of these data will allow us to investigate the productivity

profiles of researchers working in industry over their careers. Because we observe all the

inventors responsible for a patent we will be able to use this data set to investigate how firms

organize the R&D enterprise, the extent of collaboration among scientists who are

geographically dispersed, and the extent of interaction among scientists with different

backgrounds.




                                                23
Appendix A. The SOUNDEX Coding System

         The SOUNDEX is a coded index for last names based on the way a last name sounds
rather than the way it is spelled. Last names that sound the same, but are spelled differently,
such as SMITH and SMYTH, have the same SOUNDEX code. We use the SOUNDEX coding
method to expand the list of similar last names to overcome the potential for misspellings and
inconsistent foreign name translations into English; misspellings are common in the U.S.PTO
data, as are names of non-Western European origin.
         A SOUNDEX code for a last name takes an upper case initial followed by 6-digit
numeric codes. For example, the SOUNDEX code for Keynes is K520000. The rules for
generating a SOUNDEX code are10:
1. Take the first letter of the last name and capitalize it.
2. Go through each of the following letters giving them numerical values from 1 to 6 if they are
     found in the Scoring Letter table (1 for B, F, P, V; 2 for C, G, J, K, Q, S, X, Z; 3 for D, T; 4
     for L; 5 for M, N; 6 for R; 0 for Vowels, punctuation, H, W, Y).
3. Ignore any letter if it is not a scoring character. This means that all vowels as well as the
     letters h, y and w are ignored.
4. If the value of a scoring character is the same as the previous letter, ignore it. Thus, if two ‘t’s
     come together in the middle of a name they are treated as a single ‘t’ or a single ‘d’. If they
     are separated by another non-scoring character then the same score can follow in the final
     code. The name PETTIT is coded as P330000. The second ‘T’ is ignored but the third one is
     not, since a non-scoring ‘I’ intervenes.
5. Add the number onto the end of the SOUNDEX code if it is not to be ignored.
6. Keep working through the name until you have created a code of 6 characters maximum.
7. If you come to the end of the name before you reach 6 characters, pad out the end of the code
     with zeros.
8. You may choose to ignore a possessive prefix such as ‘Von’ or ‘Des’.
     See "Using the Census SOUNDEX," General Information Leaflet 55 (Washington, DC:
National Archives and Records Administration, 1995) for the detailed method.



10
  The strings of ‘-, ., +, /, (, ), %, ?, #, &, ", _’ in all name fields have been translated to blank space in advance and
then last names are SOUNDEX coded.


                                                           24
REFERENCES

Adams, J.D., Black, G.C., Clemmons, J.R., and Stephan, P.E. (2004). “Scientific Teams and
Institution Collaborations: Evidence from U.S. Universities, 1981-1999,” NBER Working Paper
no. 10640.

Agrawal, Ajay K., Cockburn, Iain M., and McHale John 2003 “Gone but Not Forgotten: Labor
Flows, Knowledge Spillovers, and Enduring Social Capital,” NBER Working Paper no. 9950

Almeida, Paul and Kogut, Bruce. “Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers in
Regional Networks,” Management Science 45(7), July 1999.

Audretsch, D. B., & Feldman, M. P. (1996). R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation
and production. The American Economic Review, 86, 630–640.

Chacar, A. S. an Lieberman, M.B. (2003). “Organizing for technological innovation in the U.S.
Pharmaceutical Industry.” Geography and Strategy: Advances in Strategic Management, 20,
299–322.

Cohen, Wesley M., Nelson, Richard R., Walsh, John P. 2002. “Links and Impacts: The Influence
of Public Research on Industrial R&D.” Management Science, 48(1), pp. 1–23

Feldman, M. P. (1994). The geography of innovation. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Griliches, Z. (1992). The search for R&D spillovers. Scandinavian Journal of Economics
(Supplement), 29–47.

Hall, B., Griliches, Z. and Hausman, J. “Patents and R&D: Is There a Lag?” International
Economic Review, Vol. 27 (1986), pp. 265-283.

Hall, B., Jaffe, A. and Trajtenberg, M. (2000). “Market Value and Patent Citations: A First
Look.” NBER Working Paper No. 7741.

Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B. & Trajtenberg, M. (2001). The NBER patent citation data file: Lessons,
insights and methodological tools. NBER Working Paper 8498.

Hu, A. G.Z and Jaffe, A. B. (2003) “Patent citations and international knowledge flow: the cases
of Korea and Taiwan.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21, pp. 849-880.

Jaffe, Adam B. 1989. “Real Effects of Academic Research.” The American Economic Review,
79(5), pp. 957-970.

Jaffe, A. B and M. Tratjenberg (1998), "International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from Patent
Citations," NBER Working Paper 6507.




                                              25
Jaffe, Adam, Trajtenberg, Manuel and Henderson, Rebecca, (1993) “Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108
(3), pp 577-598, 1993.

Kim, Jinyoung and Marschke, Gerald, 2005. “Labor Mobility of Scientists, Technological
Diffusion, and the Firm’s Patenting Decision,” The Rand Journal of Economics, 36 (2), pp. 298-
317

Moen, Jarle. (2005) “Is Mobility of Technical Personnel a Source of R&D Spillovers?,” Journal
of Labor Economics, 23(1), pp. 81-114.

Mowery, David C. and Ziedonis, Arvids A. (October 2001). "The Geographic Reach of Market
and Non-Market Channels of Technology Transfer: Comparing Citations and Licenses of
University Patents" NBER Working Paper No. W8568.

National Archives and Records Administration. (1995). General Information Leaflet 55.

Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1958)

Trajtenberg, Manuel. (2004). “The Names Game: Using Inventors Patent Data in Economic
Research,” Working paper.

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office User’s Guide. (October 2001). “Patents BIB: Selected
Bibliographic Information from U.S. Patent Grant Publications and U.S. Patent Application
Publications 1969 to Present,” Draft.

Von Hippel, E. (1988). The sources of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.

Zucker, Lynne G.; Darby, Michael R.; Armstrong, Jeff S. “Commercializing Knowledge:
University Science, Knowledge Capture, and Firm Performance in Biotechnology” NBER
Working Paper No. 8499, October 2001

Zucker, L. G., Darby,M. R., & Brewer,M. B. (1998). Intellectual capital and the birth of U.S.
biotechnology enterprises. American Economic Review, 88, 290–306.




                                             26
Figure 1. Number of Patents Granted by Year of Application (1975-2001)


                         160000
                         140000
   Number of Patents




                         120000
                         100000
                         80000
                         60000
                         40000
                         20000
                                0
                                    1975

                                           1977

                                                     1979

                                                             1981

                                                                      1983

                                                                               1985

                                                                                         1987

                                                                                                1989

                                                                                                        1991

                                                                                                                  1993

                                                                                                                          1995

                                                                                                                                 1997

                                                                                                                                         1999

                                                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                             Year



Figure 2. Number of Patents Granted by Year of Application in Two Industries


                         9000
                         8000
   Num ber of P atents




                         7000
                         6000
                         5000
                         4000
                         3000
                         2000
                         1000
                            0
                                    1989

                                              1990

                                                            1991

                                                                        1992

                                                                                      1993

                                                                                                1994

                                                                                                           1995

                                                                                                                         1996

                                                                                                                                  1997

                                                                                                                                                1998




                                                                                         Year

                                                                    Pharmaceutical                     Semiconductor




                                                                                      27
Figure 3. Patent-Inventor Ratio by Foreign-Experience type
A. All Patents
                                            2.1


                                            1.9


                                            1.7
                 Patents per Inventor




                                            1.5


                                            1.3


                                            1.1


                                            0.9


                                            0.7


                                            0.5
                                                     1985


                                                                1986


                                                                              1987


                                                                                            1988


                                                                                                      1989


                                                                                                                    1990


                                                                                                                               1991


                                                                                                                                                                    1992


                                                                                                                                                                                  1993


                                                                                                                                                                                                1994


                                                                                                                                                                                                          1995


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1996


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                                              Year
                                              Current foreign residents                                                                            Current US residents w/ foreign experience
                                              Current US residents w/o foreign experience


B. Pharmaceutical                                                                                                                     C. Semiconductor
                               3.5                                                                                                                                  3.5

                                        3                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                       P aten ts p er In ven to r
  P aten ts p er In ven to r




                               2.5                                                                                                                                  2.5


                                        2                                                                                                                             2


                               1.5                                                                                                                                  1.5


                                        1                                                                                                                             1


                               0.5                                                                                                                                  0.5


                                        0                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                           1989

                                                                                                                                                                                         1990

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1992

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1993

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1997
                                              1989

                                                      1990

                                                             1991

                                                                       1992

                                                                                     1993

                                                                                            1994

                                                                                                   1995

                                                                                                             1996

                                                                                                                       1997




                                                                               Year                                                                                                                              Year




                                                                                                                              28
Figure 4. Citations per Patent by Foreign-Experience type
A. All Patents

                                           7


                                           6


                                           5
                    Citations per patent




                                           4


                                           3


                                           2


                                           1


                                           0
                                                        1985




                                                                      1986




                                                                                     1987




                                                                                                   1988




                                                                                                                                              1989




                                                                                                                                                            1990




                                                                                                                                                                           1991




                                                                                                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                           Year

                                               Current foreign residents                                               Current US residents w/ foreign experience
                                               Current US residents w/o foreign experience


B. Pharmaceutical                                                                                              C. Semiconductor
                               6                                                                                                             12


                               5                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                C itatio n s p er p aten t
  C itatio n s p er p aten t




                               4                                                                                                             8


                               3                                                                                                             6


                               2                                                                                                             4


                               1                                                                                                             2


                               0                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                     1989




                                                                                                                                                                   1990




                                                                                                                                                                                  1991




                                                                                                                                                                                                1992
                                                 1989




                                                               1990




                                                                              1991




                                                                                            1992




                                                                       Year                                                                                               Year




                                                                                                          29
Table 1. Variables from Each Data Source

  Data Source                                   Variables

Patents BIB      Patent ID number, application year, inventors’ names, address, city,
                 state, country, assignee ID and assignee name

ProQuest         Degree holders’ name, institution, degree type, degree year, and field

Compact D/SEC Firm name, primary and other corresponding SIC codes, R&D
              expenditures, sales, number of employee, capital, and subsidiaries of
              the firms

S&P              Firm name and ownership changes due from merger and acquisition,
                 and obsolete securities due to bankruptcy or dissolution

Thomas           Founding year of firm
Register

Citation         Citing patent number and cited patent number




                                             30
Table 2. Examples of Name Matching

Initial ID   Inventor name    Co-inventor   Middle name     ZIP   Final ID

  001        Adam Smith      John Keynes                  20012     001

  002        Adam Smith      John Keynes    Emmanuel      14228     001

  003        Adam Smith                     E             14228     001

  004        Adam Smith                     Emmanuel      14214     001

  005        Adam Smith      John Keynes    J             14228     005

  006        Adam Smyth      John Keynes                  14228     001




                                            31
Table 3. Number of Patents by Assignee Type (January 1975 − February 2002)

 Assignee                  Description                  # Observations    Percentage

            Assigned to U.S. organization and                 1,090,194   43.7
            state/local governments

   US       Assigned to a U.S. resident (individual)             15,849     0.6        45.5

            Assigned to a U.S. Federal Government                30,431     1.2
            organization

            Assigned to a non-U.S.,             non-           914,826    36.7
            government organization

 Foreign    Assigned to      a   non-U.S.    resident             7,873     0.3        37.4
            (individual)

            Assigned to a non-U.S. government                     8,613     0.4
            organization (all levels)

            Unassigned                                         412,621    16.6
  Others                                                                               17.1
            Missing observations                                 13,203     0.5

  Total                                                      2,493,610




                                                 32
Table 4. Patent Statistics for All Inventors and for Inventors with Advanced Degrees
         (January 1975 − February 2002)

                                    Total           Pharmaceutical     Semiconductor

        Inventors (a)             2,299,579            25,609             33,683

    No. of Patent per Inventor               2.22               2.80               2.60

     Degree holders* (b)           122,168              3,399              3,941

    No. of Patent per Inventor               3.07               3.70               2.95

             (b/a)                  5.3%                13.3%             11.7%
* Master’s or higher.




                                              33
Table 5. Summary Statistics from Pharmaceutical and Semiconductor Industry Samples
                                                                                (Units in sales and R&D: thousand dollars)
                        No. of
                         firms       No. of firms reporting              Mean                       Standard Deviation
                Year              employee      sales     R&D employee    sales    R&D employee             sales      R&D
                1989           88       85            78     69   5903 895924      85151         13058     1940353 180615
 Pharmaceutical 1990           88       85            81     64   5722 794134      78612         13726     2036458 188652
       Industry 1991          146      137          124      98   4741 884836      95712         12690     2187517 217398
                1992          151      145          123     109   4694 987210 101187             12374     2404976 237929
                1993          161      155          132     126   4297 1609557 105501            11764     7440985 250355
                1994          179      170          149     136   4668 1670350 104193            13395     7693383 255514
                1995          184      171          150     142   4460 1924112 124575            13263     7897844 323828
                1996          193      170          158     152   4114 1996128 126510            12652     8085530 355602
                1997          221      196          193     177   4078 2161856 194237            13980     9156677 797319
                1998          209      180          186     170   4391 2341263 210768            14307 10268340 830591

                        No. of
                        firms         No. of firms reporting            Mean                  Standard Deviation
              Year                 employee      sales     R&D employee   sales     R&D employee      sales      R&D
              1989            71         70            71     55   3108 275944      25530 10043        885337 64583
Semiconductor 1990            67         65            67     52   3273 309869      30203 10102        959953 82405
     Industry 1991            87         86            84     70   3492 410065      28720 13365      1521497 81478
              1992            93         92            91     79   3244 423890      28546 13226      1698277 94122
              1993           107        107          103      95   2919 477073      28395 13307      2044170 105515
              1994           114        112          108     100   2057 590914      33344   6922     2588848 119556
              1995           131        124          127     115   2050 720290      43822   7156     3103003 151508
              1996           136        123          131     122   3201 746105      62304 14466      3243984 215290
              1997           151        141          147     135   3277 1081964     87658 14750      4956544 336703
              1998           154        125          153     139   3328 1095652    102042 14013      5255021 392838




                                                          34
Table 6. Inventors with Foreign Experience in US Domestic Patents
 Year         Number of Inventors                           Percentage of Inventors by Foreign-Experience Type (%)
                                          Current Foreign Residents         Current US Residents        Current US Residents w/o
                                                                            w/ Foreign Experience         Foreign Experience
            All     Pharma      Semi       All     Pharma       Semi       All     Pharma     Semi       All     Pharma      Semi

 1985     42,368                         8.15%                            0.99%                        90.86%

 1986     44,828                          8.30                             1.07                         90.63

 1987     48,810                          8.21                             1.13                         90.66

 1988     54,947                          8.49                             1.13                         90.37

 1989     59,164     2,143     1,139      8.60      14.47        9.04      1.17     2.01      1.14      90.23        83.53   89.82

 1990     63,812     2,259     1,362      8.02      17.35        7.78      1.22     1.51      1.25      90.76        81.14   90.97

 1991     67,657     3,332     2,791      7.76      19.09        6.02      1.26     1.23      1.22      90.98        79.68   92.76

 1992     73,640     3,876     3,370      7.86      20.38        7.15      1.30     1.21      1.13      90.85        78.41   91.72

 1993     80,428     4,505     4,190      8.06      25.88        7.06      1.21     1.31      1.03      90.73        72.81   91.91

 1994     90,910     5,320     5,739      8.44      26.86       14.76      1.20     0.98      0.94      90.36        72.16   84.30

 1995     104,775    6,629     7,450      8.78      28.87       15.18      1.13     0.87      0.86      90.08        70.25   83.96

 1996     104,829    4,894     7,916      9.19      31.55       13.26      1.07     0.90      0.78      89.75        67.55   85.95

 1997     119,556    6,093     9,993      9.11      29.71       15.31      1.01     0.75      0.80      89.87        69.54   83.89
Note: Columns 2-4 show the number of unique inventors in all U.S. domestic patents, in pharmaceutical patents, and in semiconductor
patents, respectively. In columns 8-10, we report the percent of inventors with current addresses in the U.S. who have at least one
patent in the past 10 years while residing at a foreign address.
Table 7. Variable Definitions and Sample Statistics

                                             Definition                                     Mean (Standard Deviation)
                                                                                       Pharmaceutical       Semiconductor
CITE_FRGN        Fraction of citations to patents that are assigned to foreign            0.5505                0.4760
                 assignees                                                                (0.3319)             (0.2850)
FRGN_EXP         = 1 if at least one inventor is residing or has resided in the past      0.0734                0.0290
                 in one of the foreign countries where foreign assignees of cited         (0.2609)             (0.1677)
                 patents are located
INVENTOR         Number of all inventors in the patenting firm                             326.0                 923.5
                                                                                          (195.7)               (728.6)
EMPLOYEE         Number of employees in the patenting firm                                35,979                41,538
                                                                                          (21,833)             (52,501)
R&D/INV          Real R&D expenditures in 1996 constant dollars divided by the             31.67                 12.04
                 number of inventors in the patenting firm (thousands of dollars          (24.51)               (27.34)
                 per inventor)
NSIC             Number of secondary SIC’s assigned to the patenting firm                  3.791                 3.154
                                                                                          (1.991)               (1.944)
MEXP             Median experience of all inventors in the patenting firm                  5.292                 3.832
                                                                                          (1.582)               (1.067)
FIRMAGE          Years elapsed since the founding year of the patenting firm               77.40                 36.17
                                                                                          (51.51)               (23.40)




                                                               1
Table 8 Determinants of Citation to Foreign-Assigned Patents

Dependent variable = logit transform of CITE_FRGN
                                             Pharmaceutical                                          Semiconductor
                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)              (1)               (2)                (3)

FRGN_EXP                        3.8950             3.3876               4.3832          5.8609             5.5730             6.4162
                                 4.95               3.92                 3.87            4.18               3.66               3.75
Log INVENTOR                                       1.0813               1.1595                             -1.1918           -1.1702
                                                    1.10                 1.19                               -2.69             -2.64
Log EMPLOYEE                                       0.2124               0.1885                             0.3871             0.3550
                                                    0.38                 0.34                               1.24               1.14
Log R&D/INV                                        0.0557               0.0488                             0.0658             0.0691
                                                    0.66                 0.59                               1.14               1.18
Log NSIC                                          -0.2723               -0.4079                            1.1469             1.1562
                                                   -0.38                 -0.57                              1.57               1.56
Log MEXP                                          -6.5845               -6.4702                            -6.8640           -6.8410
                                                   -4.41                 -4.40                              -2.76             -2.66
Log FIRMAGE                                       -1.0956               -1.1361                            2.3439             2.3771
                                                   -1.96                 -2.06                              2.88               2.83


Observations                    1430               1247              1215               4316               4186              4112
R2                             0.0189             0.1462            0.1539             0.0283             0.1280            0.1306
Note: Rows show the estimated coefficient and the t statistic for each regressor. The result for a constant term is suppressed. Column
3 shows the results from a regression that omits patents for which an inventor is listed as an inventor on a cited patent. The t statistic
is based on the Huber-White sandwich estimator of variance.




                                                                    2
