NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHO MISVOTES? THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENTIAL COGNITION COSTS ON
ELECTION OUTCOMES
Kelly Shue
Erzo F. P. Luttmer
Working Paper 12709
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12709

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006

We would like to thank Attila Ambrus, Gary Chamberlain, John Friedman, Edward Glaeser, Caroline
Hoxby, Brian Jacob, Lisa Kahn, and Rebecca Kalmus for helpful conversations and insightful comments.
We are also grateful to the staff at the Berkeley Institute of Governmental Studies Statewide Database
for their generous assistance. We thank Andra Hibbert for excellent research assistance. Erzo Luttmer
gratefully acknowledges funding from the National Institute on Aging through Grant Number T32-AG00186
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Kelly Shue gratefully acknowledges support from
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Grant 2006042992. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Kelly Shue and Erzo F. P. Luttmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Who Misvotes? The Effect of Differential Cognition Costs on Election Outcomes
Kelly Shue and Erzo F. P. Luttmer
NBER Working Paper No. 12709
November 2006
JEL No. D01,D72,D83,J10
ABSTRACT
If voters are fully rational and have negligible cognition costs, ballot layout should not affect election
outcomes. In this paper, we explore deviations from rational voting using quasi-random variation in
candidate name placement on ballots from the 2003 California Recall Election. We find that the voteshares
of minor candidates almost double when their names are adjacent to the names of major candidates
on a ballot. Voteshare gains are largest in precincts with high percentages of Democratic, Hispanic,
low-income, non-English speaking, poorly educated, or young voters. A major candidate that attracts
a disproportionate share of voters from these types of precincts faces a systematic electoral disadvantage.
If the Republican frontrunner Arnold Schwarzenegger and Democratic frontrunner Cruz Bustamante
had been in a tie, adjacency misvoting would have given Schwarzenegger an edge of 0.06% of the
voteshare. This gain in voteshare exceeds the margins of victory in the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election
and the 2004 Washington Gubernatorial Election. We explore which voting technology platforms
and brands mitigate misvoting.
Kelly Shue
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
shue@fas.harvard.edu
Erzo F. P. Luttmer
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu

I. Introduction
In this paper, we use the quasi-random variation in layouts of 150 types of ballots used in
the 2003 California Recall Election to study how different ballot designs led to systematic
deviations in the voteshares of candidates. We refer to votes for a candidate that are solely
attributable to that candidate’s favorable position on the ballot as misvotes because differences in
ballot layout should not affect the decisions of fully rational voters.1 Previous literature has
focused on position misvotes – when candidates receive more votes because they are listed first
on the ballot page or column. In this paper, we consider another type of misvote: adjacency
misvotes – when candidates receive more votes because they are adjacent to a popular candidate.
Adjacency misvotes can occur if voters accidentally select candidates adjacent to their
preferred choices.

Evidence from simulated voting experiments suggests that some voters

become confused by the ballot layout and voting technology and, as a result, cast accidental but
valid votes for candidates adjacent to the intended choice of the voter (e.g., Roth 1998). These
adjacency misvotes are especially likely if the ballot columns are unclearly marked, the ballot
text is small, the punch card grid is confusing, or if voters slip while marking their ballots. See
Appendix 1 for sample ballots that may produce adjacency misvotes.2
Misvotes are important for two reasons. First, and at a more fundamental level, misvotes
provide insight into human cognition: While Simon’s (1955) seminal article has spurred much
research on the limits of rational decision-making (see Conlisk 1996 for an overview), relatively
few papers examine which types of individuals are most prone to behavioral anomalies. We
1

We use rational in the traditional sense of the term: someone who has a preference ordering over candidates that is
complete and transitive over the candidates. Implicit in this definition is that choice is not affected by cognition
costs.
2
It is also conceivable that adjacency misvotes can occur if voters scan quickly for popular candidates and then give
increased consideration to candidates listed near the popular candidate. In Table 3, we show that accidental voting
rather than increased consideration is likely to be the primary cause of adjacency misvotes. However, our findings
hold regardless of which process drives adjacency misvotes.

1

examine how ballot design alters voting behavior and for which types of voters these effects are
strongest. Following List and Reiley (2002), we assume that the rationality of voter behavior
decreases with the cognitive cost of processing complicated ballot design. We examine how
variation in cognitive costs across demographic groups can affect the probability of casting a
misvote and thereby determine election outcomes. Our paper thus contributes to a relatively new
literature that examines demographic variation in people’s decision-making abilities in real
world situations (e.g., Madrian 2001, Choi et al. 2004, Thaler and Benartzi 2004, and Lusardi
and Mitchell 2006).
Second, misvotes can change election outcomes. Previous literature on position misvotes
has predominantly focused on who gains from misvotes. King and Leigh (2006), Koppell and
Steen (2004), and Miller and Krosnick (1998) show that candidates gain up to 2% in voteshare if
they are listed near the start of the ballot. However, the gain from being listed near the top of the
candidate list tends to be much smaller in well-publicized elections featuring party labels, and
well-known or incumbent candidates (e.g., Ho and Imai 2005, Koppell and Steen 2004, Miller
and Krosnick 1998, and Taebel 1975). Further, the bias caused by position misvotes can be
minimized if the list of candidate names is randomized and rotated through voting districts as is
done in states such as California, Ohio, and Kansas. Therefore, what often matters more for the
outcome of major U.S. elections is which of the two front-runners systematically loses more
votes to misvotes. This point is perhaps best illustrated by the unexpected large number of votes
that Patrick Buchanan received on the “butterfly ballot” used in Palm Beach County, Florida
during the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election. While even Buchanan himself acknowledges that

2

most of the 3,407 votes he received in Palm Beach County are due to voter mistakes,3 the bigger
question is whether these misvotes came sufficiently more from Al Gore than from George Bush
to overturn Bush’s 537 vote margin of victory. Numerous studies using demographic trends and
Buchanan’s performance in surrounding counties indicate that this was likely the case (e.g.,
Wand et al. 2001, and Smith 2002).
Unlike position misvotes, adjacency misvotes can offer insight into differences in
voteshare lost by major candidates. Voteshare gained by a candidate adjacent to a major
candidate is voteshare lost by the associated major candidate. We assess which of the major
candidates disproportionally loses votes to adjacent candidates in two ways. First, we examine
whether minor candidates in the vicinity of one major candidate gain as much voteshare as minor
candidates in the vicinity of another major candidate. Second, we relate the extent of misvoting
in each election precinct to precinct demographic characteristics and estimate whether major
candidates that appeal to voters with certain demographic characteristics lose more votes to
adjacent candidates. To our knowledge we are the first study that does this for a major election,
and both methods indicate that one of the major candidates disproportionally loses votes due to
misvoting.
We measure adjacency misvoting by exploiting the rotational structure of ballots used in
the 2003 California Recall Election. Candidates in the Recall Election are listed in order
according to a randomized alphabetization in District 1, and then rotated one position at a time in
subsequent districts. Due to the interaction between ballot rotation and each county’s unique
page layout, there exists significant exogenous variation in whether a minor (unpopular)
candidate’s name is adjacent to that of a major (popular) candidate. The increase in voteshare
3

In an appearance on the “Today” show on November 9, 2000, Buchanan said, “When I took one look at that ballot
on Election Night … it’s very easy for me to see how someone could have voted for me in the belief they voted for
Al Gore.”

3

experienced by a minor candidate when she is adjacent to a major candidate is an estimate of
adjacency misvoting. We then use precinct-level voting results and demographic data to test if
certain demographic groups are more likely to cast misvotes than others. Finally, we test if,
controlling for demographic characteristics, certain kinds of voting technologies correspond to a
reduction in the level of misvoting.
The Recall Election has several desirable characteristics. First, California contains a large
number of counties and districts that use a variety of voting technologies and ballot formats,
allowing for maximal variation in whether a minor candidate is adjacent to a major candidate.
Second, California rotates the long list of candidates (135 in total) one candidate at a time by
district. This, again, allows for greater variation in terms of adjacency. Finally, a gubernatorial
election is relatively important and well covered by the media and therefore may offer insights
that can be extended to other major elections.
We find that the voteshares of minor candidates almost double when their names are
adjacent to the names of major candidates. Misvotes account for at least 0.25 percent of all votes
cast during the Recall Election.4 We find that the amount of misvoting depends on the voting
technology used; punch card technologies yield about twice the level of misvotes compared to
optical scan and touch screen platforms, which confirms findings by Dee (2006). The amount of
misvoting also varies with voter characteristics. Using precinct-level voter registration and
Census data, we find that adjacency misvoting is strongest in precincts with high percentages of
Democratic, Hispanic, low-income, non-English speaking, poorly educated, or young voters.
After controlling for the relative popularities of the two major candidates, we find that the
voteshare lost by the Democratic frontrunner, Cruz Bustamante exceeds the voteshare lost by his

4

This is a lower bound because we only consider votes gained by candidates immediately adjacent to the top three
frontrunners in our calculation of misvotes.

4

Republican rival, Arnold Schwarzenegger, by 63%. While Schwarzenegger beat Bustamante by
a comfortable 17.0 percentage points in the Recall Election, the disproportionate misvoting
would have given Schwarzenegger a 0.06% advantage if both had been tied at 47% of the vote.
This margin is larger than the margins of victory in the 2000 U.S. presidential, 2004 Washington
gubernatorial, 1974 New Hampshire senatorial, and 1985 Indiana representative elections.
Schwarzenegger’s advantage over Bustamante is also not much smaller than the margins of
victory in several close U.S. elections including the 1880 and 1884 presidential elections and the
2000 Washington and 1998 Nevada senate elections, all of which had margins of victory of less
than 0.1%.5 Further, our estimate of the difference in voteshare lost by the major candidates
underestimates the difference that might occur in elections in which two major candidates are
adjacent to each other, as is the case in many U.S. presidential elections. In such situations, not
only does one major candidate lose more votes to adjacent candidates, these losses are accrued
by her opponent, thereby exacerbating differences in voteshare.
Adjacency misvotes pose a unique challenge to policy makers. While candidate list
rotation by district can eliminate the bias posed by positional misvoting, rotation does nothing to
reduce the bias caused by adjacency misvoting. No matter how a candidate list is randomized
across districts, major candidates will continue to lose votes to adjacent candidates. Our results
suggest two strategies that may reduce the level of adjacency misvotes. First, some voting
technologies (electronic voting and certain brands of optical scan ballots) lead to lower levels of
misvoting. Second, we find that adjacency misvotes are most prevalent when it is difficult to
discern which candidate selection box is associated with a given candidate name. For example,
on multi-column ballots, a single candidate name might be bordered by two selection bubbles.
5

Of course, adjacency misvoting is also present in elections outside the United States. Differences in voteshare lost
by major candidates could have determined outcomes for close international elections such as the 2006 Italian and
Mexican General Elections, both of which were decided by less than 0.1% of the popular vote.

5

Thus, clearer separation of the selection boxes corresponding to each candidate’s name may
reduce the level of adjacency misvotes.

II. The California Recall Election Dataset
A statewide special election was held in California on October 7th 2003 concerning the recall
of Governor Gray Davis. Voters were presented with two recall questions:
1. “Should Gray Davis be recalled (removed) from the office of Governor?” Yes/No
2. Candidates to succeed Gray Davis as Governor if he is recalled: Vote for one”
[List of 135 names]
Voters were asked to respond to the second question regardless of their response to the first
question. If more than 50% answer “Yes” to the first question, the candidate with the plurality of
the vote on the second question becomes governor. Perhaps due to the low entry requirements
(one needed only to obtain 65 signatures and pay the $3500 registration fee), a total of 135
candidates ran to replace Governor Gray Davis. The resulting candidate list was extremely
diverse and included such personalities as actor Gary Coleman, erotic actress Mary “Mary
Carey” Cook, and sumo wrestler Kurt E. “Tachikaze” Rightmyer.
Ballot format in the Recall Election was also extremely diverse. The ballot layout and
technology was determined at the county level (58 counties). The ballot ordering of candidates
varied by assembly district (80 districts). Because multiple counties can lie in the same district
and vice versa, the Recall Election used 157 different ballots (county-district combinations).
Candidates

were

ordered

according

to

a

randomized

alphabet,

“RWQOJMVAHBSGZXNTCIEKUPDYFL” in the first assembly district and then rotated one
candidate at a time by district. Thus, in District 1, the order was alphabetical according to this

6

randomly drawn alphabet: Robinson, Roscoe, Ramirez, …, Leonard. In District 2, Robinson
becomes last, and all others move up by one. This rotation continued through all 80 districts.
Gray Davis was recalled as Governor of California (55% of voters voted to recall him).
Table 1 shows the distribution of voteshares among the candidates running to replace him. The
top three candidates captured a total 93.56% of the voteshare, leaving an average voteshare of
0.05% for the remaining 132 “minor” candidates. For the remainder of this paper, we consider
the three frontrunners, Arnold Schwarzenegger (R), Cruz Bustamante (D), and Tom McClintock
(R) as major candidates. Inclusion of the next most popular candidate, Peter Camejo, as a major
candidate does not significantly change the baseline results. All candidates other than the top
three are included in the analysis as minor candidates.6
California uses three types of voting technology platforms: punch card, optical scan, and
touch screen. Punch card technology requires that voters use a stylus to punch out a pre-scored
hole corresponding to the desired candidate. Some forms of punch card technology require that
voters search for the candidate’s number on a separate punch card grid while others place the
pre-scored hole next to the candidate name. Optical scan technology requires that voters fill in an
oval or other marking to the left or right of each candidate’s name. Finally, touch screen
technology requires that voters touch a box on the computer screen in order to select their desired
candidate. After selection, the screen asks the voter to confirm her choice. Technology is
determined at the county level. Approximately 40 percent of all counties use punch card, 40
percent use optical scan and 20 percent use touch screen technology. Each technology platform
has several technology brands. The distribution of each brand is presented in Appendix 2.

6

Results do not change significantly if (a) Peter Camejo is dropped from the dataset, (b) all observations
representing minor candidates earning more than five percent of the voteshare in a precinct are dropped from the
dataset, or (c) the definition of minor candidates is restricted to include only those candidates in the lower half of the
voteshare distribution.

7

We utilize copies of sample ballots mailed to voters for 150 county-district combinations
to code which candidates had which type of advantaged position in each count-district.7 We
obtain precinct-level statements of vote and registration data from the Institute of Governmental
Studies (IGS) at the University of California, Berkeley. The statement of vote data has precinctlevel vote tallies for every candidate.8 The precinct-level registration dataset contains precinctlevel (not individual-specific) registration data such as voter party registration, race, and age
group. Because registration data does not include other important demographic variables such as
income and education, we merge precinct-level data with U.S. Census data from 2000 at the
blockgroup level using conversion files available from IGS. Summary statistics of these
demographic variables are available in Appendix 2.

III. Empirical Strategy
In general, it is difficult to measure the level of adjacency misvotes because misvotes are
recorded as valid votes. This may be the reason why previous literature (e.g., Alvarez et al. 2001
and Brady et al. 2001) has predominantly focused on the residual vote – votes that are discarded
because of hanging chads or other mismarkings. To our knowledge, Dee’s (2006) innovative
paper is the only paper that analyzes adjacency misvotes directly. Dee argues that the positive
correlation between the voteshares of a major candidate and the voteshares of “bookend
candidates” – minor candidates listed immediately before or after the major candidate – is
evidence of voting mistakes. Dee shows that voteshares of bookends increase by roughly 1/1000

7

The actual ballots used during Election Day are identical in layout to the sample ballots. In the case of touch screen
technology, voters viewed electronic screens which displayed candidate names in the same layout as that presented
on the sample paper ballots. We have been unable to collect sample ballots from Stanislaus and Imperial Counties
(which account for 1.4% of the vote).
8
Precinct-level data from IGS is at present incomplete. Full statement of vote and registration data along with
matching files account for 84% of all votes cast in the Recall Election.

8

of a percentage point for every percentage point increase in the adjacent major candidate’s
voteshare. However, Dee restricts his analysis to candidates who are almost always adjacent to
major candidates and therefore cannot test voteshare gains caused by variation in when a minor
candidate is adjacent to a major candidate. Thus, the critical assumption behind his results is that
the voteshares of the four bookends are not correlated with the voteshares of major candidates
due to reasons other than misvotes. However, this assumption may be reasonable in the context
of Dee’s paper, which focuses on which technologies mitigate misvoting rather than which
demographic groups are most prone to misvoting and how misvotes can affect elections.
Consistent with our findings, he finds that punch card technologies lead to significantly higher
levels of misvoting.
To better capture variation in adjacency, we define an adjacent candidate as any minor
candidate that vertically or horizontally borders a major candidate on a particular ballot (see
sample ballots in Appendix 1). We call these adjacent candidates north, south, east, and west
adjacent following a standard compass diagram. For example, the candidate directly above a
major candidate is north adjacent. Identification of adjacency misvoting results from random
variation in when a minor candidate is an adjacent candidate. North and south adjacent
candidates are identified due to candidate name rotation through page and column breaks.
Because north and south adjacent candidates are located in the same column as the major
candidate, they are always present and the same unless column and page breaks cause the major
candidate to be listed at the top or bottom of a column. For example, minor candidates Burton
and Bly-Chester are listed before and after major candidate Bustamante according to the
candidate name list. They are always north and south adjacent unless they are separated from
Bustamante by a page or column break.

9

Identification of east and west adjacent candidates occurs because column length varies
by county. In the sixty percent of counties that use multi-column ballots, the candidates
horizontally adjacent to the major candidates depend on the county’s column length. For
example, if Schwarzenegger is listed in the middle column on a three-column ballot, he has east
and west adjacent candidates. If Schwarzenegger is listed in the left-most column on a twocolumn ballot, he only has an east adjacent candidate. Further, this east adjacent candidate may
not be the same east adjacent candidate as in the previous ballot if the two ballots have columns
of differing lengths. Statistics describing the identification of each type of adjacent candidate are
available in Appendix 2.9
Combining district-level candidate name rotation and county-level variation in ballot
layout, we identify 68 minor candidates that are adjacent to a major candidate in some but not all
county-districts. We use this variation to answer the following four questions:
1. Is there evidence of voter irrationality as measured by increased voteshares of minor
candidates located in favorable positions?
2. How does misvoting affect the relative voteshares of major candidates?
3. What demographic characteristics correlate with the amount of misvoting?
4. What voting technologies correspond to a reduction in the level of misvotes?
To examine adjacency misvoting, we use the following baseline specification:
(I)

Votesharepdc = β0 + β1×Adjacentpdcm + controls + εpdc ,
where
Adjacentpdcm ≡ Idcadjacent × Major Candidate Votesharepdcm

9

We also identify a special class of adjacent candidates with numbers located in squares adjacent to the number
corresponding to the major candidate on a punch card (See Appendix 1). These punch card adjacent candidates only
exist in the 19% of counties that use the Votomatic or Pollstar brands of voting machines. Because column length in
the punch card grid differs from column length in the ballot text, a candidate can be punch card adjacent without
being adjacent on the regular ballot and vice versa.

10

An observation is a minor candidate c in a precinct p, with voting technology and ballot layout
varying by county-district d. Each observation is weighted by the number of votes cast in
precinct p.10 Votesharepdc is defined as the share of votes candidate c receives in precinct p in
county-district d. We do not use the log of voteshare as the dependent variable because the
voteshare gained by an adjacent candidate should be a level effect, and should not depend on the
average voteshare of the minor candidate.11 Idcadjacent is a dummy variable equaling one if
candidate c is adjacent to a major candidate in county-district d. In modifications of the baseline
regression, Idcadjacent may represent specific types of candidate adjacency (e.g., the minor
candidate listed directly above major candidate Arnold Schwarzenegger) or a vector representing
several types of candidate adjacency. If minor candidate c is adjacent to a major candidate in
precinct p in county-district d, then Major Candidate Votesharepdcm equals the voteshare in
precinct p of the major candidate m to whom the minor candidate is adjacent. Adjacentpdcm is
defined as the product of Idcadjacent and Major Candidate Votesharepdcm. Finally εpdc is an error
term that we allow to be clustered by county-district-candidate because the primary right hand
side variable of interest, Idcadjacent, is constant within a county-district for a given minor candidate.

10

Weights account for the fact that an observation representing a large precinct is more precise because it is an
average taken from a larger sample of voters. Thus, larger precincts should be weighted more heavily in the
regression.
11
This is verified empirically by a regression of minor candidate voteshare on a dummy variable equaling one if the
minor candidate is adjacent to a major candidate and an interaction term between the dummy variable and the
precinct-level voteshare of the minor candidate. The coefficient on the interaction term is insignificant and close to
zero.

11

In the baseline specification, β1 represents the gain in voteshare experienced by an
adjacent minor candidate when the corresponding major candidate’s voteshare increases by one.
In other words, β1 measures the percentage of voters originally intending to vote for a major
candidate that end up voting for each adjacent minor candidate. (The total percentage of voters
that misvote is not β1 but rather the product of β1 and the average number of minor candidates
adjacent to major candidates per ballot.) Implicit in this interpretation of β1 is that adjacency
misvoting is a positive function of the popularity of the associated major candidate; i.e. if
Schwarzenegger is more popular in precinct A than in precinct B and Schwarzenegger’s voters
are equally likely to misvote in precincts A and B, then candidates adjacent to Schwarzenegger
should gain more voteshare in precinct A than in precinct B.
Our sample consists of observations at the candidate-precinct level. There are 132 data
points per precinct, one for each minor candidate. This results in a total of 1,817,904
observations, covering 13,772 precincts corresponding to 80 districts and 55 counties.
We also introduce the following set of controls to the baseline regression and all
extensions of the baseline regression: candidate ballot location controls (dummy variables for
first and last on the ballot overall, ballot page, and ballot column), candidate fixed effects,
candidate fixed effects interacted with demographic controls, and candidate fixed effects
interacted with the voteshares of the major candidates.12 Altogether, 2250 control variables are
included in our baseline specification to ensure correct identification of adjacency misvoting.
The ballot location controls are county-district-candidate-level dummy variables that
equal one if the minor candidate is located first or last overall, on a page, or in a column on the

12

The addition of county-district fixed effect does not significantly change baseline results. They are omitted from
the analysis in order to reduce computational demands on statistical software. Because the dependent variables sum
to the total voteshare of minor candidates, county-district fixed effects only control for the relative popularity of all
minor candidates compared to major candidates in each county-district.

12

ballot. These ballot position controls ensure that adjacency misvotes are not incorrectly identified
off of position misvotes. The candidate fixed effects control for differences in the popularity of
minor candidates that could lead to bias if relatively popular minor candidates happen to be
adjacent to major candidates on a disproportionate share of the ballots. We also control for
candidate fixed effects interacted with precinct-level demographic characteristics. This controls
for how precinct-level demographic characteristics influence the popularity of each minor
candidate. It ensures that adjacency misvoting is not incorrectly identified from precinct
demographic characteristics, which, by chance, might favor candidates that are adjacent in that
precinct. Similarly we control for candidate fixed effects interacted with the precinct-level
voteshare of each major candidate to control for the correlation between the popularity of each
minor candidate and the popularity of the major candidates.
In the Results section, we introduce several modifications of the baseline specification to
check the robustness of the baseline results. We also further explore adjacency misvoting as it
relates to voteshare lost by the major candidates, precinct-level demographic characteristics, and
voting technology.

IV. Results
1. The Baseline Result
Regression (1) in Table 2 shows the results of the baseline specification. It is a least
squares regression of precinct-level voteshares of each minor candidate on Adjacent, a variable
equal to the voteshare of the associated major candidate if the minor candidate is adjacent to a
major candidate and zero otherwise. Because voteshares of major candidates are expressed as
fractions and voteshares of minor candidates as percentages, the coefficient on Adjacent

13

represents the percentage of voters that misvote for each minor candidate adjacent to their
preferred major candidate. Regression (1) reveals that each minor candidate adjacent to a major
candidate will experience an increase in votes equal to 0.104% of the intended votes for that
major candidate. This result is significant at the one percent level and is clear evidence of the
bounded rationality of some voters.
Regression (2) in Table 2 decomposes adjacency misvoting by major candidate. It shows
a regression of minor candidate voteshare on the interaction between Adjacent and a vector of
dummy variables representing each major candidate. It shows that Bustamante loses 0.143% of
his vote to each of his adjacent minor candidates, but that the corresponding figure is only
0.088% for Schwarzenegger and 0.107% for McClintock. This result is striking because it
implies that Bustamante voters are 63% more likely to misvote than are Schwarzenegger voters.
Thus, if Bustamante had received as high a voteshare as Schwarzenegger, Bustamante’s adjacent
candidates would have gained 63% more misvotes relative to Schwarzenegger’s adjacent
candidates. This result has important consequences because voteshare gained by an adjacent
candidate is voteshare lost by the associated major candidate. In later regressions, we present
evidence that Bustamante lost more votes than the other major candidates because he attracted
voters from demographic groups associated with high levels of misvoting.
Regression (3) in Table 1 shows a variation of the baseline regression in which minor
candidate voteshare is regressed on Adjacent Dummy, a dummy variable equaling one if a
candidate is adjacent to a major candidate. The coefficient on Adjacent Dummy represents the
average gain in voteshare a minor candidate experiences when she is adjacent to a major
candidate. Results show that minor candidates gain 0.037 percentage points in voteshare if they
are adjacent to a major candidate. Given that the average voteshare of minor candidates is 0.05%

14

percent, being adjacent to a major candidate nearly doubles a minor candidate’s voteshare. A
calculation taking into account the magnitude of adjacency misvoting for each type of adjacency
(i.e. north, south, east, and west), along with the average number of adjacent candidates per
ballot (see Appendix 3), reveals that misvotes accounted for at least 0.25% (SE=0.03%) of all
votes cast in the Recall Election. Further, if Schwarzenegger and Bustamante had received equal
shares of the votes received by the major candidates, misvotes would have given
Schwarzenegger an edge of 0.06%.
Table 3 presents a series of regressions that support the robustness of our primary
findings. Regression (1) in Table 3 shows a regression of minor candidate voteshare on Adjacent
Dummy, a dummy variable equaling one if a minor candidate is adjacent to one of the major
candidates and Adjacent, equal to the product of Adjacent Dummy and the precinct-level
voteshare of an adjacent candidate’s associated major candidate. Regression (1) tests our
assumption that adjacent candidates gain voteshare as a positive function of the popularity of the
major candidate. Results suggest that our assumption is valid – adjacent candidates earn only
0.010 percentage points in voteshare (a result that is not significantly different from zero at the
10% level) if they are adjacent to a major candidate that earns zero voteshare in a precinct.
Further, adjacent candidates gain an additional 0.00082 percentage points for each additional
percentage point gained by a major candidate. This result is significant at the 1% level.
Regression (2) in Table 3 tests that our primary results are driven by variation in when a
candidate is adjacent to a major candidate rather than by variation in the voteshares of associated
major candidates. Instead of regressing minor candidate voteshare on the product of an adjacency
dummy and the precinct-level voteshares of associated major candidates, Regression (2) uses the
product of an adjacency dummy and the statewide voteshares of the associated major candidates

15

as the independent variable. By substituting statewide major candidate voteshare for precinctlevel voteshare, we retain our assumption that adjacent candidates should gain more votes when
they border more popular major candidates. However, now the only variation in the independent
variable is caused by the adjacency of minor candidates to major candidates. The coefficient on
Adjacent Dummy×CA Voteshare is 0.112 and significant at the 1% level. More importantly, it is
very similar in magnitude to the coefficient of 0.104 on Adjacent in Regression (1) of Table 1,
confirming that our results are driven by variation in the adjacency status of minor candidates.
Regression (3) in Table 3 decomposes adjacency misvoting by type of adjacency. We
define a minor candidate to be adjacent if she borders a major candidate to the north, south, east
or west. This regression shows that misvoting is strongest when a minor candidate is east
adjacent and weakest when a minor candidate is west adjacent; 0.143% of voters misvote for east
adjacent candidates, only 0.038% of voters misvote for west adjacent candidates, while 0.082%
and 0.111% of voters misvote for north and south adjacent candidates respectively. We explore
why east adjacent candidates gain more in voteshare than west adjacent candidates in our
discussion of Regression (6). For now, we note that Regression (3) shows that adjacency
misvoting is not driven merely by name confusion. One might think that voters vote for north
and south adjacent candidates because candidates are listed in order (according to a randomized
alphabet) down a column. For example, on the majority of ballots, the south adjacent candidate
for Arnold Schwarzenegger is George Schwartzman. Voters may mistakenly vote for
Schwartzman because his last name somewhat resembles “Schwarzenegger.” We use candidate
fixed effects to control for the direct effect of name confusion, but one might believe that it is the
interaction between name confusion and adjacency that drives adjacency misvotes. However,
east and west adjacent candidates are one column off from a major candidate and therefore have

16

last names that are dissimilar to the names of their associated major candidates. The fact that
these adjacent candidates also gain voteshare of comparable magnitude suggests that it is
adjacency rather than name confusion that drives adjacency misvotes.
Regression (4) in Table 3 explores the voteshare gained by candidates that are diagonally
adjacent to major candidates. Diagonally adjacent candidates are one row and one column off
from their associated major candidate. Regression (4) shows that diagonally adjacent candidates
earn much less in voteshare than candidates that are horizontally or vertically adjacent. 0.002%
of voters misvote for each diagonally adjacent candidate compared to the 0.104% of voters that
misvote for each vertically or horizontally adjacent candidate. Further, the coefficient on
Diagonally Adjacent is not significant at the 10% level. Low voteshare gains for diagonally
adjacent candidates likely occur because voters are less likely to misvote for candidates one row
and one column removed from their intended choices. Because diagonally adjacent candidates
gain very little in voteshare, we restrict our analysis to vertically or horizontally adjacent
candidates.
Regressions (5) and (6) offer insight into what causes misvotes. We find that misvotes are
primarily caused by accidental mistakes rather than the increased consideration voters may give
to candidates adjacent to their preferred major candidates. Regression (5) in Table 3 explores
misvoting for candidates adjacent to major candidates on punch cards. Nineteen percent of
counties in California used punch card voting machines that require each voter to search for her
desired candidate and that candidate’s associated number from a booklet of candidate names.
Each voter then punched out the desired candidate’s number on a separate punch card. A sample
punch card is provided in Appendix 1. Because the length of columns on the punch card differs
from column length in the text ballot, a minor candidate can be punch card adjacent without

17

being adjacent on a regular ballot and vice versa. The punch card lists only numbers, so
voteshare gained by punch card adjacent candidates should represent gains due to voting
mistakes. Voters are unlikely to first locate a preferred major candidate and then to give
increased consideration to numbers adjacent to the major candidate’s number if they do not see
any names associated with those numbers. Regression (5) shows that, controlling for the
adjacency of minor candidates on the regular ballot, 0.030% of voters misvote for each punch
card adjacent candidate. This result is only significant at the ten percent level, perhaps because
our limited observations involving punch card adjacency do not have enough power to yield
significant results. Nevertheless, this result supports our hypothesis that adjacency misvotes do
not derive only from increased consideration of adjacent candidates.
Regression (6) in Table 3 presents additional evidence that adjacency misvotes are driven
by accidental votes rather than by increased consideration of adjacent candidates. We regress
minor candidate voteshare on Adjacent and Adjacent×Confusing Side. Confusing Side is a
dummy variable equaling one if the minor candidate is horizontally adjacent to a major candidate
and listed in the column with selection boxes closest to the name of the major candidate. For
example, in a single row, we might read from left to right: bubble, minor candidate, bubble,
major candidate, bubble, minor candidate. See the figures in Appendix 1 for examples. In this
case, the bubble for the east adjacent candidate is very close to the name of the major candidate
and a voter may accidentally fill in the east adjacent candidate’s bubble believing that she has
cast a vote for the major candidate. Thus, confusing side equals one if a horizontally adjacent
candidate is listed in a position that may be most confusing to the voter. After controlling for the
effects of north and south adjacency, we find that the coefficient on Horizontally Adjacent is
0.031 while the coefficient on Horizontally Adjacent×Confusing side is 0.123. This implies that

18

0.031% of voters misvote for each horizontally adjacent candidates not on the confusing side
while 0.031%+0.123%=0.154% of voters misvote for each horizontally adjacent candidate on
the confusing side. Thus, voters are five times more likely to misvote for candidates listed on the
confusing side. This implies that adjacency misvotes are, in large part, driven by accidental
voting mistakes, because increased consideration should not depend on how each candidate’s
bubble is located relative to the major candidates. Regression (6) may also explain why the
coefficient on East Adjacent is stronger than the coefficient on West Adjacent in Regression (3).
For 63% of the multi-column ballots used in the Recall Election, selection boxes were placed to
the left of each candidate’s name. Therefore, the selection boxes of east adjacent candidates were
usually closest to the names of the major candidates.
Regression (6) also delivers clear policy implications. Adjacency misvoting is extremely
high in cases when it is ambiguous which selection boxes correspond to each candidate’s name.
Therefore, adjacency misvoting may be reduced if columns and rows are spaced farther apart, so
that there is a clear separation between the each candidate’s selection box and all other selection
boxes.
2. Demographic Characteristics
The cognitive costs of voting, given complex ballot designs and voting technology, may
be higher among certain demographic groups than others. This leads to systematic disadvantages
for major candidates that attract groups more likely to misvote. Below, we show how the amount
of misvoting varies with precinct-level demographic characteristics. We find that voters from
precincts with high misvote rates disproportionally favored Democratic candidate Cruz
Bustamante and that voter demographics may explain why Bustamante lost a higher proportion
of his votes to adjacent candidates than did Schwarzenegger or McClintock.

19

A growing literature suggests that the level of residual votes, i.e. votes that are discarded
because voters vote for more than one candidate, leave hanging chads, etc., depends on the racial
and socioeconomic composition of each precinct. Tomz and Van Houweling (2003) use precinctlevel data from South Carolina and Louisiana’s 2000 Presidential Election to find that in areas
with punch card or optically scanned ballots, the Black-White gap in residual voteshare ranged
from four to six percentage points. In comparison, lever and touch screen machines cut the gap in
residual voteshares by a factor of ten. Tomz and Van Houweling do not control for income,
education, and other demographic variables in their analysis. However, even controlling for
socioeconomic differences, the racial gap remains significant. Knack and Kropf (2003) use
county-level data from the 1996 Presidential Election to find that counties with more Black or
Hispanic voters have higher residual vote tallies, controlling for income, education and voting
technology.
To our knowledge, no research has yet explored how the prevalence of misvoting varies
by demographic characteristics. To test how misvoting varies by precinct-level demographic
characteristics, we interact the variable Adjacent with precinct-level demographic characteristics
Demopd, and add this interaction to the baseline specification.13 If Demopd represents a single
variable, then the coefficient on Adjacent×Demopd represents the additional gain in voteshare
caused by adjacency misvoting when Demopd and all other demographic variables positively
correlated with Demopd increases. Meanwhile, if Demopd represents a vector of demographic
characteristics, the coefficients on Adjacent×Demopd represent the marginal change in the gain in
voteshare caused by adjacency misvotes for an increase in each demographic variable, holding
the other measured demographic variables constant. This distinction is important in cases in

13

The direct effect of Demopd is absorbed by the Demopd×candidate fixed effects interactions that are already
included in the baseline specification.

20

which the partial effect differs from the overall change. For example, we find that adjacency
misvoting is stronger in precincts with many registered Democrats. However, this overall effect
is driven by the fact that many registered Democrats have other characteristics (such as less
education) that may cause them to make more voting mistakes. If we hold these characteristics
constant, we find that the partial effect of a greater percentage of registered Democrats does not
increase misvoting.
When exploring the impact of demographic characteristics on adjacency misvoting, we
use the same set of controls as in baseline specification. In addition, we control for Demopd,
Techd and Adjacent×Techd where Techd is a vector of technology dummy variables representing
the brand of technology used in each county-district. The controls for technology ensure that our
demographic estimates are not biased because of a possible correlation between precinct-level
demographic characteristics and the voting technology of the precinct’s corresponding county.
There are two caveats to the demographic results. First, even if a demographic
characteristic such as low education is correlated with higher levels of misvoting, lack of
education may not be the cause of adjacency misvotes. For example, it is conceivable that
education is positively correlated with experience taking standardized exams, and experience
with standardized exams is what truly reduces levels of misvoting. Second, the ecological
fallacy, as explained by Achen and Shively (1995), states that analysis using precinct-level data
does not necessarily imply direct links between individual demographics characteristics and the
magnitude of adjacency misvoting. For example, a regression might show that a precinct with a
60% Asian and 40% White population casts misvotes at a higher rate than does a precinct with a
10% Asian population and a 90% White population. This does not necessarily imply that Asian
voters are more likely to cast misvotes. It could instead be the case that the White voters who

21

choose to live in predominantly Asian precincts cast misvotes at a higher rate. Nevertheless, we
argue that precinct-level demographic data offers important insights. Precinct-level demographic
data reveal which types of precincts exhibit stronger adjacency misvoting.
Regression (1) in Table 4 shows that a one percentage point increase in the number of
voters with a high school degree corresponds to a 0.0062 percentage point fall in the percentage
of voters that misvote for each adjacent candidate. This result is significant at the five percent
level. The coefficient on Adjacent×%College Graduates is similar with value of -0.0056,
suggesting that, holding high school education constant, college education has no additional
impact on misvoting. Thus, precincts with high percentages of high school graduates (including
college graduates) cast significantly fewer misvotes. The calculations in the last three columns of
Table 4 show the difference in the percentage of voters that vote for each adjacent candidate for
precincts at the 5th percentile of a demographic variable compared to precincts at the 95th
percentile. Holding the fraction with a college education constant, the percentage of voters that
misvote for each adjacent candidate is 0.22 percentage points lower in precincts at the 95th
percentile of high school education than in precincts at the 5th percentile. This difference is
double the average percentage of voters that misvote for each adjacent candidate. This result is
consistent with evidence from Lusardi and Mitchell (2006) and Benjamin et al. (2006). Lusardi
and Mitchell also find that lack of education is a strong predictor of making mistakes, but in the
context of simple questions about interest, inflation and risk diversification. Benjamin et al.
present experimental evidence that lower cognitive ability, rather than lack of schooling per se, is
a powerful predictor of behavioral anomalies.
Regression (2) in table 4 shows that, holding the percentage of precinct residents that are
Black and Asian constant, a one percentage point increase in the number of Hispanic residents

22

corresponds to a 0.0038 percentage point increase in the percentage of voters that misvote for
each adjacent candidate. This result is significant at the one percent level. Meanwhile, the
coefficients on Adjacent×%Black and Adjacent×%Asian are small with standard errors near
zero, implying that precincts with high percentages of Black or Asian residents do not behave
significantly differently from precincts with high percentages of White residents (the omitted
category). Holding the percentage of Black and Asian residents constant, the percentage of
voters that misvote for each adjacent candidate is 0.23 percentage points higher in precincts at
the 95th percentile of percent Hispanic than in precincts at the 5th percentile. This difference is
also double the average percentage of voters that misvote for each adjacent candidate.
Regression (3) in table 4 shows how misvoting varies by the party registration of voters.
The coefficients on Adjacent×%Republican and Adjacent×%Independent are -0.0025 and 0.0068, respectively, while the coefficient on Adjacent×%Other Party is not significantly
different from zero. Since the omitted category is %Democrat, these results show that precincts
with high percentages of Republican or Independent voters misvote at significantly lower rates
than precincts with high percentages of Democratic or Other Party voters. A one percentage
point increase in the number of registered Republicans corresponds to a 0.0025% point fall in the
percentage of voters that misvote for each adjacent candidate. Holding the percentage of
Independent and Other Party voters constant, the percentage of voters that misvote for each
adjacent candidate is 0.128 percentage points lower in precincts at the 95th percentile of percent
Republican than in precincts at the 5th percentile. Similarly, holding the percentage of
Republican and Other Party constant, the percentage of voters that misvote for each adjacent
candidate is 0.170 percentage points lower in precincts at the 95th percentile of percent

23

Independent than in precincts at the 5th percentile. These differences are greater than the average
percentage of voters that misvote for each adjacent candidate.
Table 5 presents regressions exploring how adjacency misvotes vary with five other
precinct-level demographic variables: median household income in thousands of U.S. dollars,
percent living below the Census poverty line, percent lacking English fluency, percent over the
age of 65, and percent between the ages of 18 and 24. All specifications show a significant
coefficient on the interaction term, Adjacent×X where X represents the demographic
characteristic of interest. These coefficients imply that precincts with high percentages of
residents between the ages of 18 and 24, living below the poverty line, or lacking fluency in
English14 exhibit higher levels of misvoting. Precincts with high percentages of residents above
the age of 65 also exhibit higher levels of misvoting, although the effect is smaller than for the
other characteristics.15 Conversely, precincts with high median household income exhibit low
levels of misvoting. Calculations in the last three rows of Table 5 estimate the difference in the
magnitude of adjacency misvoting between precincts at the 5th and 95th percentile in terms of X,
the demographic variable of interest.

These calculations reveal that differences in these

demographic characteristics correspond to large changes in the magnitude of adjacency
misvoting. The results for low income precincts are consistent with Madrian and Shea (2001),
Choi et al. (2004), and Thaler and Benartzi (2004), who in different settings, find that lower-

14

We also test how the relationship between the percentage of voters lacking English fluency and adjacency
misvoting changes conditional on the availability of foreign language ballots. During the Recall Election, 80% of
precincts offered Spanish ballots while 40% of precincts offered ballots in at least one Asian language. Results show
that adjacency misvoting is stronger in precincts that offer Spanish ballots. In addition, the availability of foreign
language ballots does not significantly change the relationship between English fluency and adjacency misvotes.
However, it is difficult to draw causal conclusions from these results because the availability of foreign language
ballots is endogenously determined by each county.
15
Age 65 was chosen as the cutoff because voter registration data does not distinguish age groups for ages greater
than 65. Voter registration data may provide a better estimate of actual voter demographics than Census data
because a higher percentage of registered voters vote on Election Day. However, results do not significantly change
using older age cutoffs derived from Census data.

24

income employees are more likely to conform to the default savings options by their employers,
which is likely because these employees have a higher cognition cost of making the optimal
savings decisions.
Table 6 shows the results of a regression of minor candidate voteshare on Adjacent and
the interaction between Adjacent and a vector of precinct-level demographics. The coefficients
on the interaction terms are partial effects; they represent the change in the magnitude of
adjacency misvoting for a change in a single demographic characteristic when the other
demographic characteristics are held constant. We find that the partial effect of the percentage of
registered Democrats is not significantly different from the partial effects of other political
affiliations.16 Altogether, the demographic interactions show that misvoting increases with the
fraction Hispanic or Asian, the fraction elderly and the fraction in poverty, while it decreases
with the fraction with at least a high school degree, and the fraction lacking English fluency.17
These demographic trends shed light on why, relative to Schwarzenegger and
McClintock, Bustamante lost more votes to adjacent candidates. If the three candidates had been
equally popular, Bustamante would have lost 63% more votes than Schwarzenegger and 34%
more votes than McClintock. Using demographic trends, we estimate how much of the
difference in voteshare lost by each major candidate can be accounted for by differences in the
demographic characteristics of each major candidate’s voting base.18 We find that, compared to

16

The percentage of voters registered with the Democratic Party is negatively correlated with median household
income and the percentage of residents with high school diplomas, both of which are associated with lower levels of
misvoting. This explains why the percentage of registered democratic voters has a positive overall effect on
misvoting (Table 4) but a non-significant partial effect (Table 6).
17
The percentage of voters lacking English fluency is negatively correlated with income and education. Further,
over 80% of voters had access to foreign language ballots. This may explain why the percentage of voters lacking
English fluency has a positive overall effect on misvoting (Table 5) but a negative partial effect (Table 6).
18
We first estimate the number of misvotes cast in each precinct using each precinct’s demographic characteristics.
The estimated number of misvotes in each precinct multiplied by each major candidate’s performance in a precinct
(as a fraction of the total votes for the three major candidates) is an estimate of the number of misvotes lost by each
major candidate. After adjusting for the relative popularities of the major candidates, we find that demographic

25

Schwarzenegger and McClintock, Bustamante attracted voters most likely to misvote.
Differences in the observed demographic characteristics of each major candidate’s voting base
can explain roughly one half of the difference in voteshare lost. Our calculation is actually a
lower bound for the explanatory power of demographic characteristics. Since our data is at the
precinct level, we need to assume that, within a precinct, Schwarzenegger, Bustamante, and
McClintock voters are equally likely to misvote for adjacent candidates. This is likely to be false
– within a precinct, Bustamante voters are probably more likely to cast misvotes. Therefore, we
underestimate the extent to which demographic characteristics can account for differences in
voteshares lost by the major candidates.

3. Voting Technology
Numerous studies and policy initiatives have explored the effect of voting technology on
the number of discarded ballots, also known as residual votes. These studies consistently find
that, relative to optical scan and electronic technology platforms, the punch card technology
platform is associated with the greatest number of residual votes. Brady et al. (2001) summarizes
the current research relating to voting technology. On average, residual votes account for two
percent of all votes in presidential races. Using county-level data from the 2000 U.S. Presidential
Election, Brady et al. find that touch screen and optical scan voting technology yield half the
level of residual votes found in elections using punch card technology. Alvarez et al. (2001)
employ similar methods to find results generally consistent with those of Brady et al.

characteristics predict that Bustamante lost 24% more votes than Schwarzenegger and 19% more votes than
McClintock. Thus demographic characteristics can account for at least 39% of the difference in votes lost by
Bustamante and Schwarzenegger and 57% of the difference in votes lost by Bustamante and McClintock.

26

While numerous studies have explored the relationship between technology and the
residual vote, much less research has explored the relationship between technology and
adjacency misvotes. Dee (2006) finds that punch card technology increases the voteshare gained
by “bookend” candidates, i.e. candidates vertically adjacent to major candidates. Using countylevel data from the 2003 California Recall election, Dee shows that, relative to touch screen and
optical scan technology, punch card technology increases the voteshare of bookends by 0.04
percentage points on average, an increase of more than one-third of the mean voteshare of the
bookends. We extend Dee’s analysis to a precinct-level dataset that measures adjacency misvotes
based upon variation in when candidates are vertically and horizontally adjacent to major
candidates. We also extend Dee’s analysis by exploring whether technology differences are
driven by platforms (i.e. punch card) or by individual technology brands. Further, we control for
precinct-level demographic characteristics – this will better control for the possibility that
technology is correlated with demographic characteristics that influence misvoting.
To study the relationship between technology and adjacency misvoting, we interact the
variable Adjacent with a vector of technology dummies Techd representing technology platforms
or technology brands. We add this interaction and Techd itself to the baseline specification. By
platform of technology, we refer to broad categories of technology such as touch screen, punch
card, or optical scan technology. By brands of technology, we refer to specific brands of voting
machines, e.g., the Diebold AccuVote-TS that uses the touch screen technology platform. For a
summary of the availability of each type of technology, see Appendix 1. In addition to the large
set of controls included in the baseline regression, we now add controls for Adjacent×Demopd,
where Demopd is a vector of precinct-level demographic variables. This specification controls for

27

the possibility that voting technology is correlated with precinct-level demographic variables and
separates technology effects from demographic effects.
Regression (2) in Table 7 shows the relationship between voting technology platform and
adjacency misvoting. Our results indicate that 0.197% of voters using punch card technology
misvote for each adjacent candidate compared to only 0.100% and 0.065% of voters using
optical scan and touch screen technology respectively. Further, the coefficient on
Adjacent×Punch Card is significantly different from the coefficients on Adjacent×Optical Scan
and Adjacent×Touch Screen at the five percent level. These results suggest that touch screen and
optical scan technology cut the prevalence of misvoting roughly in half relative to punch card
technology. This result is consistent with the large literature (e.g., Alvarez et al. 2001 and Brady
et al. 2001) arguing that punch card technology causes the greatest number of residual votes.
After all, residual votes are examples of detected voting mistakes while adjacency misvotes are
largely undetected voting mistakes.
Regression (4) in Table 7 shows the relationship between the brand of voting technology
and the magnitude of adjacency misvoting. Eleven brands of voting technology were used during
the Recall Election. Each brand corresponded to one of three technology platforms: optical scan,
touch screen, or punch card. Further details concerning the distribution of technology brands are
included in Appendix 1. Results from Regression (2) reveal that, controlling for the impact of
demographic characteristics, brands tend to have the same rate of misvoting within each
technology class, with three notable exceptions: the optical scan Diebold Accu-Vote-OS has a
level of misvoting that is comparable to typical punch card voting technologies, the punch card
Datavote brand has a level of misvoting that is comparable to most optical scan and touch screen

28

technologies,19 and the touch screen Diebold AccuVote-TS is associated with an insignificantly
low level of misvoting.
Results from regressions (2) and (4) are very similar to results from regression (1) and (3)
in which we do not control for precinct demographic characteristics. This supports evidence by
Knack and Kropf (2002), Garner and Spalaore (2005), and Card and Moretti (2005) showing that
areas with low levels of education and income, and high levels of Black or Hispanic voters are
not more likely to have “inferior” technologies such as punch card voting. Of course, it is
possible that precincts in counties that choose to adopt each brand of voting technology have
other characteristics not already accounted for by the demographic controls that influence the
magnitude of adjacency misvoting. We cannot simply conclude that touch screen technology is
“better” than punch card technology because technology may be endogenously chosen.
However, the technology brand analysis does suggest that a simple switch away from the punch
card technology platform may not automatically reduce the level adjacency misvoting. Careful
consideration of inter-brand differences may be necessary.

4. Applications and Extensions
While the small but significant loss of votes to adjacent candidates did not change the
outcome of the Recall Election, it may have important implications for elections in general.
Numerous presidential, senatorial, and gubernatorial elections have been determined by very
slim margins of victory. The margins of victory of the popular vote in the Presidential Elections

19

The Datavote punch card brand distinguishes itself from the other two punch card brands in that it allows voters to
punch out their selections on the regular ballots (rather than requiring the use of punch card ballots in addition to
regular text ballots). Thus, the low level of misvotes associated with the Datavote machine suggests that the act of
“punching” out pre-scored holes may not be the cause of misvoting. Instead, higher levels of misvoting associated
with punch card technology by may be driven by the use of separate punch card ballots.

29

of 1880, 1884, 1960, and 2000 were all less than one-quarter of a percent.20 Recently, the 2004
Washington gubernatorial, 2000 Washington senatorial, 1998 Nevada senatorial, and 2002 South
Dakota senatorial elections were determined by voteshare margins of less than one-tenth of a
percent. Major candidates that attract voters that are more likely to cast misvotes would suffer
key disadvantages in these close elections.
However, one may wonder if results from California’s gubernatorial recall election can
be applied to other major elections. The Recall Election was unique in that it featured an
unusually large number of candidates, 135 in total, competing in a single race. The advantage is
that the large number of candidates combined with variation in ballot layout and candidate order
provides the best available identification of adjacency misvoting. The disadvantage is that most
major elections feature far fewer candidates competing in a single race. For example, while a
total of 72 candidates ran for President in at least one state during the 2004 Election, the majority
of states listed fewer than ten candidates. Even primary elections, known for their large candidate
pools, typically feature fewer than thirty candidates per race.21 This does not imply, however,
that the California Recall Election ballots were unusually confusing. Ballots used in major
elections contain numerous races (e.g., President, Senate, House, assembly district, county,
municipality, etc.) and propositions, and thus do not significantly differ in length or complexity
from Recall Election ballots. However, adjacency misvoting may depend on the length of the
candidate list for a single race. Therefore, future research may wish to explore whether misvoting
occurs at comparable levels in elections featuring fewer candidates.

20

Outcomes of presidential elections are officially determined by the Electoral College. For a majority of U.S.
states, the popular vote by state determines how state electoral votes are distributed in the Electoral College. In each
of the presidential elections listed above, the margin of victory was less than a quarter of a percent in the popular
vote of at least one state with enough electoral votes to determine the outcome of the election.
21
Data for presidential elections and primaries are drawn from state election websites.

30

Future nationwide studies of adjacency misvoting may be particularly beneficial because
adjacency misvoting could have a large impact on major elections outside of California. Unlike
California, many states in the U.S. do not rotate candidate name order on ballots. Rather,
incumbents are listed first, followed by a long list of minor candidates. This implies that the
candidate adjacent to a major candidate could be another major candidate. If this is the case,
votes lost by one major candidate are systematically accrued by another major candidate. For
example, suppose that, relative to the Republican frontrunner, the Democratic frontrunner
attracts voters that are more likely to cast misvotes. Further suppose that the two frontrunners are
adjacent to each other on the ballot. Then the Democratic frontrunner would not only lose more
votes to adjacent candidates. Her loss would actually go to her opponent, thereby magnifying her
electoral disadvantage.

V. Conclusion
This paper tests the hypothesis that minor candidates experience gains in voteshare when
their names are listed near the name of a major candidate on a ballot. We refer to votes for minor
candidates resulting from adjacency misvoting as “misvotes” because ballot layout should not
impact the voting choices of fully rational voters with negligible cognition costs.
We test adjacency misvoting using a unique dataset combining precinct-level voting
results from the 2003 California Recall Election with precinct-level Census and voter registration
data. Because ballot layout and candidate order are determined at the county-district level, there
exists random variation in when a minor candidate is adjacent to a major candidate. The gain in
the total voteshares experienced by minor candidates that are adjacent is an estimate of the
number of misvotes. We find that the voteshares of minor candidates almost double when their

31

names are adjacent to the names of major candidates and that misvotes accounted for at least
0.25% percent of all votes cast during the Recall Election. Misvotes are most prevalent in
precincts with high percentages of Democratic, Hispanic, low-income, non-English speaking,
poorly educated, or young voters, suggesting that these groups may face higher cognitive costs of
voting. We also find that, relative to the punch card technology platform, the use of the optical
scan or touch screen technology platforms generally corresponds to a reduction in the number of
misvotes. However, even within technology platforms, there are some notable performance
differences across voting machine brands.
Adjacency misvoting has important electoral implications because votes gained by
adjacent candidates are votes lost by major candidates. A major candidate that attracts voters
from precincts that cast high levels of misvotes suffers systematic electoral disadvantages. In the
case of the California Recall Election, precincts that were most affected by adjacency misvoting
also showed the strongest support for Democratic candidate Cruz Bustamante. This may explain
why, relative to Republican candidate Arnold Schwarzenegger, Bustamante lost 63 percent more
of the votes intended for him to his adjacent candidates. Although this difference in lost votes
represents a small fraction of the total voteshare, the loss exceeds the margins of victory in
several recent elections, including the presidential election of 2000 and the Washington
gubernatorial election of 2004. Thus, adjacency misvoting is powerful enough to determine
outcomes in important highly-contested close elections.

32

References
Achen, Christopher H. and W. Phillips Shively.
University of Chicago Press.
Alvarez, Michael R., et al.
Technology Project.

1995. Cross Level Inference. Chicago:

2001. Voting: What is, What Could Be. Caltech/MIT Voting

Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro. May 2006. “Who is
‘Behavioral’? Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences.” SSRN Electronic Paper 675264.
Brady, Henry E., et al. 2001. Counting All the Votes: The Performance of Voting Technology in
the United States. Department of Political Science, Survey Research Center, and Institute of
Governmental Studies, University of California, Berkeley.
Card, David and Enrico Moretti. May 2005. “Does Voting Technology Affect Election
Outcomes? Touch-Screen Voting and the 2004 Presidential Election.” NBER Working Paper
11309.
Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004. “For Better or For
Worse: Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior” in David Wise editor, Perspectives in the
Economics of Aging. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 81-121.
Conlisk, John. 1996. “Why bounded rationality?” Journal of Economic Literature 34(2): 669700.
Dee, Thomas S. June 2006. “Technology and Voter Intent: Evidence from the California Recall
Election.” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Garner, Phillip and Enrico Spolaore. 2005. “Why Chads? Determinants of Voting Equipment
Use in the United States.” Public Choice 123: 363-392.
Ho, Daniel E. and Kosuke Imai. July 2005. “The Impact of Partisan Electoral Regulation: Ballot
Effects from the California Alphabet Lottery, 1978-2002.” Unpublished Manuscript. Institute for
Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University and Department of Politics, Princeton
University.
Knack, Stephen and Martha Kropf. 2002. “Who Uses Inferior Voting Technology?” Political
Science and Politics 35(3): 541-548.
Knack, Stephen and Martha Kropf. 2003. “Voided Ballots in the 1996 Presidential Election: A
County-Level Analysis.” Journal of Politics 65(3): 881-897.
Koppell, Jonathan G.S. and Jennifer A. Steen. 2004. “The Effects of Ballot Position on Election
Outcomes.” Journal of Politics 66(1): 267-281.

33

King, Amy and Andrew Leigh. September 2006. “Ballot Order Effects Under Compulsory
Voting.” Unpublished Manuscript. University of South Australia and Australian National
University.
List, John A. and David Lucking-Reiley. 2002. “Bidding Behavior and Decision Costs in Field
Experiments.” Economic Inquiry 40(4): 611-619.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2006. “Financial Literacy and Planning:
Implications for Retirement Wellbeing.” Unpublished manuscript. Dartmouth College.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1149-1187.
Miller, Joanne M. and Jon A. Krosnick. 1998. “The Impact of Candidate Name Order on
Election Outcomes.” The Public Opinion Quarterly 62(3): 291-330.
Roth, Susan K. 1998. “Disenfranchised by Design: Voting Systems and the Election Process.”
Information Design Journal 9(1): 1-8.
Simon, Herbert A. 1955. “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 69(1): 99-118.
Smith, Richard L. 2002. “A Statistical Assessment of Buchanan’s Vote in Palm Beach County.”
Statistical Science 17(4): 441-457.
Taebel, Delbert A. 1975. “The Effect of Ballot Position on Electoral Success.” American
Journal of Political Science 19(3): 519-526.
Thaler, Richard H. and Shlomo Benartzi. 2004. “Save More Tomorrow™: Using Behavioral
Economics to Increase Employee Saving.” Journal of Political Economy 112(1, pt. 2): S164S187.
Tomz, Michael and Robert P. Van Houweling. 2003. “How Does Voting Equipment Affect the
Racial Gap in Voided Ballots?” American Journal of Political Science 47(1): 46-60.
Wand, Jonathan W., et al. 2001. “The Butterfly Did It: The Aberrant Vote for Buchanan in Palm
Beach.” American Political Science Review 95(4): 793-810.

34

Appendix 1: Sample Ballots

The image above shows the upper portion of a multi-column optical scan ballot used in Alameda
County. Consider major candidate Arnold Schwarzenegger, located in the middle column, third
from the bottom. Because the columns are not clearly separated by boundary lines, voters
intending to vote for Schwarzenegger may accidentally fill in the bubble corresponding to
Ronald Palmieri, Schwarzenegger’s east adjacent candidate, instead of the correct bubble to the
left of Schwarzenegger’s name.

35

The images above show a single-column ballot and a punch card grid used in Sacramento
County. Voters searched for the number corresponding to the desired candidate’s name using
standard text ballots. Each voter then used a stylus to punch out the desired candidate’s number
on a separate punch card grid. The small print suggests voters may accidentally punch out
numbers corresponding to candidates adjacent to major candidates on the punch card.

36

The image above shows a multi-column touch screen ballot used in Riverside County. Voters
selected their desired candidates by touching the desired candidates’ corresponding circles. A
second screen then asked voters to confirm their choices. This ballot also shows how column
breaks allow identification of vertically adjacent candidates. Minor candidate George
Schwartzman normally follows major candidate Arnold Schwarzenegger in the candidate list.
However, Schwartzman is not south adjacent on this ballot because he is separated from
Schwarzenegger by a column break.

37

Appendix 2: Summary Statistics

Precinct Level Data
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Statement of Vote and Voter Registration Data
total votes cast in precinct
% voteshare of a minor candidate
% voteshare for Arnold Schwarzenegger
% voteshare for Cruz Bustamante
% voteshare for Tom McClintock
% registered with the Democratic Party
% registered with the Republican Party
% registered with other political parties
% not registered with any political party
% age 18 to 24
% age 65 plus

852
0.05
48.3
31.8
13.5
40.1
38.6
6.5
15.0
8.1
19.0

585
0.35
17.0
17.7
4.8
12.4
15.1
8.4
6.0
4.9
10.8

Census Demographic Data
% White
% Black
% Asian
% Hispanic
% lacking english fluency
median household income ($1000 per year)
% below the Census poverty line
% high school graduates (not incl. college graduates)
% college graduates

68.3
4.9
10.5
22.1
7.7
28.0
11.0
43.5
39.4

19.4
8.9
11.5
19.1
8.5
14.1
10.6
10.9
18.1

Observations:
Precincts:

1,817,904
13,772

Observations are at the candidate-precinct-level. Observations do not include the top three voteshare earners. Means and standard
deviations are weighted by the total number of votes cast in each precinct.

Identification of Adjacent Candidates
Frequency:
% of precincts with ballots that
contain this type of adjacency
Type
north adjacent
south adjacent
east adjacent
west adjacent
punchcard adjacent

Schwarzenegger
adjacent
93.7
92.1
35.6
23.4
10.9

Bustamante
adjacent
96.8
96.0
39.0
26.5
10.9

McClintock
adjacent
94.1
92.6
35.5
15.6
10.9

Variation:
number of minor
candidates that occupy the
adjacent position
3
3
25
19
18

When calculating frequency, observations are weighted by the total number of votes cast in each precinct. This is done because
observations are weighted by precinct size in all regression specifications.

38

Voting Technology
Technology Brand
Diebold Accu-Vote-OS
ES&S 550 Optech
ES&S Optech Eagle
Hart Ballot Now
Mark-A-Vote
Sequoia Optech
Diebold AccuVote-TS
Sequoia Edge
Datavote
Pollstar
Votomatic

Technology Platform
optical scan
optical scan
optical scan
optical scan
optical scan
optical scan
touch screen
touch screen
punch card
punch card
punch card

Prevalence
12%
5%
5%
11%
3%
6%
5%
6%
6%
9%
31%

Used Again in 2005 Election
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

Prevalence is defined as the percentage of observations in which each brand of technology is used. When calculating prevalence,
observations are weighted by the total number of votes cast in each precinct. Brands listed with a “Yes” in column four were used
again by at least one county in the statewide elections in 2005.

39

Appendix 3: Calculation of the Number of Misvotes
Results from the regression, Votesharepdc = B0 + B1×Idcadjacent + controls + εpdc, can be
used to estimate the total number of misvotes cast by voters in the Recall Election. Let Idcadjacent
represent a vector of adjacency dummy variables,
(Inorth AS adjacent, Isouth AS adjacent, Ieast AS adjacent, Iwest AS adjacent,
Inorth CB adjacent, Isouth CB adjacent, Ieast CB adjacent, Iwest CB adjacent,
Inorth TM adjacent, Isouth TM adjacent, Ieast TM adjacent, Iwest TM adjacent).
By separately measuring adjacency misvoting for each major candidate and adjacency type, we
identify the unique gain in voteshare when, for example, a candidate is north adjacent to Arnold
Schwarzenegger. This distinction is necessary because not all types of adjacency exist with
equal frequency.
Let F be a vector equal to:
(Fnorth AS adjacent, Fsouth AS adjacent, Feast AS adjacent, Fwest AS adjacent,
Fnorth CB adjacent, Fsouth CB adjacent, Feast CB adjacent, Fwest CB adjacent,
Fnorth TM adjacent, Fsouth TM adjacent, Feast TM adjacent, Fwest TM adjacent).
For example, Fnorth AS adjacent represents the average number of minor candidates that are located
directly north of Arnold Schwarzenegger, weighted by the total votes cast in a precinct. In a
given precinct, Schwarzenegger either has no north adjacent candidates (if Schwarzenegger is at
the top of a ballot column) or one north adjacent (if Schwarzenegger is not at the top of a ballot
column). Since F is an average across all precincts, F ranges between 0 and 1. One can think of
F as correcting for the fact that adjacent candidates exist with unequal frequency. For example,
north and south adjacent candidates always exist unless the major candidate is at the top or
bottom of a column respectively. However, east and west adjacent candidates only exist on
multi-column ballots. See Appendix 2 for detailed frequency statistics.

40

If β1 is the coefficient vector derived from the regression specified above, misvotes as a
percentage of total votes cast is equal to β1F. A simple calculation reveals that β1F equals 0.25
with a standard error of 0.03. Thus misvotes accounted for 0.25% of all votes cast in the 2003
California Recall Election.

41

Tables

Table 1: 2003 California Recall Election Results
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
:
:
25
50
75
100
135

Candidate
Arnold Schwarzenegger
Cruz M. Bustamante
Tom McClintock
Peter Miguel Camejo
Arianna Huffington
Peter V. Ueberroth
Larry Flynt
Gary Coleman
George B. Schwartzman
Mary Cook

Voteshare
48.6
31.63
13.33
2.77
0.55
0.29
0.2
0.16
0.14
0.13

No. Votes
3,747,446
2,439,133
1,027,926
213,547
42,654
22,267
15,489
12,712
10,960
10,129

Edward Thomas Kennedy
Michael J. Wozniak
Scott A. Mednick
Dennis Duggan McMahon
Todd Richard Lewis

0.0335
0.0179
0.0103
0.0067
0.0022

2,586
1,384
791
517
172

Table 2: Primary Results
Dependent Variable:
Voteshare = (votes / total votes)×100
Adjacent

(1)

(2)

0.104** (0.018)
0.088** (0.025)
0.143** (0.025)
0.107* (0.045)

Adjacent × Schwarzenegger
Adjacent × Bustamante
Adjacent × McClintock

0.037** (0.006)

Adjacent Dummy
Observations
R-Squared

(3)

1,817,904
0.8676

1,817,904
0.8676

1,817,904
0.8676

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on county×district×candidate (19,800 clusters), are reported in parentheses.
Significance levels: +: 10 percent; *: 5 percent; **: 1%. Adjacent equals one multiplied by the precinct level voteshare of the
associated major candidate if a minor candidate is adjacent to a major candidate and zero otherwise. Schwarzenegger,
Bustamante, and McClintock are dummy variables that equal one if a minor candidate is adjacent to major candidates
Schwarzenegger, Bustamante, and McClintock respectively. Observations are weighted by the total number of votes cast in a
precinct. Controls are included for candidate fixed effects, candidate fixed effects interacted with demographic controls (%Black,
%Hispanic, %Asian, %age 18-24, %age 65 plus, %in poverty, median household income (in $1000 per year), %HS graduates,
%college graduates, %Democrat, %Republican, %other party affiliation, %independent, and %lacking English fluency),
candidate fixed effects interacted with the precinct-level voteshares of major candidates Schwarzenegger, Bustamante, and
McClintock and ballot position controls (dummy variables for first and last overall, on a ballot page, and in a ballot column)
representing the ballot position of the minor candidate in each county-district.

42

Table 3: Robustness Checks
Dependent Variable:
Voteshare = (votes / total votes)×100
Adjacent
Adjacent Dummy
Adjacent Dummy × CA Voteshare

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.082**
(0.027)

(4)

(5)

0.104**
(0.018)

0.113**
(0.018)

(6)

0.010
(0.007)
0.112**
(0.019)
0.082**
(0.022)
0.111**
(0.033)
0.143**
(0.035)
0.038**
(0.011)

North Adjacent
South Adjacent
East Adjacent
West Adjacent

0.082**
(0.022)
0.111**
(0.033)

0.002
(0.003)

Diagonally Adjacent

0.030+
(0.018)

Punchcard Adjacent
Horizontally Adjacent

0.031**
(0.008)

Horizontally Adjacent × Confusing Side

0.123**
(0.038)

Observations
R-Squared

1,817,904 1,817,904 1,817,904 1,817,904 1,817,904 1,817,904
0.8676
0.8676
0.8677
0.8676
0.8677
0.8677

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on county×district×candidate, are reported in parentheses. Significance levels: +:
10 percent; *: 5 percent; **: 1%. If a minor candidate is adjacent to a major candidate, CA voteshare equals the average statewide
of the associated major candidate. North, South, East, and West Adjacent equal one multiplied by the precinct-level voteshare of
the associated major candidate if a minor candidate is north, south, east, or west adjacent respectively and zero otherwise.
Diagonally Adjacent and Punch card Adjacent equal one multiplied by the precinct-level voteshare of the associated major
candidate if a minor candidate diagonally borders a major candidate (i.e. is listed to the northeast, northwest, southeast, or
southwest of a major candidate) or is adjacent to a major candidate on a punch card, respectively. Horizontally Adjacent equals
the precinct level voteshare of the associated major candidate if a minor candidate is east or west adjacent and zero otherwise.
Confusing Side is a dummy variable equaling one if the minor candidate is horizontally adjacent to a major candidate and listed
in the column with selection boxes closest to the name of the major candidate. All other controls and variables are as described in
Table 2.

43

Table 4: Overall Effect of Precinct Demographic Characteristics on Misvoting
Dependent Variable:
Voteshare =
(votes / total votes)×100
Adjacent
Adjacent × % HS Graduates
Adjacent × % College Graduates

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.6368**
(0.1012)

0.0544**
(0.0162)

0.3353**
(0.0467)

-0.0062**
(0.0013)
-0.0056**
(0.0010)
0.0005
(0.0009)
0.0038**
(0.0008)
0.0003
(0.0006)

Adjacent × % Black
Adjacent × % Hispanic
Adjacent × % Asian

-0.0025**
(0.0007)
0.0000
(0.0020)
-0.0068**
(0.0016)

Adjacent × % Republican
Adjacent × % Other Party
Adjacent × % Independent
Observations
R-Squared

1,817,904
0.8680

1,817,904
0.8680

5th
95th
Difference in
Percentile Percentile Adjacency
Effect

24%

60%

-0.223

12%

71%

-0.330

0%

18%

0.009

4%

65%

0.232

1%

36%

0.011

9%

60%

-0.128

3%

21%

0.000

0%

25%

-0.170

1,817,904
0.8679

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on county×district×candidate, are reported in parentheses. Significance levels: +:
10 percent; *: 5 percent; **: 1%. Omitted Categories: %HS dropouts, %other ethnicity, %Democrat. %HS graduates and
%college graduates represent the percentage of precinct residents with high school degrees and college degrees (%HS graduates
does not include those who have also graduated from college). %Black, Hispanic, Asian represent the percentage of precinct
residents that identify themselves as Black, Hispanic, or Asian respectively (the omitted group includes White and other
ethnicities). %Democrat, %Republican, and %Other Party represent the percentage of registered voters that are officially
registered as a Democrat, Republican, or other party member; all remaining voters are included in %Independent. Controls are
included for Techd and Adjacentpdcm×Techd where Techd is a vector of dummy variables representing the 11 brands of voting
technology used in the Recall Election. All other controls and variables are as described in Table 2.

44

Table 5: Overall Effect of Precinct Demographic Characteristics on Misvoting (continued)
Dependent Variable:
Voteshare =
(votes / total votes)×100

(1) X =
Income (K)

(2) X =
% In Poverty

(3) X =
% Lacking
English Fluency

(4) X =
(5) X =
% Age 65 Plus % Age 18 to 24

Adjacent

0.2328**
(0.0321)

0.0964**
(0.0126)

0.0891**
(0.0155)

0.1240**
(0.0163)

0.1024**
(0.0153)

Adjacent × X

-0.0033**
(0.0006)

0.0041**
(0.0009)

0.0073**
(0.0013)

0.0007*
(0.0003)

0.0045**
(0.0015)

Observations
R-Squared

1,817,904
0.8679

1,817,904
0.8679

1,817,904
0.8679

1,817,904
0.8679

1,817,904
0.8679

5th Percentile of X
95th Percentile of X
Difference in Adjacency
Effect

12K
55K

1%
33%

0%
27%

7%
35%

3%
14%

-0.1419

0.1312

0.1971

0.0196

0.0495

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on county×district×candidate, are reported in parentheses. Significance levels: +:
10 percent; *: 5 percent; **: 1%. Income represents median household income of precinct residents in $1000 per year. %In
Poverty represents the percentage of households in a precinct below the census poverty line. %Lacking English Fluency
represents the percentage of precinct residents lacking fluency in English. %Age 65 Plus and %Age 18 to 24 represents the
percentage of registered voters in a precinct above the age of 65 and between the ages of 18 and 24 respectively. All other
controls and variables are as described in Table 4.

Table 6: Partial Effect of Precinct Demographic Characteristics on Misvoting
Dependent Variable:
Voteshare = (votes / total votes)×100
Adjacent

0.7046**

(0.1554)

Adjacent × % Black
Adjacent × % Hispanic
Adjacent × % Asian
Adjacent × % Age 18-24
Adjacent × % Age 65 Plus
Adjacent × % In Poverty
Adjacent × Income (K)
Adjacent × % HS Graduates
Adjacent × % College Graduates
Adjacent × % Republican
Adjacent × % Other Party
Adjacent × % Independent
Adjacent × % Lacking English Fluency

-0.0001
0.0022+
0.0014*
-0.0015
0.0012*
0.0010*
-0.0002
-0.0086**
-0.0068**
0.0010
0.0041+
-0.0004
-0.0066*

(0.0009)
(0.0012)
(0.0007)
(0.0011)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0023)
(0.0017)
(0.0011)
(0.0023)
(0.0016)
(0.0031)

Observations
R-Squared

1,817,904
0.8680

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on county×district×candidate, are reported in parentheses. Significance levels: +:
10 percent; *: 5 percent; **: 1%. Omitted Categories: %Other Ethnicity, %HS Dropouts, %Democrat. All other controls and
variables are as described in Tables 4 and 5.

45

Table 7: Interactions with Voting Technology
Dependent Variable:
Voteshare = (votes / total votes)×100
Adjacent × punch card
Adjacent × optical scan
Adjacent × touch screen

(1)

(2)

0.197**
(0.020)
0.100**
(0.020)
0.065**
(0.016)

0.200**
(0.019)
0.108**
(0.019)
0.067**
(0.015)

Adjacent × Diebold Accu-Vote-OS

Optical

Adjacent × ES&S 550 Optech
Adjacent × ES&S Optech Eagle
Adjacent × Hart Ballot Now
Adjacent × Mark-A-Vote
Adjacent × Sequoia Optech

Touch

Adjacent × Diebold AccuVote-TS
Adjacent × Sequoia Edge

Punch

Adjacent × Datavote
Adjacent × Pollstar
Adjacent × Votomatic
Demographic Controls
Observations
R-Squared

No
0.8677
1,817,904

Yes
0.8679
1,817,904

(3)

(4)

0.178**
(0.041)
0.061**
(0.015)
0.076**
(0.018)
0.046**
(0.015)
0.065*
(0.026)
0.106**
(0.024)

0.175**
(0.034)
0.082**
(0.018)
0.108**
(0.027)
0.065**
(0.014)
0.074**
(0.027)
0.095**
(0.023)

0.015
(0.023)
0.099**
(0.020)

0.008
(0.033)
0.095**
(0.017)

0.088**
(0.025)
0.225**
(0.035)
0.207**
(0.019)

0.095**
(0.024)
0.241**
(0.035)
0.212**
(0.018)

No
0.8679
1,817,904

Yes
0.8680
1,817,904

Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering on county×district×candidate, are reported in parentheses. Significance levels: +:
10 percent; *: 5 percent; **: 1%. Controls are included for the direct effect of each technology variable. Demographic controls
include Adjacentpdcm × Demopd where Demopd is a vector of precinct-level variables representing %Black, %Hispanic, %Asian,
%age 18-24, %age 65 plus, %in poverty, median household income (K), %HS graduates, %college graduates, %Democrat,
%Republican, %other party affiliation, %independent, and %lacking English fluency. All other variables and controls are as
described in Table 2.

46

