NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BASEL II: A CONTRACTING PERSPECTIVE
Edward J. Kane
Working Paper 12705
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12705

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2006

For valuable comments, the author is indebted to Richard C. Aspinwall, Rosalind Bennett, Fred Furlong,
Gillian Garcia, Richard Herring, Paul Horvitz, George Kaufman, John Krainer, Paul Kupiec, Geoffrey
Miller, James Moser, John Pattison, Haluk Unal, an anonymous referee, and participants in research
colloquia at Boston College, York University, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Basel II: A Contracting Perspective
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 12705
November 2006, Revised March 2007
JEL No. G21,G28,G33
ABSTRACT
Financial safety nets are incomplete social contracts that assign responsibility to various economic
sectors for preventing, detecting, and paying for potentially crippling losses at financial institutions.
This paper uses the theories of incomplete contracts and sequential bargaining to interpret the Basel
Accords as a framework for endlessly renegotiating minimal duties and standards of safety-net management
across the community of nations. Modelling the stakes and stakeholders represented by different regulators
helps us to understand that inconsistencies exist in prior understandings about the range of sectoral
effects that the 2004 Basel II agreement might produce. The analysis seeks to explain why, in the U.S.,
attempting to resolve these inconsistencies has spawned an embarrassingly fractious debate and repeatedly
pushed back Basel II's scheduled implementation.
Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu

Revised: March 23, 2007
BASEL II: A CONTRACTING PERSPECTIVE*
This paper uses the concepts of regulatory arbitrage, sequential decision-making, and
incomplete contracting to explain why Basel II has so many loose ends and why U.S. efforts
to implement Basel II have been roiled by controversy and delays. Perceived as a forum for
reregulation, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) enlists supervisory
authorities (“regulators”) from financial-center countries to work together to control
regulatory arbitrage and to promote financial integration and better risk management (Barr
and Miller, 2006; Pattison, 2006). But the success of BCBS negotiations is limited by the
largely nonbinding nature of the agreements its members ratify and by divergences in the
interests and political clout of the economic sectors BCBS conferees represent.
For this reason, the original 1988 BCBS Accord (Basel I) and its successor Accord
(Basel II) are better viewed as a collection of strategic guidelines than as systems of rules. The
agreements neither spell out explicitly the quasi-fiduciary duties that banking regulators owe
to their counterparts in other countries nor explain how such duties are to be enforced when
they conflict with the interests of stakeholders to whom they are politically accountable.
__________________________
*

For valuable comments, the author is indebted to Richard C. Aspinwall, Rosalind Bennett, Fred Furlong, Gillian
Garcia, Richard Herring, Paul Horvitz, George Kaufman, John Krainer, Paul Kupiec, Geoffrey Miller, James
Moser, John Pattison, Haluk Unal, an anonymous referee, and participants in research colloquia at Boston
College, York University, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, and International Atlantic Economic Society Meetings in Madrid.

2

BCBS negotiations are founded on the premise that group expressions of regulatory
intentions are something more than cheap talk. How much more is unclear. The Accord fails
to include clauses that could make regulators in individual countries directly accountable to
one another for enforcing the standards the BCBS promulgates. Additional weaknesses exist
both in the methods used to test Basel II arrangements for their effects on the cross-country
and within-country distributions of financial-institution risk and regulatory capital and in the
methods that were originally used to set the 4-percent and 8-percent capital standards.
Section I underscores the nontransparency of pre-Basel and post-Basel dealmaking
between governmental and industry stakeholders in individual countries (on the one hand) and
the negotiating teams that participated directly in the Basel contracting process (on the other).
The analysis demonstrates how a contracting perspective can help us to understand the
protracted, sequential, and sometimes waspish nature of Basel-related negotiations and the
gaps in regulatory accountability the Accord deliberately embraces.
Prior to letting agents undertake cross-country negotiations, it is optimal for interested
economic sectors in each country --as principals-- to exchange understandings with their
particular negotiating team. Each understanding is meant to constrain the concessions that the
particular sector may be asked to absorb. Because inconsistencies in sectoral understandings
are unavoidable, individual-country negotiators must insist that cross-country agreements
incorporate design options (called “national adaptions and concretions” by Kette, 2006) that
leave contract terms incomplete. National regulators need these options to placate principals
that might feel short-changed (or even betrayed) by the international agreement. The hope is
that these options can be employed to craft subdeals that are mutually acceptable to
competing interests in their home counties.

3

Section II describes the major options conveyed to banks and regulators by the Basel
II agreement. Although negotiators prefer not to acknowledge this, adherence to cross-country
guidelines will be tempered by the force of contrary domestic pressures and by the severity of
financial troubles that different economies experience. Government responses to political and
crisis pressures in the past indicate that clientele, career, and bureaucratic interests tend to
outweigh international considerations. In tough times, whatever concern individual regulators
might have for preserving or enhancing their standing within the international regulatory
community (emphasized, e.g., in Whitehead, 2006) will not matter very much.
Section III proposes a simplified nonmathematical model that can explain how
inconsistencies in the predeal understandings and goals of interested domestic parties
poisoned post-Basel bargaining in the United States. Section IV identifies some possible paths
for resolving contradictory concerns. The path of least resistance may be for regulators to
abandon the link between reductions in regulatory capital and the extent to which an
institution actually improves its risk management.

I. Viewing the Basel Accord as an Incomplete Multilevel Contract
The fairness and efficiency of the explicit terms of the contract (or “deal”) constructed
in Basel fall short of the Basel Committee’s stated goals of promoting comprehensive risk
management and consistency in international regulatory standards. However, just as our view
of a forest might be blocked by its trees, the redeeming social value of Basel negotiations as a
multilevel and intertemporal strategy-making process can be obscured by focusing only on
difficulties observed in particular outcomes.

4

Marking off particular sequences of negotiations and assigning them a discrete numeral
misses the essential continuity and inconclusiveness of the patch-by-patch contracting process.
This paper conceives of negotiation outcomes at any date T as “Basel (T)”: the value of an
integral equation whose kernel “B(t)dt” is driven by the goals that stakeholders (Sik) in each of
m different countries(k = 1, …, m) hope to achieve and the resources (Rik) they plan to invest in
lobbying for these goals.
Figure 1 identifies the so-called “pillars” of the Basel II Accord. Although the diagram
depicts the pillars to be of equal height and thickness, especially with respect to risks (such as
interest-rate risk in the banking book) that are not part of Pillar 1, the second and third pillars
have been hollowed out by lobbying efforts and may not support much weight. Until and
unless the incentives of banks and regulators are better aligned with those of ordinary citizens,
Pillar 2 options may be too feeble, too opaque, and too riddled with conflict from regulatory
competition to provide reliable reinforcement for the other pillars.
It is important to recognize that Basel II asks rather than forces national regulators to
behave in globally appropriate ways. Realistically, it frames a renegotiation game that binds
officials only to monitor and to think about the global consequences of actions taken by the
institutions they regulate. The outcome of this game is apt to prove more favorable for some
countries than for others.
As mutable multinational agreements, the contracts the BCBS writes establish an
intertemporal structure within which to renegotiate complicated multiparty relationships.
They are not treaties because signatories represent regulatory agencies rather than sovereign
governments. Individual negotiators and the people they report to are short-lived agents for
numerous long-lived principals. The principals are constituencies that are modelled here as

5

concerned sectors of each agent’s home economy. Each tentative contract that agents
consider in Basel promises to pass a series of rights and obligations through to the
negotiators’ home constituencies.
Within a country’s government, financial regulators are expected simultaneously to
supervise and to represent conflicting constituencies. Contracting theory presupposes that
costs of reading and writing contracts are minimized. To minimize the total costs of
negotiating with foreign and domestic constituencies, Basel II negotiations proceed in three
phases. Prior to conducting dealmaking sessions in Basel, each negotiator must prenegotiate
hard and soft constraints on its ability to accept deals that might disadvantage its politically
powerful domestic principals. It is useful to think of these restrictions as predeal
understandings. An understanding is neither as sharply worded nor as enforceable as a formal
contract. To the extent that understandings are not made public, particular constituencies can
interpret their understandings in ways that might well be inconsistent with understandings
furnished to one or more other sectors. Moreover, as parties with a personal and
organizational interest in the game, negotiators may find it advantageous on key issues to
accept soft constraints that they subsequently plan to violate.
Each time cross-country negotiators adjust the system’s strategic guidelines to meet
objections raised by agents for particular constituencies, negotiators returning from Basel
have to describe changes in the cross-country deal and reconcile them with prior
understandings. Third-phase recontracting occurs separately with other concerned officials
within a given government and with interested sectoral constituencies. In this phase,
negotiators are apt to paint their need to renege on predeal agreements as if they were

6

necessitated by what they learned in Basel about the constraints faced or imposed by foreign
negotiators.
Tables 1 and 2 model the Accord’s main stakeholders in the U.S. and Europe,
respectively. Table 3 models the stakes.
Within countries, financial institutions hoped that Basel II would redistribute safetynet costs and benefits among competing governmental and sectoral interests in advantageous
ways. For U.S. regulators, the stated purpose of the negotiations was to enhance financial
stability. As the negotiations wore on, negotiators from the European Union seemed more
interested in using Basel II to promote regulatory integration. The European Parliament
apparently wanted to establish a uniform framework for internationally active European
banking groups without burdening regional banks operating mainly in national markets.
Like bodily health, stability cannot be traded from one party to another. It is what
Maskin and Tirole (1999) and Hart and Moore (1999) characterize as an “undescribable”
variable. Negotiators assume stability can be proxied and that the proxy can be defined as the
absence of worrisome forms of financial disorder. More concretely, Basel II presupposes that
changes in stability can be represented by obverse movements in the probability and loss
severity of the particular disorders (such as economic insolvencies and operational
breakdowns) that adjustments in the Accord seek to hold at bay. Implicitly, every draft of the
Basel Accord embodies a projection of how selected control variables (especially variously
defined capital ratios) affect the components of a larger-dimensional space of global welfare.
The implicit projection that Basel II will reduce individual-bank or systemic risks is largely
hypothetical. Empirical support consists mainly of qualitative inferences about how widely
recognized forms of risk-taking, risk transfer, and risk support undertaken by individual

7

financial institutions or their regulators ought in theory to affect a subset of default
probabilities and loss severities in question.

Incompleteness
In a world of changing governments, it is impossible for one generation of regulators
to craft a contract that can firmly precommit their successors. In a world of changing financial
technology, the list of contractable triggers of instability can never be completely described.
For both reasons, explicit contractual rights and duties must have slack built into them. In
principle, the loose ends are intended to allow individual-country regulators enough flexibility
to expand their catalogue of approved and disapproved behaviors over time as unforseeable
circumstances dictate. In practice, loose ends are reciprocal options that allow safety-net
subsidies to be distributed nontransparently to private financial interests.
From this practical point of view, the most disturbing loose ends concern Basel II’s
treatment of large and complex banking organizations. Regulators need the vision to see
through the accounting numbers to the true condition of the institutions they supervise and the
incentives to respond appropriately to what they see. A bank’s opacity, political clout, and
organizational ability to arbitrage regulatory systems increase both with its size and with its
complexity. Even within countries, clever rogues or desperate managers can book particular
loss exposures in ways that are too opaque for regulators to monitor and discipline them
effectively. It is possible that data-collection and risk-measurement standards under Basel II
are so loosely specified that close adherence to them in making business decisions can support
an increase rather than a decrease in insolvency risk at many banks. To lessen this danger,
capital requirements under Basel II ought to incorporate a measure of opacity and impose an

8

additional opacity-related capital requirement to account for the opportunties that large and
complex banks have to relocate exposures across instruments and borders to avoid detection
and/or to lessen their exposure to Pillar 2 discipline.
A good contract is easy to understand and creates incentives for its fulfillment. From
the perspective of the individual constituencies, hard-to-decode loose ends are options that
can be characterized as opportunities for regulators to renegotiate or reinterpret the agreement
when unforeseen or unspecified contingencies arise (Ben-Shahar, 2004; Foss, 1996).
Retaining flexibility is a good thing, but granting flexibility to a contractual counterparty
authorizes it to act adversely to one’s interests. No matter how well-intentioned, any contract
as complex as Basel II must be feared (Rasmussen, 1996). The remedies for this fear are trust
and independent analytic ability, but neither of these remedies is costless for an individual
agent or stakeholder to establish.
An agent builds trust by making itself accountable for results. An agent builds
accountability (A) in three ways: by making its actions and motives transparent, by bonding
its commitment to the principal’s interests, and by giving the principal the power to deter
opportunistic behavior. Bonus clauses and reputational costs are forms of bonding. An
opportunistic agent’s exposure to retribution from the principal has a deterrent effect.
For every stakeholder (Sj, j = 1, …, n), the value of each imbedded option k (Ojk, k =
1, …, mj) depends on the degree to which stakeholder j can reasonably trust the option’s
counterparties to behave competently and nonopportunistically. At Basel, agents failed to
bond the Pillar II activities of foreign regulators to the goal of financial stability or to
negotiate the kinds of inter-regulator and public disclosures that would reliably buttress
market discipline by allowing independent experts to assess the quality of Pillar II activity.

9

U.S. negotiating teams are not personally accountable to voter-taxpayers for these
omissions. Members were allowed to renegotiate Basel I without direct Congressional
involvement or approval. What accountability exists comes nontransparently from post-Basel
negotiations with other U.S. regulators and industry groups. Ironically, these groups’ ability to
win new concessions traces to their option to lobby Congressional committees to weigh in on
their side.
As post-Basel dealmaking evolves, the net value of an uninvolved sector j’s collection
mj
⎛
⎞
⎜
of implicit options O = ∑ O ⎟ are unlikely to be fully counterbalanced by the value of
⎜ j k =1 jk ⎟
⎝
⎠

the net benefits or burdens conveyed by the explicit and enforceable terms of the contract (Bj).
This is because involved sectors that see the deal as exposing them to harm have a strong
incentive to hold up --or even to blow up-- the deal.

II. Options Conveyed to Banks and Regulators by Basel II
Prudential regulation of financial institutions seeks to balance the social costs and
benefits of individual-country safety nets. Both Basel Accords recognize the possibility that
the cross-country operations of aggressive multinational banks or opportunistic interventions
by their regulators can upset this balance.
Government intervention in finance leads to a protracted series of collisions between
political and economic forces (Kane, 1981 and 1984). Basel II represents the third stage in a
dialectical sequence of regulation, burden avoidance, and eventual re-regulation. The patterns
of the regulatory arbitrage and response that Basel I induced are unusual in three ways. First,
almost all banks have chosen to hold capital positions that are greatly in excess of minimum

10

standards and want to continue to advertise themselves that way. Second, any bank that found
the minimum standards burdensome could almost costlessly close the gap by securitizing lowrisk loans and thereby increase its portfolio risk to raise its desired level of capital to the
regulatory minimum. Third, around the world, banks and regulators support the effort to
narrow this loophole by increasing the granularity of the risk categories used in setting capital
standards.
Besides increasing the number of risk categories, Basel II proposes to use a mix of
statistical methods and expert opinion to track a bank’s changing exposure to insolvency risk
over time. It also envisions improved disclosure as a way to generate complementary market
discipline on bank capital positions. However, Basel II does not improve on Basel I either in
how it measures capital or in the arbitrary target ratios it sets.
Although influenced by prior consultation with other stakeholders, the June 2004
agreement known as Basel II reflects direct bargaining only among members of the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). Basel II leaves a number of options open for
regulators in individual countries to use in renegotiating prior understandings among
themselves and with various client institutions.
Basel II is not easy to understand and promises to generate options that have
undesirable incentive effects. It grants national regulators an option to use any (or all) of three
different schemes to determine the regulatory capital of client banks [see Kupiec (2005 and
2006), Pennachi (2005), U.S. Comptroller of the Currency et al. (2006), and Viets (2006) for
details]. In turn, where a country authorizes more than one scheme, some or all banks receive
the option to adopt whatever scheme they find most beneficial (or least burdensome) and to
implement the scheme they choose in the most advantageous way. By exercising their options

11

optimally, similarly situated banks in the same country or in different countries could end up
with widely divergent levels of required capital. Indeed, this is what the five Quantitative
Impact Studies (QIS1 to QIS5) conducted under the aegis of the BCBS have shown (Kupiec,
2006).
The most important option concerns whether or not to use an Internal-Ratings-Based
(IRB) Approach or the Standardized Approach to determine an individual bank’s capital
requirement. The simpler Standardized Approach resembles Basel I, except that it
incorporates a wider range of weights and asks countries to choose a set of external rating
agencies and use these agencies’ assessments of risk to determine country-level capital
requirements. IRB Approaches allow banks to specify and submit for validation their own
“internal” models to calibrate their exposure to insolvency risk. Basel II distinguishes the socalled Foundation IRB (FIRB) model from the Advanced IRB (AIRB) model for constructing
these estimates and calculating minimum capital requirements. For each individual credit,
both models require banks to specify a probability of default (PD), a “loss given default”
(LGD), and an expected exposure at default (EAD). The FIRB approach differs from the
AIRB in specifying rules for calculating EAD and in using a single LGD for all of a bank’s
credits. In calculating EAD, FIRB ignores the possibility that the rate of credit-line drawdown
and borrower PD are likely to be driven by common factors (Kupiec, 2007).
The internally generated data are plugged into a correlation function based on
characteristics of each credit and then passed through a model that ultimately produces a
probability distribution of potential losses over the next year. Minimum regulatory capital is
determined by the requirement that the bank must be able to absorb all but the last 0.1 percent
tail of losses displayed by this synthetic distribution. How artfully a bank parametizes this

12

distribution is difficult to constrain. Because capital is costly, savvy regulators expect that
most banks will use legitimate reporting options to understate their true loss exposure to some
degree. Ideally, regulatory protocols for validating models under the AIRB ought to focus on
estimating how fast the uncovered tail of the true loss distribution might grow when and as
various circumstances cause a bank’s economic capital to decline (Kane, 2006).

III. A Non-Mathematical Model of Post-Basel Contracting in the United States
It is convenient to define I j as the information and expertise needed to evaluate
accurately the option values Oj and net contractual benefit or burden Bj stakeholder j faces
from a proposed deal. Gaps can exist between I j and the information and expertise Ij that

constituency j or its agent aj actually possesses. When these gaps are not fully appreciated by
a constituency or its agent(s), it is unlikely that its interests will be adequately safeguarded.
Rationally, constituencies that simultaneously do not trust their agents to represent their
interests energetically and have enough information to perceive adverse movements in their
stake in the Accord should exert pressure to prolong the deal-making until one or the other
condition can be repaired.
To understand post-Basel developments in the U.S., it is helpful to construct a model.
My model supposes that in each participating country (q = 1,…, Q), national regulators are
agents whose respective objective functions Wq combines welfare from four sources:
1. Personal rewards to leaders (pq);
2. Bureaucratic benefits obtained for their particular organization through
regulatory competition (bq);
3. Benefits generated for client financial institutions (fq);

13

4. Mission-driven safety-net benefits that flow through to the representative votertaxpayer vq).

Post-Basel bargaining occurs both between U.S. agents and between every agent and
its principals. Although all four federal deposit-institution regulators participated in Basel II
discussions, the New York Fed and the Board of Governors exercised a commanding
leadership role. The Fed’s leadership role among central banks was inherited from Basel I and
adversely affects its ability in the post-Basel process to treat other U.S. regulators as equal
participants. In Basel, the Board and New York have always had separate votes in the
negotiations. Moreover, when Basel II discussions began, sister central banks occupied most
of the seats at the BCBS table. As supervisory functions began to be split off from European
central banks, the new supervisory agencies were incorporated into the negotiation process,
but no central bank surrendered its place in the process.
For modeling purposes, it is convenient to assume that Fed employees negotiated the
U.S. position in Basel, but now must negotiate implementation issues with other U.S.
financial regulators taken as a group. I call the collective group the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation Plus (FDIC+) because I assume that these regulators’ twofold concern in postBasel negotiations is to defend the interests of their particular regulatory clienteles and to
protect the deposit-insurance fund against the possibility that large banks might be able to
operate in a low capital position.
For simplicity, I assume that Fed personnel focus on maintaining their employer’s
position of global leadership with foreign regulators and its reputation for supporting financial
innovation with large financial holding companies. Table 1 lays out how the FDIC+ members
channel the interests of other depository institutions.

14

I also assume that Congress and the Administration project that, over their expected
terms in office, voter-taxpayers are prepared to trust financial-institution regulators until and
unless either they create a public controversy or systemic financial problems emerge. If either
event occurs, elected politicians plan to jump in and mete out blame.
To maintain their capacity for shifting blame, politicians will accept any system on
which the Fed and the FDIC+ can agree, but any regulator or any industry segment can
persuade politicians and voters to examine and defend their stakes in the outcome if
negotiations proceed badly enough for their side.1 Finally, I assume that, because of its lesselitist clientele and minimal contact with foreign regulators, the bureaucratic costs of
exercising this or other hold-up threats is much less for members of the FDIC+ than for the
Fed.
Incentive Conflicts in Post-Basel Negotiations
Conflicts between the social missions of regulators and the interests of the sectors they
regulate cannot be avoided. Post-Basel negotiations must resolve not only these conflicts, but
also conflicts among the missions and clienteles assigned to different regulators.
The interests of the nation’s largest institutions in inter-regulator negotiations are also
conflicted. On the one hand, standards that would be tough enough to assure financial stability
would help large banks by lessening the expected value of the FDIC’s right to levy ex post
assessments to finance losses that exceed the value of the FDIC’s insurance fund. On the
other hand, they want to compete as strongly as possible with foreign institutions. Figure 3
illustrates that the very largest institutions may reasonably think of themselves as too big to

1

House Financial Services Committee Chairman Barney Frank was quoted in a February 20, 2007 Amercian
Banker column on “Washington People” as saying: “My basic concern [about the Basel process] is that I have to
pay attention to it and it gives me a headache. It’s Rubik’s cube – every time you do one thing, six other people
get upset.”

15

fail and unwind. In this case, they should resist standards tough enough to preclude them from
pursuing heavy tail risks that extract government-contributed capital from the safety net.
Neither Basel II nor U.S. regulatory protocols include specific plans for resolving
large multinational financial organizations. The obvious opportunities for risk-shifting that
this gap in planning poses leads me to infer that the nation’s largest banks do not want a
benchmark resolution protocol to be designed and tested. As a group, they may believe that an
unstructured environment would enhance their ability to lobby for forbearances and/or to
negotiate away their assessment exposure if a large bank were actually to become insolvent.
This hypothesis can explain why large U.S. institutions continue to lobby uniformly for
further capital relief.
At each agency, the vast majority of employees are involved in supervising and
servicing their clienteles. This creates a bureaucratic interest in preserving the size and
competitive positions of their clientele. At the same time, no member of the FDIC+
community would like to test the system’s ability to resolve the insolvency of a giant firm.
For both reasons, these agencies are bound to oppose adjustments that promise to increase the
probability that a large institution might become economically insolvent.
Policymakers agreed at the outset that their goal was to improve risk management at
large banks, not to help banks to operate with markedly lower levels of capital. In the predeal
phase, U.S. regulators agreed publicly that very large U.S. banks2 would be required to use
whatever version of the Advanced IRB approach (AIRBus) regulators finally authorize. Other
U.S. institutions could choose, but only between the AIRBus and a Standardized approach.

2

The mandate applies to banks or thrifts that have either $250 billion in total assets or $10 billion in assets held
abroad.

16

The second part of the understanding among regulators was that the overall level of U.S. bank
capital would not be allowed to decrease much under Basel II. “Much” is of course a word
that could be interpreted differently by different constituencies. Behind this understanding lay
regulators’ statutory duty under the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 to define a series of
leverage-ratio triggers for Prompt Corrective action (PCA) intervention that are tough enough
and transparent enough to make authorities accountable ex post for losses suffered by the
federal insurance fund. FDICIA designates an unweighted leverage ratio of two percent as
the threshold at which an undercapitalized bank that does not promptly recapitalize itself must
surrender its charter. However, the numerical value or accounting tripwires that require lesser
interventions are set by interagency agreement.
Perhaps because they fear that PCA requirements impinge on Fed independence,
Federal Reserve personnel often mischaracterize regulatory concern for the leverage ratio as a
transitional safeguard meant to “backstop” Basel protocols for banks whose information or
control systems might initially mishandle the complicated AIRB capital calibration. However,
Congress and the FDIC+ recognize that simplicity and transparency of the leverage ratio
creates the personal and bureaucratic accountability that ultimately enables PCA requirements
to restrain capital forbearance.
PCA obligations and the second understanding undermined predeal assurances
afforded the banking industry that individual banks that designed and operated state-of-the-art
risk-management systems would be rewarded with reduced levels of regulatory capital. In an
offhand effort to sort out the conflict in understandings, one Fed Governor – Governor Susan
Schmidt Bies – was quoted as saying, “The leverage ratio down the road has got to

17

disappear.” This was good news for large institutions, because the disappearance of leverageratio triggers is a development they favor.
However, the length of this road was noticeably extended by the outcome of the fourth
Quantitative Impact Study (QIS4). As Figure 2 shows, QIS4 indicated that if the 26 bank
holding companies surveyed met only AIRB-generated requirements, 17 of them would show
a leverage ratio that PCA standards would classify as undercapitalized.
This result was both surprising and disturbing. It was surprising in that it seems as if
the quantitative staffs at these 17 giant holding companies used QIS4 survey instruments to
demonstrate to their superiors how effectively Basel II would let them arbitrage restrictions on
leverage without stopping to appreciate the parallel danger of demonstrating this same
capacity to regulators in other industry segments. The outcome was disturbing in two ways.
First, it supports the hypothesis that quantitative personnel at large banks and the Fed have
been the engine driving the Basel II train in the U.S. and that disconnects exist in the way
members of this staff interface with the rest of their organization. Second, neither the
competitive upheaval nor the threat to the deposit-insurance fund that these results implied
was sustainable politically. Smaller members of the FDIC+ clienteles demanded that the
formulas embodied in the Standardized Approach be recalibrated to afford them equal capital
relief, whether or not they did anything to improve their risk management. This scaled-down
capital standard has come to be known as “Basel IA.”

IV. Where Can Regulators Go From Here?
In September 2005, the Fed and the FDIC+ took the first step in the post-Basel process
of formally reconciling inconsistent understandings about bank prospects for capital

18

reduction. Regulators agreed that, during the first three years of implementation, no individual
bank’s Basel II capital would be allowed to drop more than 5 percent a year, relative to preBasel II standards. In March 2006, U.S. regulators indicated [and in September 2006 stated in
a massive notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR)] that if aggregate capital held by AIRB banks
fell by 10 percent, they reserved the right to redesign the AIRB system. Because QIS4 tells us
that this so-called “transition floor” might be hit in the second year, a 10-percent reduction is
likely to be the recalibration target for which large banks and FDIC+ clienteles will lobby.
This rewriting of predeal understandings not only reduces projected returns at large
banks and thrifts, it leaves the entire industry less trustful of the options they are likely to
enjoy under the still-evolving regulatory system. All parties are annoyed that the time and
resources invested in supervisory negotiations and bank measurement systems have not yet
produced a workable arrangement. Undoubtedly, large-bank investments in risk-management
systems promise a mix of regulatory and nonregulatory benefits -- not just regulatory ones.
However, divergences between the AIRB model and a large bank’s own risk-measurement
protocols create deadweight costs. Compliance costs could be greatly reduced by monitoring
and frequently revalidating the internal models each large bank uses, while allowing large
banks’ formal capital requirements to be set by the standardized approach.
In July 2006, four giant institutions -- Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, Wachovia, and
Washington Mutual – openly asked to renegotiate their stake by requesting that large U.S.
banks be granted the option either to help design improved AIRB formulas or to use
something like the Standardized approach that competing European banks enjoy. On August
3, the American Bankers Association sent a letter to Dr. Bernanke and leaders of the FDIC+

19

asking “the agencies to permit U.S. banking organizations of all sizes the option of adopting
alternative methodologies.”
While Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke previously dismissed this option, large
banks and FDIC Chairman Bair are challenging his answer. To get large banks back on the
train, the Fed may have to postpone the AIRB mandate and can justify this as buying time to
incorporate and test “promising” new advances in risk modeling. In a February 2007
comment on the 2006 NPR, the four banks attacked the transition floors and the relevance and
validity of the QIS4 data that spawned them. The banks also reasserted their claim that the
provisions officials agreed to add to Basel II convey unfair competitive advantages to foreign
banks.3 Since other U.S. regulators are in no hurry to adopt Basel II in any case, the main
costs of temporarily making AIRB optional would be a slight loss of face in the international
regulatory community for the Fed and for individual personnel most closely identified with
implementing the 2004 agreement. Finally, the four banks’ February 2007 comment asks that
level and composition of the leverage ratio be reviewed.
To maintain financial stability, the choice of PCA triggers must feature the idea that a
sustained decline in the accounting value of capital is a lagging indicator of bank weakness.
Other nonnegotiable points should be to continue to make tough and transparent leverageratio thresholds the key to identifying failing and zombie firms and to continue to give these
thresholds incentive force by mandating that every agency’s Inspector General conduct a
thorough “material loss review” whenever an institution it supervises imposes a substantial
loss on the insurance fund. A conscientious material loss review publicly unveils a failed
institution’s supervisory history in excruciating detail. The credible threat of ex post
3

If true, the fault lies either in the procedures used to validate IRB models in particular countries or in the
absence of PCA requirements from Basel II (Nieto and Wall, 2006). It is instructive to note that European banks
routinely express the opposite fear.

20

accountability for imprudent forbearances fuels the incentive force that supervisors feel from
PCA standards.
A dangerous path on which regulators might embark would be to surrender control of
the inevitably politicized capital-assessment process in the hope that, in the not-too-distant
future, transparent and reliable statistical methods for objectively measuring risk exposure
will emerge. It might seem defensible to measure risk exclusively by IRB procedures at
strongly capitalized banks if the Basel approach to risk-weighting were made truly
comprehensive, but measuring bank risk is not the role that the leverage ratio plays in PCA.
However, Basel protocols will always contain loopholes. It is no accident that regulatory
forbearance can gain cover from Pillar I’s neglect of the concealment options created by the
complexity of a bank’s balance sheet and of exposures to interest-rate risk in its banking
book. Hence, even if regulators could take account of all of a bank’s loss exposures, it would
still be necessary to counter nontransparencies in the forbearance pressures that agencies
might experience. For this reason, taxpayers need the simpler tests embodied in PCA
thresholds to trigger reliable end-game regulatory discipline.
Whatever regulators decide about risk weighting, to strengthen leverage-ratio triggers
for troubled banks, they ought also to tighten their definition of capital to incorporate marketvalue losses. Consistent with evidence presented by Berger, Davies, and Flannery (2000),
leverage-ratio supervisory triggers would be improved if accountants were required to define
contra-asset loan-loss reserves as the higher of either: (1) incentive-conflicted estimates now
routinely prepared by bank personnel or (2) estimates generated by a rolling-regression model
that agency researchers would update and apply each quarter.

21

Politically, the path of least resistance appears to be a different one: to focus postBasel negotiations on lowering minimum regulatory capital in a way that equalizes the
competitive effects of capital-requirement reductions across regulatory clienteles. In this case,
rather than being designed to provide a better measure of risk sensitivity and to reward
improvements in risk management made by individual institutions, I would bet that capital
requirements finally specified in Basel IA for community banks and in options that might be
opened for large banks would each be calibrated to reduce regulatory capital to a level
approaching the U.S. regulators’ previously specified 10 percent transition floor. If political
pressures force the FDIC to accept this outcome for minimum capital, I would urge the FDIC
to use its authority to raise explicit deposit insurance premiums as a bargaining chip with
which to persuade the other agencies to toughen the definitions and levels of capital that
trigger prompt corrective action obligtations.

22

REFERENCES
Barr, Michael S., and Geoffrey P. Miller, 2006. “Global Administrative Law: The View
From Basel,” European Journal of International Law, 17, 15-46.
Ben-Shahar, Omri, 2004. “‘Agreeing to Disagree’: Filling Gaps in Deliberately Incomplete
Contracts,” in Symposium on Freedom from Contract, Wisconsin Law Review, 389.
Berger, Allen N., Sally M. Davies, and Mark J. Flannery, 2000. Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, 32, 641-667.
Foss, Nicolai J., 1996. “Firms, Incomplete Contracts and Organizational Learning,”
Human Systems Management, 15, 17-26.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1999. “Foundations of Incomplete Contracts,” Review of
Economic Studies, 66, 115-38.
Kane, Edward J., 1981. “Accelerating Inflation, Technological Innovation, and the
Decreasing Effectiveness of Banking Regulation,” Journal of Finance, 36, 355-367.
________, 1984. “Technological and Regulatory Forces in the Developing Fusion of
Financial Services Competition,” Journal of Finance, 39, 759-772.
_________, 2006. “Inadequacy of Nation-Based and VaR-Based Safety Nets in the
European Union,” North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 17, 375- 387.
Kette, Sven, 2006. “On the Characteristics and Achievements of a Cognitive Mode in
Banking: The Consultative Process of Basel II Examined,” Bielefield: Institute for
World Society Studies, University of Bielefield (unpublished, September).
Kupiec, Paul, 2004. “Is the New Basel Accord Incentive Compatible?,” in Benton E. Gup
(ed.), The New Basel Capital Accord, New York: Textere, 239-284.
________, 2006. “Financial Stability and Basel II,” Washington: Division of Insurance and
Research, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (unpublished,
July).
_________, 2007. “A Generalized Single Common Factor Model of Portfolio Risk,”
Washington: Division of Insurance and Research, Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (March).
Macleod, W. Bentley, 2006. “Reputations, Relationships and the Enforcement of Incomplete
Contracts,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1978, February, 2006.
Maskin, Eric, and Jean Tirole, 1999. “Unforseen Contingencies and Incomplete
Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies, 66, 83-114.\
Nieto, Maria, and Larry D. Wall, 2006. “Preconditions For Successful Implementation of
Supervisors’ Prompt Corrective Action: Is There a Case For a Banking Standard in the
European Union?” Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working
Paper No.
2006-27 (December).
Pattison, John C., 2006. “International Financial Cooperation and the Number of Adherents:
The Basel Committee and Capital Regulation,” Open Economies Review, 17, 443-458.
Pennachi, George, 2005. “Deposit Insurance, Bank Regulation, and Financial System
Risks.” Fifth Annual Banking Research Conference: Financial Sector Integrity and
Emerging Risks in Banking, Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Center for Financial Research.
Rasmusen, Eric, 2001. “Explaining Incomplete Contracts as the Result of ContractReading Costs,” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 1, Article 2.
U.S. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation, and Office of Thrift Supervision, 2007. Proposed

23

Supervisory Guidance for Internal Ratings-Based Systems for Credit Risk,
Advanced Measurement Approaches for Operational Risk, and the Supervisory
Review Process (Pillar 2) Related to Basel II Implementation, Federal Register, 72
(Feb. 28), 9083-9183.
Viets, Daniel V., 2006. Does Basel II Fail? Ph.D. Dissertation submitted to Victoria
University of Wellington, New Zealand.
Whitehead, Charles K., 2006. “What’s Your Sign?- International Norms, Signals, and
Compliance,” Columbia Law and Economics Working Paper No. 295, Michigan
Journal of International Law, 27, 695-741.

24

Appendix

Fact sheet - Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
Functions

The Committee provides a forum for regular cooperation on banking supervisory matters.
Over recent years, it has developed increasingly into a standard-setting body on all
aspects of banking supervision.
Membership

Senior officials responsible for banking supervision or financial stability issues in central
banks and authorities with formal responsibility for the prudential supervision of banking
business where this is not the central bank.
Institutions

Banking and Finance and Insurance
Commission
Office of the Superintendent of
Financial Institutions
General Secretariat of the Banking
Commission
Federal Financial Services Agency

National Bank of Belgium
Bank of Canada
Bank of France
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bank of Italy
Bank of Japan
Surveillance Commission for the Financial
Sector (Luxembourg)
Netherlands Bank
Bank of Spain

Financial Services Agency

Swedish Financial Supervisory
Authority
Swiss Federal Banking Commission
Financial Services Authority
Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

Sveriges Riksbank
Swiss National Bank
Bank of England
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Chairman

Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank.

25

Vice Chairman: Nicholas LePan, Superintendent of Financial Institutions, Canada.
Secretariat

Secretary General (as from 4 September 2006: Stefan Walter), supported by a staff of 14.
Frequency of meetings

The Basel Committee usually meets four times per year.
Reporting arrangements

The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision reports to a joint committee of central
bank Governors and (non-central bank) heads of supervision from the G10 countries.
Outreach

The Committee maintains links with supervisors not directly participating in the
committee with a view to strengthening prudential supervisory standards in all the major
markets. These efforts take a number of different forms, including:
•
•
•

the development and dissemination throughout the world of policy papers on a
wide range of supervisory matters;
the pursuit of supervisory cooperation through support for regional supervisory
committees and sponsorship of an international conference every two years;
cooperation with the FSI in providing supervisory training both in Basel and at
regional or local level.

Main subgroups
•
•
•
•
•
•

Accord Implementation Group
Capital Task Force
Accounting Task Force
Core Principle Liaison Group
Cross Border Banking Group
Research Task Force

26

Figure 1

27

Figure 2: Estimates of Effective AIRB
Changes in Minimum Required Capital
of QIS4 Banks

Source: FDIC

Edward J. Kane, Boston College

28

17

Figure 3
GIANT BANKS NEED LESS
ENTERPRISE-CONTRIBUTED CAPTIAL
Moody’s now assesses U.S. banks’ likelihood of
getting “systemic support” when needed.

Source: American Banker, March 7, 2007.

29

Table 1

Model of U.S. Stakeholders and Clienteles
I. Federal Reserve Board and NY Fed (lead negotiators for the U.S.)
U.S.)
a. Quantitative Staff at Fed (stake = advancement & “street creds”
creds”: e.g., John Mingo)
b. Successive Leaders of Basel II push
• Early leaders: William McDonough and Larry Meyer
• Successors: Roger Ferguson, Susan Bies,
Bies, and Randy Kroszner
c. Broad Stability Mission:
Mission: Stabilize Liquidity; Oversee Domestic and International
Value of the Dollar; Promote Systemic Stability
d. Special Clientele:
Clientele: Larger Financial Holding Cos. and Their Quant. Staffs
II. Other Federal Regulators: The FDIC+
a. FDIC
Mission:
Mission: Resolve Insolvencies and Protect the Integrity of the DI fund.
Special Clientele:
Clientele: Community Banks; Conference of State Bank Supervisors
b. OCC
Mission:
Mission: Supervise National Banks and Strengthen their Charter
Special Clientele:
Money-Center and Regional Banks
Clientele: Moneyc. OTS
Mission:
Mission: Support mortgage market (i.e., keep Basel risk weight for mortgages
mortgages low),
Strengthen S&L charter, and supervise S&Ls
Special Clientele:
Clientele: S&Ls & Building Industry
III. Congress & Administration
IV. VoterVoter-Taxpayers

30

9

Table 2

Main Stakeholders in Europe
I. CHANGING MIX OF CENTRAL BANKS AND FINANCIAL SUPERVISORY
AUTHORITIES
a. Mission of Central Banks: Stability of Every Kind
b. Mission of FSAs: Application of Basel Across Countries and
Institution Types (Increased Supervisory Authority and Uniformity
as well as Financial-Institution Stability)
c. IOSCO et al.
d. Clienteles: Systemically Important Institutions
(Trend is for European central banks to transfer responsibility for
fin. stability to FSAs and to apply the Basel approach to every kind
of financial institution.)
II. ECB and Other Authorities in European Union
a. Mission: To promote political and economic integration (uniform
rules)
b. Clientele: Sponsors of political and economic
integration in Brussels and elsewhere.
III. Elected Officials in National Governments
IV. Voter-Taxpayers

10

31

Table 3

STAKES
First-Order Stake of U.S. Negotiators Is Enhancing
Financial Stability; First-Order Stake of EU
Negotiators is Enhancing Financial Integration.
¾
¾

a.
b.
c.
d.
¾

Objective Function for
Regulated Institutions
¾ Competitive Advantages,
Including Loyalty of Clients and
Broader Reputational Standing
of Firm
¾ Regulatory Forbearances
¾ Personal Rewards to Staff &
Leaders (Incentive Bonuses;
Career Trophies and
Opportunities)

Objective Function for
Regulators
Mission Fulfillment
Reputational Standing of their
Organization
With clientele
With National Politicians
With Foreign Regulators
With Taxpayer-Voters

Personal and Career Benefits
for Staff and Leaders

11

32

