                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CORRESPONDENT CLEARING AND THE BANKING PANICS OF THE GREAT
                            DEPRESSION

                                          Gary Richardson

                                       Working Paper 12716
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12716


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




I thank colleagues, friends, and participants in the conference Economics of Payments II for comments
and advice. I thank Francesca Labordo for exceptional research assistance. National Science Foundation
Grant D/SES-00551232 supported this research. The author may be reached via email at garyr@uci.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Correspondent Clearing and the Banking Panics of the Great Depression
Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 12716
December 2006
JEL No. E42,E44,E65,N1,N12,N2

                                               ABSTRACT

Between the founding of the Federal Reserve System in 1913 and the depression of the 1930s, three
check-clearing systems operated in the United States. The Federal Reserve cleared checks for members
of the system. Clearing houses cleared checks for members of their organizations. Correspondents
cleared checks for all other institutions. The correspondent-clearing system was vulnerable to counter-party
cascades, particularly because accounting conventions overstated reserves available to individual institutions
and the system as a whole. In November 1930, a correspondent system in the center of the United
States collapsed, causing the closure of more than one hundred institutions. Bank runs radiated from
the locus of events, and additional correspondent networks succumbed to the situation. For the remainder
of the contraction, banks that relied upon correspondents to clear checks failed at higher rates than
other banks. In sum, weaknesses within a check-clearing system played a hitherto unrecognized role
in the banking crises of the Great Depression.

Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
Introduction

       During the Great Depression, banks failed in larger numbers than at any other time in

United States history. Nearly one-third of the depository institutions in operation at the onset of

the downturn disappeared during the contraction. Bank failures often occurred in clusters

characterized as crises. The first crisis of the depression began in Tennessee in the fall of 1930

and engulfed hundreds of banks in neighboring states. The final crisis began in Michigan in the

winter of 1933, when to forestall runs on financial institutions, the governor ordered the state’s

banks to suspend operations. Neighboring states followed Michigan’s example, igniting a chain

reaction of state moratoria that forced President Roosevelt to declare a national banking

‘holiday.’

       Economists have long debated the reasons for the banking system’s collapse. A

traditional school of scholarship maintains that the underlying causes were withdrawals of

deposits, illiquidity of assets, and the Federal Reserve’s reluctance to act (Friedman and

Schwartz, 1963; Elmus Wicker, 1996). A contending school concludes that banks failed because

the economy contracted. Asset prices fell. Loan default rates rose. Banks became insolvent.

These fundamental forces accentuated a process of bank liquidation and that began during the

1920s (Temin, 1976; Charles Calomiris and Joseph Mason, 2003).

       These opposing views exist for many reasons. A principal one is differences in data

sources. Scholars in the traditional school analyze data aggregated at the national or regional

level. This data reveals bank failures clustered in space and time, often coinciding with turning

points in macroeconomic time-series such as indices of industrial production, the money supply,

the money multiplier, interest rates, and the deflation rate. Narrative sources from the 1930s

characterize these clusters as banking panics. Scholars in the second school analyze data at lower




                                                 1
levels of aggregation, or disaggregated data consisting of samples of national banks, or panels of

banks from within individual cities, states, or Federal Reserve districts. Eugene White (1984)

pioneered this line of research by examining a panel of data drawn from national banks. The

most recent and comprehensive work (Calomiris and Mason, 2003) analyzes a panel of data for

all Federal Reserve member banks. These different data sources provide different perspectives

on various segments of the banking industry, but none provides a comprehensive view of the

causes of failure for all types of banks operating in the United States throughout the contraction

of the early 1930s.

       This essay examines a new source of evidence that provides such a comprehensive

perspective. The new source indicates the cause of suspension for all banks – including Federal

Reserve members and nonmembers, national and state, incorporated and private – that suspended

operations from the onset of the contraction in 1929 and until the national banking holiday in

March 1933. The source comes from the archives of the Federal Reserve Board, whose Division

of Bank Operations tracked changes in the status of all bank operating in the United States,

analyzed the cause of each bank suspension, and recorded its conclusion and financial

information for each bank on the St. 6386 series of forms. The complete series of St. 6386 forms

survives in the National Archives of the United States (See Richardson (2005) for details).

       This new source indicates that check-clearing systems played a critical, but as of yet

unnoted, role in the propagation of banking panics during the Great Depression. At that time,

three check-clearing systems operated in the United States. The Federal Reserve cleared checks

for members of the system. Clearing houses cleared checks for banks belonging to their

organizations. Correspondents cleared checks for all other financial institutions.

       During November 1930, the failure of the Bank of Tennessee in Nashville, a principle




                                                 2
correspondent for depository institutions in Tennessee and surrounding states, triggered a chain-

reaction. The ensuing collapse of its correspondent network forced more than one hundred banks

to cease operations. Bank runs radiated from the locus of this counter-party cascade, forcing

hundreds of additional banks to close their doors to depositors, and inducing most other banks in

the affected regions to slow the conversion of deposits to currency through various mechanisms

short of suspension. Several separate, smaller correspondent chains collapsed in the weeks that

followed. Later surges in bank suspensions also disproportionately afflicted banks that cleared

checks through correspondents.

       A comparison of the three check-clearing systems reveals reasons why correspondent

networks collapsed like dominos at the onset of the banking crisis. Large banks providing

correspondent services resembled central banks. Deposits in correspondents counted as a portion,

usually the preponderance, of a client bank’s reserves. When a correspondent closed, these

reserves disappeared, and the client bank had to suspend operations. If the client, in turn, had

correspondents of its own, those banks had to suspend operations as well.

       A ubiquitous feature of pre-depression correspondent-clearing networks exacerbated the

situation. To facilitate book-keeping, country banks treated checks working their way through

the correspondent-clearing system as entering their reserve accounts immediately upon deposit,

or if the checks were deposited through the postal system, at the time the checks were handed to

the postmaster. Correspondents provided immediate credit on all items deposited by country

clients. Checks traveling through the correspondent clearing system usually traveled through the

hands of at least two banks before being redeemed at the bank on which they were drawn. The

reserves of banks using the correspondent-clearing system consisted, therefore, partially of

checks in transit, and this float was magnified by a multiple depending upon time in transit and




                                                 3
the number of banks through which checks passed.

         Contemporary critics of the correspondent-clearing system called these reserves fictitious,

since they consisted merely of book-keeping entries on the balance sheets of banks, and were

not, in reality, backed by funds. Fictitious reserves peaked during the fall harvest season, when

the flow of funds through correspondent networks to country banks and their agricultural clients

peaked. Fictitious reserves also fluctuated with the behavior of bankers and the business cycle.

Evidence indicates that the ratio of checks in transit relative to bankers’ balances, a measure of

the share of reserves which were fictitious, rose rapidly during the 1920s and peaked in fall of

1930, immediately preceding the onset of banking panics.

         The remainder of this essay documents these hitherto unrecognized facts and describes

how they contributed to the collapse of the banking system during the Great Depression. Section

1 describes the three check clearing systems that operated in the United States circa 1929.

Section 2 describes the sources of evidence that reveal the connection between payment systems

and bank distress. Section 3 illuminates the initial collapse of correspondent networks and their

impact on banks in surrounding regions. Section 4 illustrates the fate of correspondent networks

later during the depression. Section 5 discusses the implications of these findings. The collapse

of correspondent networks played a hitherto unrecognized role in the banking crises of the

1930s.


Section 1: The Three Check Clearing Systems

         Around the turn of the twentieth century, checks became the predominant method of

payment in local and long-distance trade. In response to the vast volume of payment orders

presented at financial institutions, bankers established systems for routing checks from banks in

which they were deposited to banks on which they were drawn. Three such check clearing



                                                  4
systems operated in the United States at the onset of the Great Depression.

        The first system consisted of clearing houses. A clearing house was an association

created by banks doing business in one locality to provide a uniform and convenient method of

exchanging checks and settling balances on a daily basis. The association was governed by a

constitution and a set of regulations adjudicated by an elected committee. Membership was

voluntary. A bank joined a clearing house by depositing with the organization either cash or

securities at a fixed ratio either to their capital stock or their deposits. In return, the bank received

certificates issued by the organization and used to pay daily balances due to other banks

belonging to the association. To settle accounts, representatives of each bank arrived at the

clearing house each day at a designated hour, usually in the morning, presented items for

collection at other banks, received claims against their own bank, checked to determine which

items presented for collection would be rejected if presented at a teller’s window (e.g. “not

sufficient funds,” “payment stopped,” “improperly endorsed,” etc.), ascertained the amounts due

each bank, and finally, issued the appropriate certificates of debit and credit.

        As clearing houses gained experience with their primary function of facilitating check

transactions among members, their members realized that they could utilize the organizations to

attain other goals. One common goal was the quick, safe, and inexpensive settlement of

transactions with institutions outside the organization. All banks accepted for deposit checks

drawn on banks beyond their town’s limits. Rather than redeeming these items individually, via

messengers or through the mail, which could be a time consuming and expensive process,

particularly for items of low value, for which the cost of redemption could exceed the amount of

remuneration, the clearing house gathered together all checks that members of the clearing house

wished to clear from banks around the nation, and then processed and forwarded those checks




                                                   5
collectively. The joint processing of checks economized on labor, postage, and exchange

charges.

       In the 1890s, the Boston Clearing House was the first organization to establish such a

system for the ‘collection of country items.’ It eventually reduced the expense of redemption to

a nominal amount, less than seven cents per thousand dollars. By 1913, almost all banks in New

England participated in the Boston clearing system, enabling their checks to circulate freely

throughout the region, and enabling them to settle outstanding balances with a single, daily

remittance to the clearing house (Talbert 1913 pp. 204-206). Under the system, Boston banks

received at par checks from all New England banks. The Boston clearing house received,

recorded, and forwarded the items for collection to the institutions on which they were drawn.

Members of the Boston Clearing House received at par credit for the items on the second day

following their dispatch. The Kansas City Clearing House, which adopted such a system in 1905,

cut the costs of collection in half within 5 years (Young 1910, see also Preston 1920 p. 568). The

Detroit Clearing House had a similar experience (Preston 1920 p. 568). In 1912, the New York

Clearing House, which had begun regulating collection terms on country checks in 1898,

established a system for clearing checks from the states of New York, New Jersey,

Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. In 1913, the bankers of St. Louis approved a

similar plan.

       Another common goal was maintaining depositors’ confidence in the soundness of local

banks. Bankers recognized that “no bank can be in an unsound position without hurt to the whole

local banking community (Young 1910 p. 608).” To detect instances of unsound banking, to

restore confidence during unwarranted runs on individual institutions, and to affect remedies

quicker than possible by state or national officials, clearing houses established examination




                                                 6
bureaus. These bureaus monitored the balance sheets of banks belonging to the organization,

audited institutions periodically, and promptly checked into reports of irregularities. Threatening

to expel weak banks from the organization enabled “the clearing house as a body to exercise

such supervision of any weak bank as to amount to a virtual taking over of its management till it

is again in sound condition (Young 1910 p. 608).”1

         A third common goal was the provision of liquidity, particularly during periods of panic,

when depositors withdrew funds en masse, forcing banks to scramble for cash. In such

circumstances, clearing houses eased the pressure on bank balance sheets by issuing clearing

house certificates. These substitutes for currency circulated between banks and among their

better customers, usually bigger businesses, alleviating the pressure to sell assets at depressed

prices (Talbert 1913 p. 195). Clearing house members also pooled resources and raised cash in

large quantities by borrowing from banks in central reserve cities, or taking lines of credit from

financiers or industrialists, or accessing equity markets. Clearing houses used these funds to aid

banks undergoing runs and to convince depositors that they could meet all contingencies.

         If all else failed, clearing houses coordinated temporary suspensions of payment, when all

banks in a region ceased converting deposits into cash, until efforts to repair depositor’s

confidence yielded results, and banks were able to reopen. Coordinated closures ensured that no

bank suffered lasting stigma relative to its competitors for suspending payments in times of

trouble.

         Clearing houses began operating in commercial centers in the United States during the

1
    Note: Many clearing house examination bureaus also monitored borrowers within their communities, to detect
    duplications of borrowings by the same client at different banks, and to alleviate adverse selection among
    borrowers, by collecting detailed information on loan applicants, and disseminating it to all institutions, ensuring
    that borrowers could not refuse to provide information or security to an individual institution by threatening to
    borrow elsewhere. Young writes that “little has yet been said of the possibility of further development through
    such an office … with regard to the question of credit information (Young 1910 pp. 130-131).” Scattered
    historical accounts appear to indicate that clearing houses expanded their operations along such lines during the
    1910s and 1920s, but I have found no solid body of data on the practice.


                                                           7
second half of the nineteenth century. Banks in New York City organized a clearing house

association in October 1853. On October 11, the first day of operation, total clearings amounted

to $22,648,109.87. The number of clearing houses grew rapidly during the second half of the

century. By 1929, the year in which the Roaring 20s peaked and the stock market crashed,

clearing houses operated in 349 municipalities in the United States. Each day, these associations

cleared transactions totaling billions of dollars. At the New York Clearing House alone, daily

clearings averaged $1,508,046,030.73 (Andrews 1942 pp. 587-588).

       Table 1 examines the distribution of clearing houses in the United States. In 1930,

clearing houses operated in 45 of 48 states and the District of Columbia. Banks belonging to

clearing houses numbered 2,186. These banks comprised 57.5% of the 3,805 banks located in

clearing house cities. In the central reserve city of Chicago, 142 of 240 banks belonged to the

clearing house. In the central reserve city of New York, only 34 of 222 banks belonged to the

clearing house.

       Table 2 examines the distribution and characteristics of clearing houses with official

examination bureaus. The preponderance of these bureaus existed in cities possessing a Federal

Reserve district or branch bank. These cities were, of course, hubs of the financial industry. The

banks within them often served as correspondents for country banks in the vicinity.

       The second check clearing system consisted of correspondent banks. Correspondents

were banks with ongoing relationships facilitated by deposits of funds. The typical situation

involved a bank outside a reserve city (called a country bank) that deposited funds in a bank in a

reserve city (called a city bank) and received services in return. The cornerstone of the

relationship was the clearing of checks. When a country bank received out-of-town checks from

depositors, rather than mailing the checks directly to the banks on which they were drawn, the




                                                 8
country bank deposited the checks in its city correspondent. The correspondent cleared the

checks through the most convenient method, either through a clearing house, through the Federal

Reserve System, or by directly contacting the institution on which the checks were drawn.

Country banks found the services of city correspondents economical, because a correspondent

enabled them to clear checks by making a small number of daily deposits via the United States

postal service, rather than employing a staff of clerks to handle the volume of correspondence

needed to send each check directly to bank of origination. Correspondent clearing also enabled

country banks to avoid exchange charges, the fee that many banks charged for remitting

payment for checks drawn on them not cashed over the counter.

       In addition to cashing checks, correspondents offered client banks an array of financial

services. Correspondents supplied coins and currency, conducted wire transfers, facilitated

investments in stocks and bonds, and offered investment advice. One of the most important

services that correspondents offered was a line of credit. Correspondents routinely provided

overdraft protection for their country clients and allowed clients to borrow against future flows

of funds. Correspondents monitored the financial status of clients, enabling them to respond to

clients’ requests for credit more quickly than could any other institution. Correspondents

provided clients with access to domestic exchange markets, where banks bought, borrowed,

loaned, and sold excess reserves deposited at correspondent banks in reserve cities.

       Domestic exchange markets existed in part because deposits with correspondents in

reserve cities formed a portion of country banks’ legal reserves. The National Banking Act

established a system in which all country banks held reserves in banks in reserve cities, and all

banks in reserve cities held reserves in banks in the central reserve cities, New York and

Chicago. Table 1 indicates the interstate distribution of reserve cities and shows that in 1930,




                                                 9
almost all reserve cities contained clearing houses. State regulations conformed to this

nationwide pyramiding of reserves, although in some states, state-chartered banks could hold

reserves in designated banks within their state as well as reserve cities in other jurisdictions.

       On the eve of the Great Depression, correspondent networks formed a complex web of

long-term interbank relationships anchored by banks in large commercial centers. A country

bank often had a correspondent located in a nearby town, which was a member of the Federal

Reserve, and therefore, could conveniently supply it with cash and clear many of its checks. A

country bank also often possessed at least one correspondent in a financial center. The choice of

correspondent depended on the needs of the respondent bank and its depositors. If the latter

wished to invest in New York or international markets, than the country bank needed a New

York correspondent who could handle those transactions. If the latter wished to invest in markets

centered in Chicago, such as agricultural commodities, then the country bank needed a

correspondent in Chicago. These incentives generated a system organized geographically.

Regional financial centers, such as Boston, Cincinnati, Philadephia, San Francisco, and St.

Louis, served banks in the surrounding states. St. Louis correspondents, for example, primarily

served banks operating in Missouri and Arkansas. From these regional centers, interregional

payments flowed primarily through New York banks.

       Table 3 presents an example of a correspondent network extending outward from a unit-

banking agricultural state, Mississippi, in the year 1929. Column (i) indicates that all banks in the

state had at least one correspondent. The median, mean, and mode were three correspondents.

The maximum was five. The most common set-up for an individual bank was to have one

correspondent in the city containing the Federal Reserve Bank of their district (i.e. Atlanta for

banks located in southern Mississippi, which lay in the 6th District; and St. Louis for banks




                                                  10
located in northern Mississippi, which lay in the 8th District); one correspondent in a central

reserve city, usually New York; and one correspondent in a commercial center outside of the

state, often New Orleans.

       The correspondent banking system evolved during the nineteenth century. As early as

1830, rural banks deposited reserve balances in metropolitan banks to facilitate the redemption of

bank notes. In return for maintaining a minimum reserve deposit, metropolitan correspondents

agreed to redeem their cumulative notes at par or a fixed discount (James and Weiman 2004 p.

13). As banks evolved from suppliers of cash to deposit money, and as transactions shifted from

currency to drafts to checks, the correspondent system kept pace. Checks drawn on a local

bank’s correspondent account in New York or similar financial center became the most common

medium for settling debts across communities. Providing correspondent services became the

principal activity of the largest banks in national financial centers of New York and Chicago,

where more than half of all deposits consisted of bankers’ balances, and was an increasingly

important segment of the market in regional financial centers. Correspondent banks grew

increasingly profitable, as correspondents used connections to client banks to market an ever

growing array of financial services and as a basis for building branch, group, and chain banking

systems.

       Correspondent banking expanded during the decades before the Great Depression,

because the correspondent system had strengths relative to potential alternatives. The

centralization of clearing and settlement services among money center banks yielded scale

economies that reduced transaction costs and information externalities that reduced the risk of

check transactions (James and Weiman 2004). The concentration of reserves in money center

banks enabled the banking system as a whole to economize on reserve holdings, since banks




                                                 11
could participate in an interbank domestic exchange market, where institutions bought or

borrowed surplus correspondent balances, and thus, could buffer against transitory and seasonal

flows of funds. This liquidity externality “diminished the volatility of domestic exchange rates in

regional markets and lower[ed the] volatility of bankers’ balances in larger reserve cities,”

making the banking system as a whole more stable and profitable (James and Weiman 2004 p.

5).

           The correspondent banking system, however, also had weaknesses.2 The first was a

standard practice of all major correspondent banks. Clients could immediately count checks

deposited as a portion of their reserves. The correspondent bank itself carried “the float.”

           It has long been recognized that the chief defense of the plan was its convenience.
           A country bank in this way knew how its reserve account stood. No checks were
           charged until the country bank remitted, and checks sent to the city correspondent
           were counted as available reserve as soon as put into the mail. In this way a
           fictitious reserve was created. A check in the mail for several days might later be
           returned for want of funds. All of this time the various banks that had handled it
           would count as reserve these unavailable funds (Preston 1920 p. 567).

Regulatory authorities in all states approved of this long-standing practice, since its convenience

seemed to offset potential disadvantages, such as allowing customers to write checks against

uncollected funds. Moreover, “rural states adopted liberal bank incorporation laws that reduced

minimum capital requirements to a fraction of the federal threshold and so spurred the formation

of state-chartered banks in smaller cities and towns (James and Weiman 2004 p. 8).”

           These state regulations and common practices created a connection between

correspondent clearing and bank reserves with perilous potential. Bank reserves in the

correspondent system were inflated by a multiple of the volume of checks in transit. Each check

2
    Advocates of Federal Reserve check clearing often criticized two additional features of the correspondent clearing
    system: first, the practice of exchange charges, which were fees charged for redeeming checks; and second,
    circuitous routing of checks, in order to avoid exchange charges. I do not focus on those problems, since they are
    orthogonal to the issues of this essay, and because the Federal Reserves’ drive to expand par territory alleviated
    these problems by the late 1920s.


                                                           12
in transit counted was counted as part of the reserve of every bank through which it passed, until

the check was redeemed, and the funds flowed backwards through the system, and the

pyramiding unwound. Consider, for example, the case of a check sent by a textile factory in New

England drawn on a Lowell bank with a Boston correspondent to a cotton-farmer in Alabama

who deposited the check in his local bank with a Birmingham correspondent which routed the

check through its New York correspondent on the way back to New England. At its peak, the

value of the check would be added to the reserve account of the four banks through which it

traveled: the local Alabama bank, its Birmingham correspondent, its New York correspondent,

and the Boston correspondent. Meanwhile, the funds needed to pay the check remained within

the merchants account at the Lowell Bank which counted those funds as part of its reserve. If all

correspondent chains were this length, the total quantity of fictitious reserves in the

correspondent system would be the value of all checks in transit multiplied by 4.3

           Seasonal flows of funds from crop-growing regions exacerbated the situation.

Agricultural states possessed large numbers of small rural banks that relied on correspondents to

clear checks. Business for these banks peaked during the harvest and planting seasons, when

farm lending, flows of crops, and flows of funds from cities to the hinterland peaked. During

these periods, it would not be unusual for an institution in a small town to process checks equal

to its required reserves within each week. If those checks took a week to clear through

correspondents (also a typical period), then the bank’s possessed no actual reserves, since the


3
    No source provides a figure or basis for determining this multiplier. It must have been at least one. Here, I provide
    a rough estimate. If the volume of checks in transit was constant, if all banks sent checks through the system via
    the most direct route to a correspondent which belonged either to the New York Clearing House or the Federal
    Reserve System, if all correspondents routed their checks through either the New York Clearing House or the
    Federal Reserve System, if the Mississippi correspondent network was representative of correspondent networks
    throughout the nation, and if funds returned at the same rate that checks moved through the system, then the
    multiplier would have been approximately 1.5. In other words, the aggregate funds actually available as reserves to
    correspondent banks, denoted A, would have been the A = B – (1.5)*F, where B was the amount of reserves that
    banks carried on their books and F was the float.


                                                            13
‘float’ (a.k.a. fictitious reserves) exceeded the ‘reserves’ that they carried on their books.

       The growing number of banking chains and groups may have exacerbated the situation. A

chain was a collection of independently chartered banks controlled by an individual or

organization, usually through stock ownership or interlocking directorates. A group was a

collection of independently chartered banks operating under the auspices of a corporate

conglomerate. Each bank in the group had its own board of directors, but the holding company

coordinated the activities of all the banks in the group and owned a majority of the capital stock

in member banks. In chains and groups, the leading bank usually served as a correspondent for

the other institutions, an arrangement which allowed chains and groups to economize on reserves

and diversify risk across a diverse pool of assets. The presumed advantages of this arrangement

may have been squandered by accounting conventions that overstated the reserves of the

organization as a whole. These conventions obscured the true state of chains’ and groups’

financial health, confused management, and distorted incentives. In certain cases, according to

contemporary accounts, these distortions induced management to artificially expand reserves by

reciprocal clearing of checks, slowing the processing of checks in transit, and other arrangements

that increased float, and thus reserves, without affecting real financial resources.

       For these reasons, the connection between clearing and reserves placed the correspondent

system in a perilous position. A large portion of the reserves of the correspondent system

consisted of ‘fictitious’ reserves equal to a multiple of the volume of checks in transit. The

reserves of the correspondent system appeared to expand (but in reality did not change)

whenever the volume of checks in transit or the length of correspondent chains (and thus the

number of banks through which a check passed) increased. Any disruption of the clearing system

that prevented the payment of checks forced the revelation of the fictitious reserves. An event,




                                                  14
such as a banking panic, that forced banks to convert reserves into cash, would reveal that the

much of the reserves in any correspondent chain consisted of fictitious figures based on the

multiplication of the value of checks in transit.

         Precise data on the quantity of fictitious reserves does not exist, but extant sources yield

closely related statistics. One is the ratio of checks in transit to bankers’ balances for state

commercial banks. This is a lower bound for the share of reserves which were fictitious.4 Figure

1 displays the data for July 1 of each year from 1913 to 1940. The ratio peaked in 1930, when

float approached 60% of bankers’ balances. This percentage was nearly twice the proportion

prevailing during the preceding decade. The percentage was more than four times the proportion

prevailing following the trough of the contraction.

         In 1913, in order to alleviate the problem of fictitious reserves, lower the costs of clearing

checks, increase the efficiency of the payments system, and facilitate industry and commerce,

Congress required “every federal reserve bank to receive on deposit, at par and without charge

for exchange or collection, checks and drafts drawn upon any of its depositors (Federal Reserve

Act 1913).” Congress authorized the Federal Reserve Board to make “regulations governing the

transfer of funds at par among federal reserve banks, and authorized the Federal Reserve System

to “exercise the functions of a clearing house for Federal Reserve member banks (Federal

Reserve Act 1913).” In July 1916, the Federal Reserve’s system of check clearing initiated

operations. Over the next five years, operations expanded rapidly, as the Federal Reserve

modified services to make them more efficient, and legal changes required Fed member banks to

clear their checks as directed by their Federal Reserve district.

4
    The ratio which we measure is a lower bound because it includes figures from all state commercial banks,
    including members of the Federal Reserve System and members of clearing houses. Federal Reserve members
    cleared checks through the system, and thus, had much lower levels of checks in transit than non-member state
    banks. Clearing house banks, particularly in major money centers, also cleared checks more rapidly and credited
    them more slowly than banks that cleared via correspondents.


                                                        15
       By the 1920s, the Federal Reserve’s check clearing system had matured. The Fed cleared

checks both within and across districts. Each day, Federal Reserve members submitted the

checks that they received to the nearest Federal Reserve office. The Fed office routed the checks

directly to banks within its district and to the pertinent Federal Reserve district office for banks

belonging to other districts. The Federal Reserve also accepted checks from non-member banks

on the par list, which included about 90% of the banks in the nation. Banks on the par list paid at

face value checks sent to them by the Federal Reserve. Most did so voluntarily, and in exchange,

the Federal Reserve covered the costs of their efforts by supplying the necessary forms and pre-

printed and pre-posted envelopes. A few did so reluctantly, after the Federal Reserve hired local

agents to redeem checks at the bank’s teller’s window, where the law required them to redeem

checks at par.

       In cities with clearing houses, the pre-Federal-Reserve arrangements for clearing checks

remained, albeit in a modified form. The clearing houses provided the machinery and experience

necessary for handling tremendous volumes of transactions. The Federal Reserve decided,

therefore, that it would not handle checks between banks located in the same clearing-house city,

and it informed banks of this decision at the inauguration of its plan.

       In cities possessing both a clearing house and Federal Reserve branch, settlements of

clearing house balances were made by debiting or crediting accounts on the books of the Federal

Reserve branch, in which all members of the clearing house were required to keep deposits, even

those that did not belong to the Federal Reserve System. In March 1917, New York adopted this

system, and it spread swiftly to most cities boasting both clearing houses and Federal Reserve

branches (Andres 1942 p. 595). During the 1920s, clearing houses in cities outside of Federal

Reserve cities also began to adopt the practice of settling balances by transfers on the books of




                                                 16
the Federal Reserve, by simply requiring clearing house members to open accounts at the Federal

Reserve and telephoning or telegraphing the debits and credits to the Federal Reserve at the end

of each business day (Andrews 1942 p. 596).

       In many cities possessing both clearing houses and Federal Reserve branches, closer

cooperation evolved. Federal Reserve branches had a reason to belong to the local clearing

house, since a Fed branch received numerous checks drawn on banks in its city, and the clearing

house was the most convenient method of clearing them. Most clearing house associations

admitted their local Federal Reserve branch, under special arrangements.

       “Customarily, the reserve bank has no vote or voice in the management of the
       association, is not subject to the examinations or reports often prescribed for the
       association members, and need not sign the constitution or articles of the
       association. Usually the [Federal Reserve] bank must help to bear the expenses of
       the association … [since] the reserve bank enjoys the clearing privilege, it is
       required to abide by the clearing rules, including such matters as time for
       exchanging items, form in which items are to be brought to the exchanges, time
       and manner of returns, and the like (Andrews 1942 pp. 606-607).”

In some cities, the Federal Reserve took over the operation of the clearing house. For

example since July 15, 1916, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston furnished the

equipment and paid the salaries of the clerks for the Boston Clearing House Association

(Andrews 1942 p. 606).

       The Federal Reserve cleared all other checks in a manner resembling the

procedures employed by correspondent banks. The Federal Reserve shipped batches of

checks to banks on which they were drawn, either via private messenger or the postal

services, and awaited the return of funds (usually in the form of a draft drawn on an

account of a Federal Reserve member or a money center bank) via the same means. The

Federal Reserve and correspondent systems differed, however, in a crucial aspect. The

Federal Reserve did not immediately credit out-of-town checks to the accounts of banks



                                                17
that deposited them. The Fed imposed a waiting period whose length was based on the

typical length of time that it took for a check drawn on a type of bank in a particular

location to remit funds.

         The waiting periods varied up to eight business days depending on the distance

involved and the type of bank on which the draft was drawn. The schedule of the Federal

Reserve Bank of New York was the most expeditious. New York provided immediate

credit for drafts deposited before 9 am and payable at New York City Clearing House

Association Banks, Northern New Jersey Association Clearing House Banks, or certain

other New York and Brooklyn banks. It also provided immediate credit for drafts drawn

on its own members and certain warrants and obligations of the United States Treasury

and the Federal Reserve System. It credited checks drawn on banks in east coast cities

within one or two days, south eastern cities within three days, mid-western cities within

four days, and San Francisco and Los Angeles within five days. Credit for items over

$500 was delayed one day. The longest waiting period, of seven business days, pertained

to drafts drawn on banks in western and Pacific states that belonged neither to a clearing

house nor the Federal Reserve System.5


Section 2: Sources of Data

         The previous section describes the payment systems operating on the eve of the Great

Depression. The descriptions is based on the professional and academic literature of the era,

information available in bankers’ handbooks and manuals, and contemporary sources widely

available at the time and often employed by economists pondering the causes and consequences

of the depression. Data on clearing houses, reserve cities, reserve requirements, and

5
    See Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory for a complete recapitulation of each Federal Reserve banks’ time
    schedule for crediting deposits.


                                                       18
correspondent linkages comes, for example, from Rand McNally’s Bankers Directory.

         The remainder of this essay is based on a new and unique source. During the 1920s, the

Federal Reserve Board of Governors developed a lexicon for discussing bank suspensions and

procedures for collecting data on the phenomenon. They preserved their conclusions on the St.

6386 series of forms. This section concisely characterizes the terms that the Federal Reserve

devised to describe the causes of banks suspensions. Richardson (2005) delves into details of the

definitions and the data collection process.

         In the Federal Reserve’s lexicon, a suspension was a bank that closed its doors to

depositors and ceased conducting normal banking business for at least one business day. Some,

but not all, suspended banks reopened for business. A liquidation was a permanent suspension. A

liquidating bank closed its doors to the public, surrendered its charter, and repaid depositors,

usually under the auspices of a court appointed officer known as a receiver. A voluntary

liquidation was a category of closure in which banks ceased operations and rapidly arranged to

repay depositors the full value of their deposits. Voluntary liquidations did not require the

services of receivers and were not classified as suspensions. A consolidation (or merger) was the

corporate union of two or more banks into one bank which continued operations as a single

business entity and under a single charter. The categories of bank distress were typically

construed to be temporary suspensions, terminal suspensions (i.e. liquidations), voluntary

liquidations, and consolidations due to financial difficulties.6

         The Federal Reserve attributed most bank suspensions to one of five common causes.

The first was slow, doubtful, or worthless paper. The term worthless paper indicated an asset

with little or no value. The term doubtful paper meant an asset unlikely to yield book value. The


6
    Contemporary publications often employed the terms failure and closure as synonyms, which typically (but not
    universally) referred to the sum of temporary and terminal suspensions.


                                                       19
term slow paper meant an asset likely to yield full value in time, but whose repayment lagged or

which could not be converted to full cash value at short notice. The second common cause of

suspension was heavy withdrawals, the typical example being a bank run. The third was failure a

banking correspondent. Correspondents were banks with ongoing relationships facilitated by

deposits of funds. A typical example is a county bank (the client) which kept its reserve deposits

within and cleared its checks through a national bank in a reserve city (the correspondent). The

fourth common cause was mismanagement. The fifth was defalcation, a monetary deficiency in

the accounts of a bank due to fraud or breach of trust.

       Table 4 summarizes the data by presenting numbers of banks failing for different reasons

during each year. In the table, row (a) indicates the total number of banks suspending operations

due to problems with assets and liabilities. Imbalances often arose on one side of the balance

sheet, but could arise simultaneously on both sides. Rows (a.1) through (a.5) display the possible

combinations: (a.1) slow, doubtful, or worthless assets listed as the primary cause of suspension;

(a.2) assets listed as the primary cause and heavy withdrawals listed as a contributing cause; (a.3)

both withdrawals and assets listed as primary causes; (a.4) heavy withdrawals listed as the

primary cause and assets as the contributing cause; and (a.5) withdrawals alone as the primary

cause of suspension. Row (b) indicates the number of banks suspending due to the closure of a

correspondent. Row (c) indicates the number of banks suspending due to defalcations,

mismanagement, excessive loans to officers and directors, excessive investment in building and

facilities, and similar circumstances. Row (d) indicates the number of banks suspending due to

other or multiple causes. The latter consists in part of complex cases which do not fit into the

mutually exclusive categories above, often because they spanned two or more classifications. An

example is a poorly managed bank which failed to enforce collections on its slow farm loans and




                                                 20
which experienced runs after local newspapers revealed that its president embezzled funds from

savings accounts

       In Table 4, several patterns appear prominent. The share of suspensions due primarily to

problems on the asset side of the balance sheet fell through 1931, rose in 1932, and fell again in

1933. The share of suspensions due primarily to withdrawals rose through 1931, fell in 1932, and

rose again in 1933. The ratio of assets over withdrawals varied over time. Withdrawals’ role in

the collapse of the banking system peaked in 1931, while before and after, asset problems caused

the majority of suspensions. The share of suspensions due to defalcation and mismanagement fell

throughout the depression, perhaps because corrupt and poorly-managed institutions lacked the

resources needed to weather the initial states of the storm. The share of suspensions due to the

closure of correspondents peaked during 1930.

        Figure 2 examines the data from a different perspective. It indicates the share of

suspensions due to correspondents, withdrawals, and assets for the depression as a whole. The

left-hand pie chart presents data for banks which suspended operations temporarily. The right-

hand pie chart presents data for banks which suspended operations permanently. The shades of

gray indicate the percentage of banks suspending for different reasons. The color black denotes

banks which suspended solely due to heavy withdrawals (in key, WITHDRAWALS) but which

were in fine financial shape before depositors’ demanded repayment of deposits. Most of these

banks experienced sudden and severe runs. Three-quarters gray denotes banks forced out of

operations by heavy withdrawals and also afflicted by asset troubles that exacerbated their

condition, but which were not severe enough to have necessitated suspension in the absence of

withdrawals (WITHDRAWAL + assets). One-half gray indicates banks in double trouble.

Problems severe enough to necessitate suspension existed on both sides of the balance sheet




                                                21
(WITHDRAWALS & ASSETS). One-quarter gray indicates banks whose slow, doubtful, and

worthless assets forced them to close their doors and where withdrawals exacerbated the

situation. Examples include (i) banks forced by continuous, slow withdrawals to sell their

profitable assets leaving them with a problematic portfolio, and (ii) banks headed towards failure

whose demise was accelerated by depositors’ demands (ASSETS + withdrawals). Lightly-dotted

gray indicates banks forced to suspend solely due to problematic assets (ASSETS).

       Figure 2 demonstrates that for the contraction as a whole, asset problems were the

primary cause of about half of all bank liquidations (i.e. terminal suspensions) and a contributing

cause of another one-quarter. About five in ten of the banks which went out of business, in other

words, had asset problems severe enough to have caused their demise. For temporary

suspensions, the pattern was different. Temporary suspensions appear to have been issues of

illiquidity. Banks suspended operations temporarily when they lacked enough cash on hand to

satisfy the demands of depositors. Heavy withdrawals were the primary cause of more than a half

of all temporary suspensions. The closure of counterparties caused a sixth of all temporary

suspensions.


Section 3: Correspondent Networks and the Initial Panic of the Depression

       The correlation between suspensions and the closure of correspondents was particularly

pronounced during the initial banking panic of the depression. Figure 3 plots the number of

suspensions each week due to the closure of correspondents (and for sake of comparison also

plots total changes due to financial distress). The typical week witnessed few, if any, suspensions

from this source. The weekly mode and median were zero. The weekly number rose during July

of 1929, when a Mediterranean fruit fly epidemic produced a banking panic in Florida, and the

suspension of banks in Tampa, which served as the principal correspondents for banks in central



                                                22
Florida, forced the banks to suspend operations throughout the region, but remained near zero

until November 1930, when it spiked sharply upwards.

         In a two week period, more than 120 banks were forced to suspend operations due to the

closure of their correspondents. The event is an obvious outlier. Never before or since have so

many financial institutions fallen in a counterparty cascade. It does not seem surprising that this

event, the worst chain reaction in United States financial history, marked the onset of the worst

period of bank distress and most catastrophic financial contraction in United States financial

history. In the immediate aftermath, bank runs radiated from the locus of the counterparty

cascade, forcing hundreds of banks to close their doors to depositors.

         Figure 4 examines the event in more detail. Figure 4 uses the shading scheme of Figure 2

to portray the cause of suspensions during the fall of 1930 and winter of 1931, a period which

witnessed the initial surge of bank suspensions during the Great Depression. Before mid-

October, the pattern of bank suspensions resembled the pattern of failures throughout the 1920s.

Banks failed at a steady rate. The principal cause was problems with asset quality. The pattern

changed dramatically in November 1930, when the rate of suspension rose suddenly. The closure

of correspondents caused the initial increase. Thereafter, runs (or fear of runs) forced scores of

banks to close their doors, and adverse circumstances pushed many weak banks into insolvency.

         Comments written on the St. 6386 forms tell the tale.7 On November 7, the Bank of

Tennessee (Nashville, TN) closed due to “depreciation in the value of securities” and

irregularities which left it with “bills payable of $2,887,100.00” and debts “on real estate of



7
    The archival evidence attributes the suspension of the principal banks controlled by Caldwell conglomerate to
    either: (a) financial difficulties directly attributed to Caldwell’s demise, or (b) runs because of the banks known
    connection to Caldwell and Company. The archival evidence attributes the suspension of nearly 100 additional
    banks to: (a) the severing of correspondent links to institutions, such as the Bank of Tennessee, controlled by the
    Caldwell conglomerate, (b) runs due to known affiliations with the Caldwell organization, or (3) runs due to
    geographic proximity to Caldwell controlled institutions or geographic proximity to banks undergoing runs.


                                                          23
$260,079.20” on a deposit base of $10,000,000.8 In the following week, heavy withdrawals

forced many banks in the city to suspend operations. On November 12, the Holston-Union

National Bank (Knoxville, TN) closed due to heavy withdrawals “due to loss of confidence

caused by failure of banks in Nashville” and the frozen state of its assets.

         On November 17, armageddon arrived. The National Bank of Kentucky (Louisville, KY)

suspended operations because of “heavy withdrawals and affiliation with the Caldwell Chain.”

The closure forced its affiliate, the Louisville Trust Company, to suspend operations on the same

day. During the next week, eleven clients of the national bank suspended operations, as did four

clients of the trust company. An additional client closed its doors soon thereafter. The Federal

Reserve attributed the suspension of all of those clients to the severance of the correspondent-

client linkage.

         The American Exchange Trust Company (Little Rock, Arkansas) also suspended

operations due to “heavy withdrawals due to rumors caused by failure of Caldwell and Company

[in] Nashville.” The American Exchange Trust Company was the lead bank in the A. B. Banks

chain and one of the principal correspondent institutions in Arkansas and the surrounding states.

Its suspension forced 37 of its clients to suspend operations immediately. Another five suspended

operations during the following week. Some of those clients – notably the Arkansas Trust

Company (Newport, AR) and the Merchants and Planters Bank and Trust (Pine Bluff, AR) – had

clients of their own, which suspended operations in turn.

         One client of the American Exchange Trust Company remained in operation for a month.

The Citizens Bank and Trust Company (Harrison, AR) endured by calling on the resources of the

A. T. Hudsputh Chain, for which it was the principal bank. But on December 17, when those


8
    This quotation contains all of the information necessary to locate the cited text in the central subject file of the
    Board of Governors in the National Archives. The appendix describes how to locate the original sources.


                                                            24
resources ran thin and the loss of funds on deposit in the American Exchange Trust Company

appeared irreversible, the Citizens Bank threw in the towel. Within 24 hours, its suspension

caused seven of its client banks and the remaining members of the A. T. Hudsputh chain to

suspend operations.

        Similar events occurred in Illinois, where correspondent chains without connection to

Caldwell collapsed. On November 8, Quincy-Ricker National Bank and Trust Company

(Quincy, IL) suspended operations due to the collapse its largest borrower, the “Smith and

Ricker Land and Cattle Company, of Kansas City, Missouri.” Its suspension soon forced four of

its client banks to close their doors. During the following week, deposits fell steadily at banks in

the vicinity. On November 14, cash reserves of the State, Savings, Loan, and Trust Company

(Quincy, IL) ran out. It suspended operations. In the next three days, six of its client banks also

closed. Three more did so during the next month. The effects of these suspensions spread across

state lines. On November 20, the Hannibal Trust Company (Hannibal, MO) suspended

operations due to “heavy withdrawals due to closing of a number of banks in their section at

Quincy, Illinois.” The closing of the Hannibal Trust Company forced one of its clients, the

Farmers Bank (Oakwood, MO), to suspend operations later that afternoon.

       Similar dominoes of collapsing correspondent networks radiated out from Sioux City,

Iowa and Clarksdale and Tupelo, Mississippi during December, 1930. On December 6, both the

Sioux City National Bank and the First National Bank in Sioux City suspended operations due to

“slow, doubtful, or worthless paper.” Two days later, the Leeds Bank of Sioux City, a client of

the former, closed its doors. On December 12, the Exchange Bank of Marcus, a client of the

latter, ceased operations. On December 17, another client of the latter, The Alvord Bank (Alvord,

IA) suspended operations. This was one of the four banks in the Charles Shade chain. The




                                                 25
remaining banks of the chain (located in Inkwood, Larchwood, and Rock Rapids, IA) suspended

operations at the same time. On December 24, the Peoples Bank and Trust Company (Tupelo,

MS) suspended operations due to “excessive bills payable” and “slow, doubtful, and worthless

assets.” Its branches at Nettleton and Rienzi closed concurrently. During the next 24 hours, its

suspension forced six state banks for which it served as correspondent, located in the towns of

Fulton, Guntown, Saltillo, Shannon, Sherman, and Verona, to suspend operations. On December

1930, the Planters National Bank in Clarksdale suspended operations, forcing two of its clients

into suspension and inducing banks in neighboring towns to suspended operations for fear of

runs.

Section 4: Correspondent-Clearing and Bank Closures during 1931 and 1932

        The previous section showed that the collapse of correspondent-clearing networks

triggered the initial banking crisis in the fall of 1930. This section shows correspondent clearing

networks played a role in later local and regional panics. An example is the surge in bank

suspensions in Illinois in the spring of 1931, an event that Friedman and Schwartz (1963) named

the Second Banking Crisis. The Federal Reserve attributed only three suspensions in this panic

directly to closures of correspondents. One of the suspensions was in Florida, one in Nebraska,

and one in North Carolina, all far from the locus of suspensions in Illinois.

        Yet, Federal Reserve agents indicated that of the 25 banks which suspended in Chicago

between June 6th and 10th, eleven belonged to the John Bain Group, seven belonged to the

Foreman Group, and one belonged to the Ralph E. Ballou and E. L. Wagner Group. For almost

all of those suspensions, the Federal Reserve determined heavy withdrawals to have been the

primary cause and slow or frozen assets to have been a contributing cause. The same was true of

almost all other suspensions in Illinois and adjacent states. Federal Reserve agents stated




                                                 26
laconically on most of the forms that the bank closed its doors after depleting its cash reserves.

These comments suggest an epidemic of illiquidity plagued these banks. Depositors wanted cash.

The banks’ assets were frozen. The banks closed because they could not meet depositors’

demands.

        Each of these banking groups was a collection of independently chartered institutions

operating under the auspices of a corporate conglomerate, which owned a majority of the capital

stock in each of the banks, and by appointing directors and hiring managers, controlled their

affairs. The leading bank of each of these groups served as the correspondent for the subordinate

institutions. The groups were relatively recent innovations. They had grown during the preceding

decade, as correspondent banks in Chicago expanded their businesses by absorbing responding

institutions.

        Table 5 examines the relationship between clearing systems and bank closure for the

contraction as a whole. The table indicates the number of banks that suspended operations

temporarily and terminally in three groups: first, banks that cleared checks solely through

correspondents; second, banks that belonged to clearing houses (but not the Federal Reserve

System); and third, banks that belonged to the Federal Reserve System (including those that also

belonged to clearing houses). The table shows that the preponderance of banks that suspended

operations cleared checks via correspondents. About a fifth belonged to the Federal Reserve

System. Only a small fraction belonged to clearing houses.

        Across these groups, the percentage of banks that suspended operations temporarily or

terminally varied. Over one-third of all banks that cleared checks via correspondents suspended

operations at some point during the depression, and over one-fourth permanently ceased

operations before the banking holidays began in March 1933. These rates were four times higher




                                                 27
than those of clearing-house members and two-and-one half times larger than those of Federal

Reserve members. The failure of the later two types was concentrated during the three months

following Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard in the fall of 1931, to which the Federal

Reserve reacted by contracting the money supply and raising interest rates. That reaction

changed fundamentals in a way which burdened money center banks. So did later periods of

contractionary policy. Outside of those periods, banks that cleared checks via correspondents

failed at rates much higher than banks which cleared checks through clearing houses or the

Federal Reserve.

       These raw correlations do not, of course, reveal why banks that cleared via

correspondents failed at such high rates. Banks that cleared via correspondents differed from

clearing-house and Fed-member banks along many dimensions, such as location, size,

investment opportunities, customer base, regulatory environment, access to the discount window,

and management expertise. Those dimensions undoubtedly influenced banks’ prospects for

success (or failure). Determining which was the most important requires the collection of

additional data and the development of techniques to separate the effects of check-clearing

contagion from other factors.


Section 5: Conclusion

       The correspondent check clearing system played a hitherto unrecognized role in the

collapse of the banking system during the contraction of the early 1930s. The initial banking

crisis began when a correspondent system in the center of the United States imploded, causing

the closure of more than one hundred institutions. Panic radiated from the locus of events, as

bank runs spread throughout the Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio River watersheds, and

additional correspondent networks succumbed to the situation. The second banking crisis began



                                                28
when depositors simultaneously withdrew large sums from several banking groups in northern

Illinois. These banking groups were correspondent networks whose leading institutions had

gradually taken control of their client banks during the 1920s. For the entire contraction, banks

that relied upon correspondents to clear checks failed at much higher rates than banks which

cleared via clearing houses or the Federal Reserve.

       Correspondent networks were always vulnerable to counter-party cascades. The

institutions formed a line like dominoes. One bank held deposits for another bank, which in turn,

held deposits for a third. These deposits comprised the preponderance of the dominoes’ reserves

(both required and excess). When one domino toppled, the reserves of the next domino

disappeared, and it suspended operations also, which forced additional dominoes to fall.

       Accounting conventions employed by correspondent banks exacerbated the situation.

Banks that cleared via correspondents counted checks in transit as part of their reserves. This

convention exaggerated on paper the resources available to individual institutions and the system

as a whole in reality. Banks’ balance sheets indicated that they possessed abundant reserves,

when in reality, they possessed few, if any, resources. The summer and fall of 1930 witnessed

the historical peak in the accumulation of these fictitious reserves. The panics that began in

October of that year forced the revelation of banks’ reserve positions. Simultaneous revelation

revealed the cancer lurking within the correspondent system. In such circumstances, it is no

wonder that the system collapsed so suddenly and so extensively.

       Banks that belonged to the Federal Reserve System and clearing houses did not suffer

such circumstances. The Federal Reserve processed drafts quicker and credited accounts slower

than did correspondent banks. Their clients did not accumulate fictitious reserves. Their

accounting conventions did not conceal the true state of their client’s (and their own) reserve




                                                29
positions. This difference is likely to be one reason that Federal Reserve and clearing house

members faired better than other banks during the initial years of the contraction.




                                                30
Table 1
Clearing Houses, Federal Reserve Facilities, and Reserve Cities by State, 1930




                                          Central Reserve Cities




                                                                                                                                                                                           Central Reserve Cities
                                                                                                                          Banks in CH Cities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Banks in CH Cities
                                                                                                      Banks in C Houses




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Banks in C Houses
                                                                                    Clearing Houses




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Clearing Houses
                                                                   Reserve Cities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Reserve Cities
                            FR Branches




                                                                                                                                                                             FR Branches
                 FR Banks




                                                                                                                                                                  FR Banks
                  (1)         (2)              (3)                    (4)             (5)                (6)                 (7)                                   (1)         (2)             (3)                    (4)              (5)                  (6)                   (7)


 Alabama                          1                                        1          4 17 37                                                  New Hampshire                                                                           1                    4                  13
 Arizona                                                                              2   9 12                                                 New Jersey                                                                              8                   66                 100
 Arkansas                         1                                        1          3 16 21                                                  New York               1            1                   1                   1          11                   85                 328
 California          1            1                                        3         24 111 202                                                North Carolina                      1                                       1           9                   35                  46
 Colorado                         1                                        2          3 22 31                                                  North Dakota                                                                            5                   15                  21

 Connecticut                                                                          1                 30                  61                 Ohio                   1            1                                       4          17                107                   168
 Delaware                                                                             1                  8                  16                 Oklahoma                            1                                       2           7                 29                    50
 Florida                          1                                        1          7                 28                  63                 Oregon                              1                                       1           3                 16                    39
 Georgia             1                                                     2         13                 41                  75                 Pennsylvania           1            1                                       2          34                243                   419
 Idaho                                                                                3                  6                   9                 Rhode Island                                                                            1                  9                    16

 Illinois            1                                 1                   1         15 214 321                                                South Carolina                                                                          9                   32                  47
 Indiana                                                                   1         14 92 165                                                 South Dakota                                                                            4                   13                  19
 Iowa                                                                      4         13 71 97                                                  Tennessee                           2                                       2           5                   30                  58
 Kansas                                                                    3         11 91 106                                                 Texas                  1            3                                       7          16                   81                 130
 Kentucky                         1                                        1          5 27 48                                                  Utah                                1                                       2           3                   15                  24

 Louisiana                        1                                        1          1                  9 13                                  Virginia               1                                                    1           5                   27                  53
 Maine                                                                                2                 12 15                                  Washington, D.C.                                                            1           1                   37                  44
 Maryland                                                                             3                 30 64                                  Washington                          2                                                   6                   26                  80
 Massachusetts       1                                                     1          8                 56 134                                 West Virginia                                                                           2                   18                  23
 Michigan                         1                                        2         12                 56 111                                 Wisconsin                                                                   1          11                   96                 117

 Minnesota           1                                                     2         11 89 123                                                 Wyoming                                                                                       2                    5                      6
 Mississippi                                                                          7 19 27
 Missouri            2                                                     3         12 106 185
 Montana                          1                                        1          3 11 12
 Nebraska                         1                                        2          6 26 56                                                  United States       12         24                       2             57 349                            2,186                 3,805


Source: Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory, July 1930

Notes: Column (1) indicates the number of Federal Reserve District Banks in the state. Column (2) indicates
the number of Federal Reserve Branch Banks. Column (5) indicates the number of cities with clearing houses.
Column (6) indicates the number of banks belonging to clearing houses. Column (7) indicates the number of
banks located in cities containing clearing houses.


                                                                                                                                               31
Table 2
Clearing Houses with Examination Bureaus
By Region and City Characteristics, 1930



                        Central Reserve City




                                                                              Central Reserve City
                        Reserve City




                                                                              Reserve City
                        FR Branch




                                                                              FR Branch
                        FR Bank




                                                                              FR Bank
City            State                          City                   State

New England                                    North Central
Boston          MA             1 1             Chicago                IL        1      1
New Haven       CN                             Indianapolis           IN             1
                                               Cleveland              OH             1 1
                                               Columbus               OH             1
Mid Atlantic                                   Detroit                MI             1   1
Newark          NJ                             LaCrosse               WI
New York        NY        1      1             Milwaukee              WI             1
Philadelphia    PA             1 1
                                               Plains and Mountains
                                               Hutchinson             KS
South Central                                  Kansas City            KS             1
Louisville      KY             1   1           Wichita                KS             1
Kansas City     MO             1 1             Minneapolis            MN             1 1
St. Louis       MO             1 1             St. Paul               MN             1
                                               Denver                 CO             1   1

South                                          Pacific
Montgomery      AL                             Los Angeles            CA             1         1
New Orleans     LA             1         1     Pasadena               CA
Oklahoma City   OK             1         1     Portland               OR             1         1
Tulsa           OK             1               Ogden                  UT             1
Nashville       TN             1         1     Salt Lake City         UT             1         1
                                               Seattle                WA             1         1



Source: Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory, July 1930




                                                          32
Table 3
Correspondents of Banks in Mississippi, 1929

                        Location of Correspondent
       MS   Other       St. Louis       Atlanta           New New     Total
 #          States      6th 8th       6th 8th          Orleans York
        (a)    (b)      (c) (d)       (e) (f)              (g)  (h)     (i)

 0     199       7     101    15       3    62             93   104
 1      91      56      34    79      54    87            189   197     20
 2      18      85       6    69      64    20             27     9     69
 3       2      76             6      19                    1          111
 4              83                     1                               106
 5               4                                                       4

 N     310 310         141 169       141 169              310   310   310

Source: Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory

Notes: Each column indicates the number of banks in Mississippi which
reported 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 correspondents in the designated area. Column
(a), for example, indicates that 199 banks in Mississippi possessed no
correspondents in the state and 2 banks in Mississippi possessed 3
correspondents in the state. Column (b) indicates the number of
correspondent located in states other than Mississippi. Column (c)
indicates the number of correspondents in St. Louis, which contained the
headquarters of the 8th Federal Reserve District, possessed by banks
located in the 6th Federal Reserve District portion of Mississippi. Column
(d) indicates the same number for banks located in the 8th District portion
of Mississippi. Column (e) and (f) indicate the number of correspondents
in Atlanta, which contained the headquarters of the 6th Federal Reserve
District, possessed by banks in the 6th and 8th District respectively.
Column (g) indicates the number of correspondents in New Orleans.
Column (h) indicates the number of correspondents in New York. Column
(i) indicates the total number of correspondents in all areas.




                                                  33
Table 4
Causes of Suspensions
January 1929 to March 1933

 Causes of Suspensions                     1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 Total

  (a) Assets and Liabilities               242     848 1720 1125        337   4272
    (a.1) Assets                           102     316 457 354           91   1320
    (a.2) Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)    44     142 294 250           61    791
    (a.3) Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)    16      71 163    74         22    346
    (a.4) Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)    38     145 487 294          116   1080
    (a.5) Withdrawals                       42     174 319 153           47    735
  (b) Closure of correspondent              28     140   97   68         24    357
  (c) Defalcation and mismanagement        143     153 159    76         16    547
  (d) Other and multiple causes             90     215 298 193           91    887

 Total                                     503 1356 2274 1462           468   6063

Note: Statistics for 1933 include only the months January through March. Figures do
not include banks closed due to government proclamations, moratoria, or banking
holidays. Rows (a.1.1) through (a.1.5) indicate subtotals of line (a.1).

Source: Richardson (2005).




                                              34
Table 5
Temporary and Terminal Suspensions by Clearing System and Year
January 1929 to March 1933

                   Correspondent              Clearing   Federal Reserve
                   Term. Temp.        Term. Temp.         Term.    Temp.
                      (a)  (b)           (c)  (d)            (e)      (f)

 1929                366       62         3          0       64        7
 1930                874      241        37          6      169       21
 1931              1,461      224        72         10      432       74
 1932                976      133        37          2      290       27
 1933                326       41        11          1       83        2

 Total             4,003      701       160         19    1,038      131

 # 1929                    14,080               2,183              8,707

 % Suspended               33.4%                 8.2%              11.9%
 % Failed                  28.4%                 7.3%              13.4%


Source: Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory, Historical Statistics of the United
States, and National Archives and Records Administration. See data appendix
and Richardson (2005) for details of NARA data.

Notes: Columns headed “Term” indicate the number of terminal
suspensions. Columns headed “Temp” indicate the number of temporary
suspensions. Figures for 1933 include only banks that failed preceding the
banking holiday. The row “# 1929” indicates the number of banks of that
type in operation on June 30, 1929. The row “% Failed” indicates the
percentage of banks of that type in operation at the beginning of the
depression that suspended operations terminally before the banking holiday
in 1933. The row “% Suspended” indicates the percentage of banks of that
type suspended operations either temporarily or terminally before the
banking holiday.




                                               35
Figure 1
Checks in Transit as a Share of Bankers’ Balance for State Commercial Banks
1913 to 1939
             7,000                                                                        0.6
                            Checks in Transit (Float)

             6,000          Bankers'Balances (including reserves)

                            Ratio                                                         0.5

             5,000


                                                                                          0.4
             4,000
 $ Million




                                                                                                Ratio
             3,000
                                                                                          0.3


             2,000

                                                                                          0.2
             1,000


                0                                                                         0.1
                     1915                1920             1925       1930   1935
                                                              Year

Source: Board of Governors, All Bank Statistics, Table A-3, p. 43, 1959.

Notes: The series were constructed using data from June 30 of each year or the nearest available
date.




                                                              36
Figure 2
Causes of Suspensions, Percent of Totals, January 1929 through March 1933


                                     Temporary                         Terminal
                                              12%                      4%
                               15%
                                                                 15%
  Assets                                                                             31%
  Assets + withdrawals
  Withdrawals & assets                                   19%
  Withdrawals + assets
  Withdrawals            23%
  Correspondents
                                                               24%
                                                    8%

                                                                                  18%
                                        23%                            8%




Note: The pie charts above display the proportion of suspensions occurring between January
1929 and March 1933 attributed to the 6 causes listed above. Suspensions attributed to
defalcation, mismanagement, multiple, and other causes were excluded from the calculations.
The proportions of suspensions attributed to those causes were roughly equal.

Source: Richardson (2005).




                                                    37
Figure 3
Suspensions Due to Closures of Correspondents, January 1929 through March 1933
                            160
                                       Suspensions Due to Closure
                            140        of Correspondent
                                       All Changes

                            120
 Number of Banks per Week




                            100


                             80


                             60


                             40


                             20


                              0
                              Jan-29                 Jan-30          Jan-31   Jan-32   Jan-33
Source: Richardson (2005).




                                                                    38
Figure 4
Causes of Suspension during the First Banking Crisis, September 1930 through March 1931
                            120
                                                                         ASSETS
                                                                         ASSETS + withdrawals
                            100
                                                                         WITHDRAWALS & ASSETS
                                                                         WITHDRAWALS + assets
 Number of Banks Per Week




                            80                                           WITHDRAWALS
                                                                         Correspondent

                            60



                            40



                            20



                              0
                            September   October    November   December   January         February   March 9,
                             22, 1930   20, 1930   17, 1930   15, 1930   12, 1931         9, 1931    1931

       Source: Richardson (2005).




                                                              39
Bibliography

Anderson, Gordon B. “Some Phases of the New Check Collection System.” Annals of the
      American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 63, National Industries and the
      Federal Government, (Jan 1919) pp. 122-131.

Andrews, Fletcher. “The Operation of the City Clearing House.” Yale Law Journal, Vol. 51, No.
      4 (February 1942), pp. 582-607.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1929. “Memorandum Regarding Preparation of
       Reports of Changes in Status of Member and Nonmember Banks,” Memo: November 18, 1929.
       National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject File, 421.113.

-----   1930. Committee on Branch, Group and Chain Banking, “Bank Changes – Definitions of Terms,”
        Memo: November 5, 1930. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject
        File, 421.113-1.

-----   1931. Committee on Branch, Group and Chain Banking. “Comments Regarding Preparation of
        Form F.” 23 November 1931. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central
        Subject File, 421.113-1, Forms and Instructions.

-----   1937. “Bank Suspensions in the United States.” Federal Reserve Bulletin. Washington, D.C.:
        Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. September, 1937.

-----   Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve System, 1943.

-----   All Bank Statistics, 1896-1955. Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve System, 1959.

Bryan, George. “The Law of Clearing Houses.” Virginia Law Review, Vol. 2, No. 6 (March
       1915) pp. 447-456.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During the
    Depression.” American Economic Review, December 2003, 93(5): pp. 1615-1646.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. “The Great Depression and the
     Friedman-Schwartz hypothesis,” Working Paper 0318, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 2004.

Eichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Friedman, Milton and Schwartz, Anna J. 1971. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Goldenweiser, E. A., et al. 1931. Bank Suspensions in the United States, 1892-1931. Volume 4. Material
      prepared for the information of the Federal Reserve System by the Federal Reserve Committee on
      Branch, Group, and Chain Banking.

Gilbert, R. Alton. “Did the Fed’s Founding Improve the Efficiency of the U.S. Payments System?”
         Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 77 (1998), pp. 7-23.

Green, Edward and Richard M. Todd. “Thoughts on the Fed’s Role in the Payments System.” Federal


                                                  40
        Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review (2001) 25, pp. 12-27.

Hamilton, David. “The Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930, Another View.” Journal of Southern
       History November 1985, (51), pp. 581-608.

James, John and David Weiman. “Drafts, Correspondent Banking Networks, and the
       Transformation of the U.S. Payments System, 1850-1914.” Manuscript. February 2004.

Howard Preston. “The Federal Reserve Banks’ System of Par Collections.” Journal of Political
      Economy. Vol 28, No. 7, (Jul 1920) pp. 565-590.

Lawrence, J. S. “Borrowed Reserves and Bank Expansion.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      Vol. 42, No. 4. (Aug 1928) pp. 593-626.

Lucia, Joseph. 1985. “The Failure of the Bank of the United States: A Reappraisal.” Explorations in
        Economic History 22 (October): 402-16.

McFerrin, James B. 1939. Caldwell and Company. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Meltzer, Allan H. “Monetary and Other Explanations for the Start of the Great Depression.” Journal of
     Monetary Economics 2 (1976): 455-72.

Redenius, Scott A. “Hubs and Spokes: Network Effects and the Formation of Regional Banking
      Centers.” Manuscript: Bryn Mawr College, February 2003.

Richardson, Gary. “The Records of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in the National Archives of
     the United States.” Financial History Review (forthcoming June 2006).

-----     “Bank Distress During the Great Contraction, 1929 to 1933, New Data From the Archives of
          the Board of Governors.” UC Irvine Mimeo, 2005.

Richardson, Gary and William Troost. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics During the
     Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal Reserve Border in Mississippi,
     1929 to 1933.” UC Irvine Mimeo, 2006.

Romer, Christina. “The Nation in Depression.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol 7, No. 2
    (Spring, 1993), pp. 19-39.

Spahr, Walter E. The Clearing and Collection of Checks. New York: Bankers Publishing, 1926.

Talbert, Joseph. “Clearing: House and Domestic: Exchange Functions of the Federal Reserve
       Banks.” Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science in the City of New York, Vol. 4,
       No. 1, (Oct 1913) pp. 192-212.

Temin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York: W.W. Norton, 1976.

----    Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.

United States, Bureau of the Census. Historical statistics of the United States, colonial times to 1970.



                                                     41
        Bicentennial Edition. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1975

Wheelock, David. “Member Bank Borrowing and the Fed’s Contractionary Monetary Policy During the
    Great Depression.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking November 1990, (22) pp. 409-426.

White, Eugene. 1984. “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” Journal of Economic History
        44 (March): 119-38.

White, Eugene N. The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900 – 1929.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983.

Wicker, Elmus. 1980. “A Reconsideration of the Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930.” Journal of
       Economic History 40 (September): 571-83.

-----   1996. The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
        1996.

Young, Stanley. “Enlargement of Clearing House Functions.” Annals of the American Academy
      of Political and Social Science, Vol. 36, No. 3, Banking Problems (Nov 1910) pp. 129-
      134.




                                                  42
