                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   FINANCIAL VERSUS MONETARY MERCANTILISM-LONG-RUN VIEW OF LARGE
                  INTERNATIONAL RESERVES HOARDING

                                           Joshua Aizenman
                                              Jaewoo Lee

                                         Working Paper 12718
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12718


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2006




We appreciate comments by Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti and Charles Wyplosz, but are solely responsible
for all errors and misinterpretations. The views expressed in this Working Paper are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily represent those of the NBER, the IMF or IMF policy.

© 2006 by Joshua Aizenman and Jaewoo Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Financial Versus Monetary Mercantilism-Long-run View of Large International Reserves
Hoarding
Joshua Aizenman and Jaewoo Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 12718
December 2006, Revised February 2007
JEL No. F15,F31,F43,F51

                                              ABSTRACT

The sizable hoarding of international reserves by several East Asian countries has been frequently
attributed to a modern version of monetary mercantilism -- hoarding international reserves in order
to improve competitiveness. From a long-run perspective, manufacturing exporters in East Asia adopted
financial mercantilism -- subsidizing the cost of capital -- during decades of high growth. They switched
to hoarding large international reserves when growth faltered, making it harder to disentangle the monetary
mercantilism from precautionary response to the heritage of past financial mercantilism. Monetary
mercantilism also lowers the cost of hoarding, but may be associated with negative externalities leading
to competitive hoarding.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics ; E2
1156 High St.
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@cats.ucsc.edu

Jaewoo Lee
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
Washington DC, 20431
jlee3@imf.org
                                                    2


                                            I. OVERVIEW

         The growing stockpiles of international reserves held by emerging markets have
prompted a considerable debate. Among the explanations advanced, Dooley, Folkerts-Landau,
and Garber (2005) took the perspective of modern mercantilism -- hoarding international
reserves as part of a deliberate development strategy, which facilitates growth by maintaining an
undervalued real exchange rate. They also opined that international reserves potentially served as
a “collateral” for encouraging foreign direct investment. This interpretation takes for granted the
advantages of outward oriented growth strategy, viewing hoarding reserves as an integral part of
it.

         An alternative interpretation for the sizable hoarding of international reserves is the self-
insurance/ precautionary demand, as described in the earlier work of Ben-Bassat and Gottlieb
(1992) that viewed international reserves as output stabilizers. International reserves can reduce
the probability of an output drop induced by capital flight and/or the depth of the output collapse
when the sudden stop materializes. Aizenman and Marion (2003) attributed the large increase in
international reserves in Korea and other East Asian countries to the aftermath of financial crises
during the 1990s. Similar views have been voiced by the researchers who used more elaborate
models [see Lee (2004), Garcia and Soto (2004), Aizenman and Lee (2005), and Jeanne and
Ranciere (2005)]. These authors concluded that part of the large increase in reserves is consistent
with self insurance motives in the presence of sudden-stop risks.1 Rodrik (2005) also pointed out

1
    Another self-insurance interpretation deals with precautionary hoarding of international
reserves needed to stabilize fiscal expenditure in developing countries in the context of Barro’s
distortion smoothing (see Aizenman and Marion, 2004). Specifically, a country characterized by
volatile output, inelastic demand for fiscal outlays, high tax collection costs and sovereign risk
may want to accumulate both international reserves and external debt. External debt allows the
country to smooth consumption when output is volatile. International reserves that are beyond
the reach of creditors would allow such a country to smooth consumption in the event that
adverse shocks trigger a default on foreign debt. Political instability, by taxing the effective
return on reserves, can reduce desired current reserve holdings. The tests reported by Aizenman
and Marion (2004) are consistent with this interpretation.
                                                  3

that increasing the ratio of international reserves to short terms debt can be achieved by
combining reserve accumulation with a reduction in short-term debt exposure.2 Aizenman and
Lee (2005) evaluated the relative importance of these approaches by augmenting the
conventional econometric specifications for international reserves with new variables associated
with the mercantilism and self-insurance/precautionary demand approaches. While variables
associated with both approaches are statistically significant, the self-insurance variables play a
greater economic role in accounting for recent trends.

         The purpose of the present paper is to infer the association between mercantilism,
economic growth, and hoarding reserves by looking at the development strategies of East Asian
countries during recent decades. Taking a long-run perspective is useful because the outward
growth orientation of East Asia goes back more than four decades, whereas the sizeable hoarding
of international reserves started in the early nineties. The history of the region suggests the
prevalence of export promotion by preferential financing, which effectively subsidized
investment in targeted sectors. This was achieved in several ways, including direct subsidies
funded by state banks; or by means of financial repression where favored sectors enjoyed
preferential access to cheaper external borrowing; or via “moral suasion” where private banks
were encouraged to provide favorable financing. We refer to this policy as financial
mercantilism, and contrast it with monetary mercantilism, a policy that hinges on hoarding
international reserves.3



2
    Hence, Rodrik suggests that emerging markets over-invested in the costly strategy of reserve
accumulation and underinvested in capital-account management policies to reduce their short-
term foreign liabilities.

3
    Wyplosz (2002) used the expression in a similar context: “…financial mercantilism i.e. the
desire to keep domestic savings home in order to finance domestic investment and growth.”
Favorable financing [what we dub financial mercantilism] and favorable treatment of successful
producers as a means of encouraging exports was part of the classical mercantilism:

“Most of the mercantilist policies were the outgrowth of the relationship between the
governments of the nation-states and their mercantile classes…These policies took many forms.
                                                                                       (continued…)
                                                 4

       These two mercantilist approaches differ both in terms of transparency and the economic
channels at work. Financial mercantilism is frequently less transparent, and may promote exports
in the long run independently of the nature of the monetary regime. In contrast, monetary
mercantilism is directly linked to hoarding reserves, thereby having direct monetary
implications, and its efficacy is bounded by the flexibility of price and wage adjustment in
response to monetary policy. Yet, both forms of mercantilism are associated with economic
costs, and may lead to unintended adverse consequences.

       The history of Japan and Korea suggests the (near) absence of monetary mercantilism
during the phase of fast growth. Abounding anecdotal evidence, occasionally supported by more
detailed analysis, suggests that financial mercantilism had been vigorously applied during the
phase of rapid growth. In both countries, the switch to large hoarding of international reserves
happened at times of collapsing growth. Thus, if monetary mercantilism played any significant
role in these countries, it was adopted in periods of disappointing growth.




Domestically, governments would provide capital to new industries, exempt new industries from
guild rules and taxes, establish monopolies over local and colonial markets, and grant titles and
pensions to successful producers.”

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics, 2006, Mercantilism, by L. LaHaye.

“As conventionally pictured, mercantilism was a long chapter of simple coherence in the history
of European economic thought and national economic policy, extending from roughly 1500 to
1800. With diverse expositors and practitioners scattered far over space as well as time, it was
intended to promote production and commerce of private entrepreneurs who benefited from and
contributed to the consolidation, prosperity and power of nation-states, with foreign trade being
the most strategic variable.

......The precepts and proposals of mercantilism were the economic component of state-building,
providing much of the rationale and suggesting some of the procedures of national unification,
seen especially in England, France and Spain. Men of trade sought the protection and the order
essential for expansion of their activity, as well as monopolistic subsidization of their ventures
from the crown.”

The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, 1987, Mercantilism, by William R. Allen.
                                                 5

       We discuss in detail the implications of these regularities. The legacy of financial
mercantilism led to deteriorating balance sheets of affected banks. The resultant financial
fragility is more sustainable in times of rapid growth, but it may induce banking crises when
growth flounders. As the switch to large hoarding of reserves coincides frequently with the
collapse of growth, it is difficult to disentangle monetary mercantilism from precautionary
hoarding that is intended to mitigate the growing risk of currency crises induced by financial
fragility. Moreover, monetary mercantilism and precautionary hoarding may be mutually
complementary: the competitiveness benefit may reduce the effective cost of hoarding reserves
and induce governments to prefer reserve-hoarding over alternative precautionary means.4

       Furthermore, monetary mercantilism is associated with negative externalities akin to
competitive devaluation. Hoarding international reserves motivated by short-run competitiveness
concerns of one country may trigger other countries into adopting a similar policy, to preempt
any competitive advantage gained by the first country. These circumstances may lead to
competitive hoarding of reserves, which in turn would dissipate any competitiveness gains. We
provide a simple framework illustrating the welfare losses associated with competitive hoarding.
These losses may provide a novel argument in favor of regional funds, viewed as a mechanism to
cope with regional negative externalities.

       It is not our intention in this paper to offer a normative statement on the pros and cons of
what we call financial and monetary mercantilism. The normative question can be answered only
by carefully quantifying all costs and benefits of the two varieties of mercantilism, and then by
comparing the welfare of diverse agents who are differently affected by them. Instead, we offer a
positive long-run interpretation of the forces behind the phenomenal hoarding of international
reserves by several countries.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the phases of financial
and monetary mercantilism for Korea and Japan. Section 3 discusses their economic implications
both domestically and internationally, including the logic of competitive hoarding and a case for


4
  For the discussion of efficiency of reserves as means of precaution, see Caballero and Panageas
(2004), and Lee (2004). Rodrik (2006) offered a similar critique, by calling for simultaneous
reduction of reserves and short-term external debt.
                                                      6

regional pooling. Section 4 discusses the near observational equivalence between monetary
mercantilism and the precautionary hoarding, and Section 5 concludes.

    II. FINANCIAL VERSUS MONETARY MERCANTILISM OVER THE DECADES: 1970–2005.

       We start with a case study of Japan and Korea during the last 35 years. Figure 1 traces the
International reserves/GDP [along the left scale] and the GDP per capita growth rate [along the
right scale] in both countries, where the horizontal dotted line corresponds to zero growth rate.
We center the time line at the 1997 financial crisis for Korea, and the beginning of the relative
stagnation in Japan, around1992. Intriguingly, in both countries international reserves were
almost flat at a low level during the years of rapid growth, and “took off” during periods of
relatively sluggish growth – from the early 1990s in Japan, from 1998 in Korea. Compared to the
average over the decade prior to crisis, the foreign exchange reserves in percent of GDP rose by
nearly five-fold after 8-10 years since the crisis.

       There is a significant body of evidence that financial mercantilism played an important
role during the phases of rapid growth of Japan and Korea [see Amsden (1989), Kim and
Leipziger (1993), Noland (2005), Rodrik (1995), Noland and Pack (2003), and Doi and Hoshi
(2002)]. Financial mercantilism operated at the background of financial repression and
considerable involvement of the government in the allocation of credit. Because financial
mercantilism operated under conditions of limited transparency, quantifying the magnitude of
these subsides remains a challenge. The better documented experience of Japan’s, however,
indicates that the order of magnitude of these subsides has been staggering. For example, Doi
and Hoshi (2002) reported:

        “When the FILP (Fiscal Investment and Loan Program) started in the 1950s,
       financing the economic recovery was the most important goal for the
       government. Hence, the FILP heavily targeted the industrial financing through
       the Japan Development Bank (predecessor of the present Development Bank
       of Japan) and other government financial institutions.” … “The Fiscal
       Investment and Loan Program (FILP) in Japan collects funds through
       government financial institutions (most notably postal savings) and use the
       funds to finance public projects undertaken by government-affiliated
       corporations or to finance government loans to borrowers in targeted areas
                                                 7

       (targeted industries, small firms, mortgage borrowers, etc.). Many countries
       have government sponsored loan programs. The Japanese program is
       distinguished in its size. As of the end of fiscal 2000 (March 2001), for
       example, the outstanding amount of the FILP stood at more than 80% of GDP.
       The postal savings, which is the most important source of funds for the FILP,
       is the world’s largest financial institution, accepting 35% of total household
       deposits as of the end of fiscal 2000”


The legacy of this strategy is the growing fragility of the banking system, an issue that becomes
more transparent when growth flounders, as has been the Japanese experience.5 Doi and Hoshi
reported in 2002 that “Our estimates suggest as much as 75% of the FILP loans are bad. The
expected losses are likely be 16% of GDP, or higher.”

       Figure 1 suggests that floundering growth may have provided the impetus towards both
precautionary hoarding and monetary mercantilism, augmenting or replacing the credit subsidy
with hoarding reserves. This switch may be triggered by budgetary/precautionary concerns
related to the growing weight of bad loans, or/and as a “last resort” attempt to revitalize
declining growth. Moreover, the two motives can reinforce each other. When the financial sector
is saddled with non-performing loans, the government would want to make provisions against
these loans [see Krueger (2002) for a discussion of prevailing standards for provisions]. The
mercantilist benefit of maintaining a competitive exchange rate reinforces the attraction of
hoarding reserves as a means of making provisions for financial fragility, compared to other
means that do not help to maintain a competitive exchange rate—including structural reforms
that strengthen the financial sector.

       The two forms of mercantilism differ considerably. Financial mercantilism operates
though the direct cost of investment, and may increase investment in enduring ways. In its


5
  It is difficult to distentangle the historically cumulated fragility from that which might have
been generated by the property boom during the pre-crisis decade. However, suggestive evidence
is provided by Iwamoto (2002) who report that the FILP loans averaged 5 percent of GDP since
the mid-1950s, buttressing the possibility that a large part of the bad FILP loans originated
during the earlier decades.
                                                 8

incarnation as export-oriented growth strategy in East Asia, financial mercantilism can improve
long-run economic efficiency when there are strong dynamic externalities in the economy, such
as learning by doing and knowledge spillovers. In general, the case for financial mercantilism
remains debatable, and may hinge on government ability to pre commit and the nature of the
strategic interaction among competitors.6 Dynamic externalities have often been postulated in
models of economic growth in the name of knowledge accumulation or learning by doing,
exemplified by Romer (1990) and the follow up literature.7 While we don’t argue that the case
for export subsidies is watertight and universal, the revealed preferences of policy makers in
Japan and Korea indicate their presumption that the gains from such subsides in the early
development stages warranted financial mercantilism. Indeed, some observers made the case
that, with proper implementation, such policy worked well for these countries.8

       In contrast, for monetary mercantilism to be potent, prices and wages should adjust in an
extremely sluggish manner, and trade rivals should refrain from adopting similar policies. If
other countries adopt similar mercantilist policies, they can undermine the exchange rate effect
of the mercantilist attempt by the home country and lead to a competitive real depreciation. In
addition, the speed of price adjustment determines the time frame over which monetary
mercantilism can remain effective. Monetary mercantilism would have sizable effects usually as
long as monetary policy has real effects--typically the duration of a business cycle. Little
evidence exists that monetary policy can have long-run effects beyond that, and certainly not
over the duration of economic growth for a whole generation. Even if monetary mercantilism
succeeds in keeping the nominal exchange rate at a desired level, inflationary pressures will
erode competitiveness by appreciating the real exchange rate.


6
  For example, Leahy and Neary (1999) show conditions under which optimal export subsidy is
increasing in the rate of learning with government precommitment but decreasing in it without.
See Fundenberg and Tirole (1983) for study of learning by doing in a closed economy, and
Spencer and Brender (1983) for a model of international R&D rivalry and industrial policy.
7
  The often cited “Dutch disease” also postulates a variant of dynamic externality, though applied
to the detriment of an economy in which the activity in the sector with dynamic externality
declines in response to a favorable external shock, often in commodity exports [Krugman
(1987)]. For financial development, Lee (1996) discusses financial underdevelopment trap that
hinders the accumulation of information through learning by doing.
                                                    9

         Both types of mercantilism come with a cost, too. Financial mercantilism increases
financial fragility, and may lead to abuse and overinvestment in inefficient activities. Cumulated
over time, the cost may turn into a significant macroeconomic hazard, either culminating in a
macroeconomic crisis or calling for a sizable precautionary undertaking ahead of a full-blown
crisis. Monetary mercantilism is frequently associated with costly sterilization, which may be
outweighed by short-term competitiveness gains if other countries do not follow similar policies.
If they do, monetary mercantilism may lead to a competitive hoarding described below, which
renders even its short-lived mercantilist benefit ineffectual.

                         III. THE HAZARD OF COMPETITIVE HOARDING

         Monetary mercantilism is subject to negative externalities, akin to competitive
devaluation. Countries that compete in similar third market destinations may end up following a
policy of competitive hoarding, which in the symmetric case would not alter their relative
competitiveness, but would lead to large hoarding. To exemplify this concern, we focus first on a
simple case of two symmetric countries, H and F, in a one shot game. Both countries start with
international reserves at levels R0 ; R0* , respectively. For notational simplicity, we assume a

symmetric initial hoarding, R0 = R0* = 1 . The initial international reserve stocks may reflect self
insurance/precautionary demand and other, non mercantilist motives. 9 Hoarding more reserves
by H is assumed to depreciate H’s real exchange rate, thereby improving H’s short run
competitiveness vis-à-vis country F. We model this situation assuming that H’s net export is
imperfect substitute of the exports of F, and depends positively on the relative hoarding of
                                                                                 α
international reserves of the two countries, NE = 1 + g ⎣⎡( R − R0 ) /( R* − R0* ) ⎦⎤ ; α ≥ 0 , where R

and R* are the actual international reserve levels of country H and F, respectively. Hoarding
international reserves comes at a quadratic cost, reflecting costly sterilization and other indirect
costs. The policy maker in country H maximizes the following reduced form “utility”:



8
    See World Bank (1993).
9
 Alternatively, these levels can be viewed as the optimal levels of reserves, which have been
approached from a variety of viewpoints in aforementioned papers.
                                                     10

                                α
                      ⎡ R−R ⎤
        (1)     1 + g ⎢ * 0* ⎥ − b( R − R0 ) 2 .
                      ⎣ R − R0 ⎦

        The parameters g and α reflect net export’s responsiveness to hoarding international
reserves, and b reflects the costs of sterilization. A similar situation confronts country F. The
reaction functions in a symmetric world are:

                ⎧ α ⎡ R − R ⎤α R − R
                ⎪         ⎢ *
                                 0
                                  *⎥
                                         =     0
                                                          H ' s reaction function
                ⎪ R − R0 ⎣ R − R0 ⎦        χ
                ⎪
        (2)     ⎨                                                                   ;
                ⎪                      α
                ⎪ α ⎡ R − R0 ⎤ = R * − R0
                              *     *            *

                ⎪ R * − R* ⎢ R − R ⎥         χ
                                                      F ' s reaction function
                ⎩        0 ⎣       0 ⎦


where χ = 0.5 g / b , reflecting the export expansion / cost of sterilization ratio.


In a symmetric Nash equilibrium, where R0 = R0* = 1 , the non-cooperative outcome is:


        (3)     R = R* = 1 + αχ .

        In contrast, the cooperative equilibrium yields R = R* = 1 . Figure 2a plots the reaction
functions, where the symmetric Nash equilibrium is at point S, whereas the cooperative outcome
is at point O. Curve Wo (double lines) plots H’s indifference map – the configuration of R and
R* where H’s utility equals the cooperative outcome. Points below (above) this curve are
associated with utility above (below) the cooperative outcome. These circumstances may lead to
competitive hoarding of reserves, which in turn would dissipate any competitiveness gains,
reducing utility by 0.5 gα . Greater substitutability between the exports of two countries would
magnify the negative externality associated with hoarding international reserves, and lower
sterilization costs would increase the “excess reserves” associated with competitive hoarding.
These conditions are more likely to be met in countries exporting manufacturing goods, subject
to financial repression. Figure 2b corresponds to asymmetric case, where χ > χ∗ , as would be
the case if the cost of sterilization is lower in country H. Lower sterilization costs shifts curve
HH rightwards, and the indifference map Wo upwards, increasing the aggressiveness of H’s
hoarding. Low enough cost of sterilization [or for high enough impact of the real exchange rate
                                                 11

on exports] implies that H would win the “hoarding war” -- H’s non cooperative outcome is
superior to the cooperative one, akin to the “Beggar-thy-neighbor” outcome of asymmetric tariff
wars [see Syropoulos ( 2002) for further discussion of asymmetric tariff wars].

       Recent empirical research, while still preliminary, has provided evidence consistent with
our discussion. A prediction of the mercantilist motive is that countries exporting to the same
third market, competing for market shares there, may engage in competitive hoarding. This in
turn would imply “Keep with the Joneses” pattern of hoarding international reserves, in line with
the finding of Cheung and Qian (2006). They found evidence of inter-dependence of holdings of
international reserves in East Asia, and report that their finding is robust to the presence of
standard macro determinants, a few controls, and a few alternative specifications of the
“Joneses” variable. For ten East Asian countries, they found that a dollar increase in international
reserves by one country has been associated with an increase of about .6 dollar by the other nine
“peer countries.”


                 A. A “Mercantilist” Case for Pooling Reserves in East Asia

       An unintended consequence of competitive hoarding is excessive reserves, where the
competitive gains are dissipated. The inefficiency associated with competitive hoarding may
provide the impetus for the formation of institutions that would allow coordination. For example,
an “Asian International Reserve Fund” may provide an umbrella institution that would commit
the countries to refrain from competitive hoarding.10 The greater importance of manufacturing in
East Asia relative to Latin America, and the deeper financial repression in some East Asian


10
 This is an example of the usefulness of institutions in dealing with competitive externalities.
Melitz (1996) points out that these concerns in the context of the EMU project:

       “Concern over competitive devaluations repeatedly comes to the surface in the
       European Union (EU). Examples arose following the exchange rate crisis of
       1992, when the lira, the peseta, and the British pound depreciated greatly and
       brought some competitive advantages to the depreciating countries. There is also
       much current discussion of the importance of avoiding competitive devaluations
       in the initial phase of EMU when there will be both "ins" and "outs." One of the
       benefits of EMU that its proponents often have in mind is a certain degree of
       cooperation in the formation of policy.”
                                                 12

countries suggests that the case for an Asian fund is stronger than that for a similar regional fund
among Latin American countries.11

       While financial mercantilism does not necessarily impose a negative externality on
trading partners (Section 3.2), monetary mercantilism impacting the real exchange rate does and
can even lead to a Pareto-inferior equilibrium among monetary mercantilists themselves. The
observational near-equivalence between monetary mercantilism and precautionary hoarding (to
be discussed in Section 4) makes it difficult to infer the extent of competitive hoarding driven by
monetary mercantilism. Regional pooling arrangement can alleviate the pressure of competitive
hoarding and enable countries to focus better on precautionary hoarding.

       This rationale for regional pooling is independent of the risk-sharing argument, which in
fact militates against the regional pooling. If the risks facing countries in the region are more
positively correlated among themselves than with those facing countries outside the region, risk
sharing outside the region will dominate the risk sharing that can be attained within a region.
And there are ample evidence for strong regional correlation of risks. Be it due to trade links or
to pure sentiments, financial contagion has been much stronger among countries in the same
region. Overall macroeconomic risks have also been found to provide a much greater scope of
risk sharing among countries beyond than inside a regional boundary [Imbs and Mauro (2006)].

       Once monetary mercantilism is out of the way, the desirable magnitude of precautionary
hoarding may decline. Pooling reserves would also provide a side benefit of reducing the scope
of unwarranted contagion, potentially reducing the optimal self insurance of countries in a region
with significant overlap of the trade vector across countries. The future course of financial
mercantilism will be partly determined by the opportunity for dynamic externality. Once the
expectable dynamic efficiency gain falls below the cost of static distortion, the efficiency-
rationale for financial mercantilism will lose validity.




11
  The presumption is that the real exchange rate has greater consequences on the
competitiveness of manufacturing exporters than on countries specializing in exporting
commodities and raw materials.
                                                  13

                   B. Do Financial Mercantilists Beggar Their Neighbors?

       Financial mercantilism differs from monetary mercantilism in the extent of negative
externalities for trading partners. What we call financial mercantilism, outward-oriented growth
strategy by means of financial support, can in principle proceed with no beggar-thy-neighbor
trade externality. Financial mercantilism promotes the export sector, which results in the shift of
comparative advantage as the dynamic efficiency gains are realized. The benefit of efficiency
gains improves the welfare of both home and foreign consumers, and has the potential to
compensate for the static efficiency losses that may arise in the subsidy phase.

       Static efficiency losses that fall on trading partners are the excessive promotion of
exports and the consequent job losses in the importing countries. The resulting costs are difficult
to quantify, because sector-level transition—involving job destruction in some sectors and job
creation in others—is the other side of the coin to the benefit of international trade. Nevertheless,
the suspicion of beggar-thy-neighbor effect runs high when a large current account surplus is
realized. Financial mercantilism, however, can proceed with any level of current account
balance, namely surplus, zero balance, or even a deficit. Indeed, over the course of rapid growth
during the past several decades, Korea and Japan did not always run large current account
surpluses [Figure 3].

       The negative externality of the two varieties of mercantilism can be compared by
considering the relative prices that are targeted by them. Monetary mercantilism purports to alter
the relative price between home and foreign exports, and can work only by undermining the
competitiveness of foreign exports. Financial mercantilism, on the other hand, purports to alter
the relative price of capital, in order to facilitate expansion of the sector with dynamic
externalities. Pushed beyond a threshold, the lower cost of capital can also end up having a
similar effect on the relative competitiveness of foreign exports as the monetary mercantilism,
but it is one possible consequence rather than being the only consequence or the objective.

       What about the side effect of financial mercantilism, namely the cost of replenishing the
weak balance sheet of the banking and financial sector? This side effect would impose a negative
externality on trading partners to the extent that the cost of restructuring or provision is borne by
trading partners. In practice, the foreigners’ share of the restructuring cost is typically very small,
                                                  14

and the bulk of the cost is borne by current and future tax payers of the country whose financial
sector is restructured.

        The following question can arise, considering the gigantic amount of the U.S.
government securities held as international reserves [McCauley (2005)]. Don’t foreigners pay for
the cost, if the mercantilist country holds a large amount of foreign government securities as its
international reserves? The answer to this is negative. Foreign (e.g. the U.S.) government
securities were purchased at market prices and represent financial transactions between a lender
and a borrower. If the lender liquidates the asset in the market or transfers it to commercial banks
to bolster their balance sheets, the transaction involves no transfer from the borrower to the
lender, in contrast to the transfer from current and future taxpayers to the financial sector that
goes on among domestic agents.

        The absence or weakness of negative externality in financial mercantilism—unlike
monetary mercantilism—does not imply that financial mercantilism is a highly desirable
development strategy which every developing country should consider. The almost certain cost
of it, namely the deepening fragility of the financial sector, suggests that it is at best a high-risk
strategy, which is worth trying only when the associated return is high enough to compensate for
the risk. In the case of Japan and Korea and with the benefit of a hindsight, it appears to have
delivered a high return during the take-off period, which may have compensated for the
apparently high cost, while saddling the present policy maker with the legacy of financial
fragility.

        The importance of prudent macroeconomic policies should also be noted. Considering the
likely burden on the financial sector over the long haul, fiscal and monetary policies should be
run in a such way that minimizes the likely burden on the financial sector. Otherwise, the
combination of macroeconomic and structural/mercantilist pressures on the financial sector may
easily prevent the realization of dynamic externality that is the benefit of financial mercantilism.
                                                 15

The sustained prudence of macroeconomic (especially fiscal) policies appears to have been an
important contributing factor to the working of financial mercantilism in Japan and Korea.12

IV. BANK FRAGILITY: ON THE OBSERVATION EQUIVALENCE OF MONETARY MERCANTILISM
                                       AND SELF INSURANCE


          Circumstances where floundering growth leads to the switch from financial mercantilism
to large hoarding of reserves are associated with growing fragility of the banking system. This
reflects both the legacy of the past borrowing, as well as the deteriorating balance sheet induced
by the deterioration of borrower’s growth prospects. The research triggered by Kaminsky and
Reinhart (1999) points out that greater financial fragility increases the odds of currency crisis.
Hutchison & Noy (2005) report that “… the onsets of 31% of banking crises were accompanied
by currency turmoil. Furthermore, there is a statistically significant correlation between lagged
banking crises and contemporaneous currency crises but not vice versa.” This observation is
consistent with the insight of models of financial fragility, exemplified by Chang and Velasco
(1999).

          In these circumstances, precautionary motives may lead countries to hoard international
reserves in order to mitigate the possible transmission of banking crisis to currency crisis. With
limited data, such a response may be observationally equivalent to the one predicted by monetary
mercantilism. Having good data about international reserves but spotty data on non performing
loans, it is hard to disentangle the precautionary hoarding from the monetary mercantilism.13

12
   See Wyplosz (1996) for the discussion of the post-war French experience with government
intervention in credit allocation, which is viewed to have had a limited success. Nor is the French
experience viewed to have been characterized by very prudent macroeconomic policies.
13
   Financial fragility in China is the outcome of favorable financing provided to the SOE and to
other targeted borrowers. See Lardy (1998) and Bonin (2001) for further discussion of financial
fragility in China. The ratio of banks’ non performing loans/international reserves in China has
been estimated to be in the range of about 20% (according to the Bank of China) to more than
90% (see Jim Peterson’s report at the International Herald Tribune, 9-11-2006). In Barnett
(2004), non-performing loans were estimated to be 23 percent of GDP on average for 2002-03,
more than 90 percent of the international reserves in 2002-03. Restructuring of non-performing
loans would reduce the ratio from the banks’ balance sheet, but would not eliminate the
economy-wide burden of them. These numbers indicate a large uncertainty associated with
estimating the economy-wide burden of financial weakness, which itself would add to the
demand for precautionary hoarding.
                                                  16

Given the sheer size of China and its reserve hoarding, however, other countries in the region
may be tempted to engage in competitive hoarding in order to mitigate the competitiveness loss
in third markets. These interpretations, the merit of which was discussed in Section 3.1, are
consistent with growing regional interest in the formation of Asian fund [for further discussion
on regional funds see Eichengreen (2006)].

       China’s hoarding of reserves picked up sharply after the Asian crisis. Its foreign
exchange rate reserves rose from $ 105 billion at the end of 1996 to $ 820 billion at the end of
2005 (and to $ 950 billion in July 2006). In percent of GDP terms, this amounts to a five-fold
increase, similar to that of the Japan and Korea after their respective financial crisis. Unlike
them, China is accumulating reserves without having gone through a sharp slow-down in
economic growth. It can be viewed to be accumulating reserves in anticipation of possible
deterioration in the strength of the financial sector. We conjecture that the recent history of Japan
and Korea provided evidence encouraging China to adopt a dual strategy of financial
mercantilism and rapid hoarding of international reserves [Figure 4]. This dual strategy is
reinforced by the speed of the Chinese transition from a sleepy giant to a highly open economy
[by now its trade openness is more than three times that of Japan]. Arguably, as much as China is
growing even faster than Korea and Japan in their early years and is going through its take-off
process in the era of a highly integrated global financial market, China faces much greater
downside risk of social and political instability associated with a crisis than the risk that
confronted Korea or Japan. This greater downside risk of recession and financial crisis may
explain both the Chinese eagerness to push financial mercantilism, and to buffer the downside
risk of the growing financial fragility with aggressive reserve hoarding.

       The prominence of financial mercantilism is supported by Aizenman and Lee (2005) and
by Cheung et al. (2006). As discussed earlier, Aizenman and Lee (2005) find that reserves
accumulation is more closely associated with precautionary variables—which relate to financial
mercantilism—than with variables that capture monetary mercantilism. Nor do we find evidence
that China’s reserve accumulation was exceptionally larger than those of other countries until
2003 or so, once the effects of standard determinants (population, GDP/Capita, trade openness,
etc.) are taken into account. After a detailed examination of the price level data for a panel of
more than 100 countries, Cheung et al. (2006) find that China’s currency got substantially
undervalued by 2004, in terms of the deviation of the price level from the international trend.
                                                  17

However, the measured undervaluation still falls within the two standard-deviation band of the
international trend, leading the authors to conclude that there is little evidence of statistically
significant real undervaluation of China’s currency. Considering the difficulty with statistical
inference in these issues, these results do not constitute an irrefutable proof that monetary
mercantilism is absent in China, but strongly suggest that there is more than monetary
mercantilism at work behind the rapid accumulation of reserves in China.

          As an interpretation of mercantilist tendencies, financial mercantilism is consistent with
the apparently slow development of the financial sector in Japan and Korea, as well as in China.
When credit is channeled to export sectors with mercantilist intentions, the overall development
of the financial sector is in the primary interest of neither the government nor the market. If any,
weak development of the arms-length financial market will leave the savings in the banking
system, making it easy for the government to direct credits to targeted sectors. Nor is there an
immediate need to improve the credit allocation of the banking system. Financial
underdevelopment is not just an unintended outcome of unbalanced development, but also a
convenient coincidence which the government and market have no pressing desire to escape.

          Moreover, the mercantilist push may lead to “status quo” bias: financial repression would
be supported by the key players running the show as long as growth continues. The opposition to
financial repression reflects mostly the interests of smaller producers, which tend to be less
organized due to the free rider problem, and the inability to identify ex-ante the losers from the
missing activities that were not financed due to financial repression. This bias may be an
example of the incumbent bias against financial development, espoused by Rajan and Zingales
(2003).

                                          V. CONCLUSION

          International reserves held by three East Asian countries of China, Japan, and Korea have
exceeded 2 trillion dollars by the summer of 2006. The sheer amount of their reserves, combined
with their relentless increase, has aroused a strong suspicion of mercantilist intervention. This
interpretation, however, harbors its share of difficulty. It would have been no small feat to keep
the real exchange rate undervalued by monetary means for the span of a decade. Nor has it been
easy to produce conclusive evidence of massive and persistent undervaluation in the real
exchange rate of China, which is the prime target of the suspicion.
                                                 18

       Drawing on existing studies, we provided a heuristic argument for an alternative
understanding of the accumulation of reserves in these countries. If the mercantilist push refers
to the growth strategy based on export orientation, Japan and Korea may be viewed to have
relied on mercantilist push for much of the years of rapid growth. However, the means of
decades-long mercantilist push are better sought in the financial sector-based instruments, rather
than the monetary instruments whose real effects are unlikely to stretch over decades. Financial
mercantilism carries a cost, in the form of heightening fragility in the financial sector, which
needs to be reckoned with at some stage. The reckoning appears to have come through financial
crises, of a purely domestic variety for Japan and of an international variety for Korea.
Subsequent to that, the precautionary motive provides a strong impetus for reserve accumulation.

       Additional stimulus to reserve accumulation could have been provided by the possible
competitiveness gain of monetary mercantilism, which reduces the perceived cost of
precautionary hoarding of international reserves. Monetary mercantilism, when pursued
simultaneously by countries with interdependent trade structure, could result in competitive
hoarding. The negative externality can push the reserve hoarding beyond the desired
precautionary level. Regional pooling of reserves can be one method to internalize the negative
externality of competitive hoarding.
                                                                                                                          19

Figure 1. Japan and Korea: Foreign Exchange Reserves and Economic Growth
Left scale: International Reserve/GDP; Right scale: GDP/Capita Growth Rate
                                                                                           Foreign Exchange Reserves in percent of GDP


                                                                                                Centered around 1992 for Japan and 1997 for Korea
                                                      35                                                                                                                          12

                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                  8


                                                      25                                                                                                                          6




                                                                                                                                                                                        Percent Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                              In percent of GDP




                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                      15

                                                                                                                                                                                  -2

                                                      10                                                                                                                          -4

                                                                                                                                                                                  -6
                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                  -8

                                                       0                                                                                                                          -10
                                                            -10    -9    -8    -7    -6    -5     -4   -3    -2    -1    0     1     2     3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10
                                                                                                            Year before and after crisis

                                                                                    Japan--Reserves          Korea--Reserves         Japan--Growth       Korea--Growth


                                                                        Foreign Exchange Reserves, relative to the average over the pre-crisis decade


                                                                                                Centered around 1992 for Japan and 1997 for Korea
                                                      6                                                                                                                           12

                                                                                                                                                                                  10
  Ratio relative to the average over the pre-crisis




                                                      5                                                                                                                           8

                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                      4

                                                                                                                                                                                        Percent Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                       decade




                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                  -4


                                                      1                                                                                                                           -6

                                                                                                                                                                                  -8

                                                      0                                                                                                                           -10
                                                           -10    -9    -8    -7    -6    -5     -4    -3    -2    -1    0     1     2     3   4     5   6     7    8    9   10
                                                                                                            Year before and after crisis

                                                                                    Japan--Reserves         Korea--Reserves          Japan--Growth       Korea--Growth

The lower panel presents the reserves-to-GDP ratios divided again by the ten-year averages of the reserves-to-GDP
ratios themselves (1987-1996 for Korea and 1982-1991 for Japan).
                                               20

Figure 2. Competitive Hoarding


R*                                           R*


                                                                 HH
              HH



                                                       FF
                S
                              FF
         Wo                                           Wo            S


     O                                  R         O                                  R


         2a: The symmetric case                       2b: The asymmetric case




HH and FF are the home and foreign reaction functions, respectively. Point S is the non-
cooperative equilibrium. Point O corresponds to the cooperative outcome. Curve Wo is H’s
indifference map -- H is indifferent between the cooperative outcome and the (R, R*) forming
curve Wo.
The left panel corresponds to the reaction functions in a symmetric world, where g = g* = 1;
χ =χ∗ = 0.5; α = 0.5. The right panel corresponds to the asymmetric case, where g = g* = 1;
χ =1.25, χ∗ = 0.5; α = 0.5.
                                 In percent of GDP




                      -10
                            -5
                                 0
                                               5
                                                     10
                                                          15
               19
                 76
               19
                 77
               19
                 78
               19
                 79
               19
                 80
               19
                 81
               19
                 82
               19
                 83
               19
                 84
               19
                 85
               19
                 86
               19
                 87
               19




China
                 88
               19
                 89
               19
                 90
                                                                                                                                                       21




               19
                 91




        Year
               19




Japan
                 92
               19
                 93
                                                               Current Account Balances
                                                                                          Figure 3. History of Current Account Balances in East Asia




               19
                 94
               19
                 95
               19
                 96




Korea
               19
                 97
               19
                 98
               19
                 99
               20
                 00
               20
                 01
               20
                 02
               20
                 03
               20
                 04
               20
                 05
                                                                                        22

Figure 4. China: Foreign Exchange Reserves and Economic Growth


Left scale: International Reserve/GDP;                                             Right scale: GDP/Capita growth rate

                                                                    China: Foreign Exchange Reserves



                                40                                                                                                               14


                                35
                                                                                                                                                 12


                                30
                                                                                                                                                 10
    Reserve in percent of GDP




                                                                                                                                                      Percent Growth Rate
                                25
                                                                                                                                                 8

                                20

                                                                                                                                                 6
                                15

                                                                                                                                                 4
                                10


                                                                                                                                                 2
                                5


                                0                                                                                                                0
                                     -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5     -4    -3     -2    -1     0     1      2      3     4      5   6   7   8
                                                                      Year before and after Asian crisis (1997)

                                                                China--Reserves                                   China-Growth
                                                         23

                                                     References
Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy P. Marion, 2003, “The High Demand for International Reserves in the Far East:
         What’s Going On?” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, Vol. 17, pp. 370–400.
———, 2004, “International Reserves Holdings with Sovereign Risk and Costly Tax Collection,” Economic
         Journal, Vol. 114, pp. 569–91.
Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee, 2005, “International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercantilist Views, Theory
         and Evidence,” forthcoming, Open Economies Review.
Amsden, Alice H., 1989, “Asia’s Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization,” Oxford University Press.
Barnett, Steven, 2004, “Banking Sector Developments,” in China’s Growth and Intergration into the World
         Economy, edited by Eswar Prasad, IMF Occassional Paper No. 232, pp.43–50.
Ben-Bassat Avraham and Daniel Gottlieb, 1992, “Optimal International Reserves and Sovereign Risk,” Journal of
        International Economics, Vol 33, pp. 345–62.
Bonin P. John and Yiping Huang, 2001, “Dealing with the bad loans of the Chinese banks,” Journal of Asian
        Economics, 12.2, Summer 2001, pp. 197-214
Caballero, Ricardo and Stavros Panageas, 2004, “A Quantitative Model of Sudden Stops and Liquidity
         Management,” Manuscript, MIT.
Cabellero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2005, “An Equilibrium Model of Global
         Imbalances and Low Interest Rates,” Manuscript, MIT.
Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco. 1999. "Liquidity Cerises in Emerging Markets: Theory and Policy,"
         NBER/Macroeconomics Annual, 1999, 11-57.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, and Eiji Fujii, 2006, “The Overvaluation of Renminbi Undervaluation,”
         Manuscript, UCSC.
Cheung, Yin-Wong and XingWang Qian. (2006), “Hoarding of International Reserves: Mrs
        Machlup’s Wardrobe and the Joneses,” manuscript, UCSC.
Doi Takero and Takeo Hoshi, 2002, “FILP: How Much Has Been Lost? How Much More Will Be Lost?”
         Manuscript, UCSD.
Dooley P. Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. International Financial Stability Deutsche Bank,
         October, 2005. This is a manuscript with all their papers, at
         http://econ.ucsc.edu/~mpd/Int%20Fin%20Stab.pdf.
Eichengreen, Barry, 2006, “Insurance Underwriter or Financial Development Fund: What Role for Reserve Pooling
         in Latin America?” NBER Working Paper No. 12451.
Fundenberg D. and J. Tirole, 1983, “Learning by Doing and Market Performance,” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol.
         14, pp. 522–30.
Garcia, Pablo, and Claudio Soto, 2004, “Large Holdings of International Reserves: Are They Worth It?” Central
         Bank of Chile, Working Papers N° 299.
Hutchison, M. Michael and Ilan Noy. 2005. "How Bad Are Twins? Output Costs of Currency and Banking Crises"
         Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 37, 4, 725-752.
Imbs, Jean and Paolo Mauro, 2006, “Pooling Countries,” Manuscript, IMF.
                                                         24

Iwamoto, Yasushi, 2002, “The Fiscal Investment and Loan Program in Transition,” Manuscript, Hitotsubashi
         University.
Jeanne, Olivier and Romain Ranciere, 2005, “The Optimal Level of International Reserves for Emerging Market
         Economies: Formulas and Applications,” IMF Research Department.
Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. "The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-of-
         Payments Problems," American Economic Review; 89(3): 473-500.
Kim, Kihwan and Danny Leipziger, 1993, “Korea: A Case of Government Led Development,” World Bank Country
         Study, Washington DC.
Krueger, Russell, 2002, “International Standards for Impairment and Provisions and Their Implications for Financial
         Soundness Indicators (FSIs),” Manuscript, International Monetary Fund.
Krugman, Paul, 1987, “The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive Consequences of Mrs.
         Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence of Dynamic Scale Economies,” Journal of Development
         Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 41–55.
Lardy, Nicholas R., 1998, China's Unfinished Economic Revolution, Washington D.C.
Leahy Dermot and Peter Neary, 1999, “Learning by Doing, Precommitment and Infant-Industry Promotion,” Review
         of Economic Studies, Vol. 12:3, pp. 435-40.
Lee, Jaewoo, 1996, “Financial Development by Learning,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 50, pp. 147–
         64.
———, 2004, “Insurance Value of International Reserves,” IMF Working Paper No. 04/175.
McCauley, Robert, 2005, “Distinguishing Global Dollar Reserves from Official Holdings in the United States,” BIS
         Quarterly Review September 2005, pp. 57–72.
Melitz, Jacques, 1996, “Assessing the Costs of European Monetary Union” Atlantic Economic Journal, Vol. 24, No.
         4, pp. 269–80.
Noland, Marcus, 2005, “South Korea’s Experience with International Capital Flows,” NBER WP No. 11381.
Noland, Marcus and Howard Pack, 2002, “Industrial Policy in an Era of Globalization,” Washington: Institute for
         International Economics.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 2003, “Saving Capitalism from Capitalists,” Crown Business.
Rodrik, Dani, 1995, “Getting Interventions Right: How South Korea and Taiwan Grew Rich,” Economic Policy, No.
         20.
———, 2005, “The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves,” forthcoming, International Economic Journal.
Romer, P., 1990, “Endogenous Technical Change,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 5, pp. S71–S102.
Spencer B. and J. A. Brender, 1983, “International R&D Rivalry and Industrial Policy,” Review of Economic
         Studies, Vol. 50, pp. 707–22.
Syropoulos, C., 2002, “Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation Revisited: How Country Size Matters,” The Review of
        Economic Studies, Vol. 69, No. 3, pp. 707-727.
The World Bank, 1993, “The East Asian Miracle,” Oxford University Press.
Wyplosz, Charles, 2002, “Regional Monetary Arrangements: Lessons from Europe,” Manuscript, Graduate Institute
         for International Studies.
                                                      25

Wyplosz, Charles, 1996, “French Postwar Growth:From (Indicative) Planning to (Administered) Market, in N.
        Crafts and G. Toniolo eds. Economic Growth in Europe since 1945, Cambridge University Press.
