                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               A PRODUCT-QUALITY VIEW OF THE LINDER HYPOTHESIS

                                         Juan Carlos Hallak

                                        Working Paper 12712
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12712


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




I thank Alan Deardorff for numerous discussions and comments on the contents of this paper. I also
thank Martin Daneri, Elhanan Helpman, Jim Levinsohn, Marc Melitz, Gary Solon, Walter Sosa Escudero,
and seminar participants at Michigan State, Princeton, Syracuse and the NBER Summer Institute for
helpful comments and suggestions. Tomas Castagnino, Isao Kamata, and Alejandro Molnar provided
outstanding research assistance.

© 2006 by Juan Carlos Hallak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A Product-Quality View of the Linder Hypothesis
Juan Carlos Hallak
NBER Working Paper No. 12712
December 2006
JEL No. D12,F1,F12

                                              ABSTRACT

The Linder hypothesis states that countries of similar income per capita should trade more intensely
with one another. This hypothesis has attracted substantial research over decades, but the empirical
evidence has failed to provide consistent support for it. This paper shows that the reason for the failure
is the use of an inappropriate empirical benchmark, the gravity equation estimated using trade data
aggregated across sectors. The paper builds a theoretical framework in which, as in Linder's theory,
product quality plays the central role. A formal derivation of the Linder hypothesis is obtained, but
this hypothesis is shown to hold only if it is formulated as a sector-level prediction. The "sectoral Linder
hypothesis" is then estimated on a sample of 64 countries in 1995. The results support the prediction:
after controlling for inter-sectoral determinants of trade, countries of similar per-capita income trade
more intensely with one another. The paper also shows that a systematic aggregation bias explains
the failure of the previous empirical literature to find support for Linder's theory.

Juan Carlos Hallak
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
351C Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
hallak@umich.edu
1        Introduction

There is ample evidence that the quality of goods that countries produce and consume varies sys-
tematically with their income levels. On the production side, export prices are strongly correlated
with countries’ income per capita, suggesting a positive relationship between per-capita income
and quality production [Schott (2004), Hummels and Klenow (2005), Hallak (2006)]. On the con-
sumption side, household data shows that quality demand is strongly correlated with household
income [e.g. Bils and Klenow (2001)], suggesting that, in the aggregate, high income countries
consume larger proportions of high quality goods. A positive relationship between countries’ per-
capita income and quality consumption is also found in studies based on international trade data.1
The evidence of systematic supply-side and demand-side relationships between income per capita
and product quality indicates a potentially important role for product quality as a determinant of
bilateral trade patterns. Even though workhorse theories of international trade neglect this role,
growing interest in product quality has spurred theoretical research on the interaction between
quality and trade. This interaction is also a subject of interest in policy-oriented research. In
particular, international organizations are concerned about the prevalence of quality standards im-
posed by firms and governments in developed countries that firms in developing countries cannot
easily attain.2
        Long before empirical evidence of systematic cross-country variation in quality production and
consumption became available, Linder (1961) introduced the idea of quality as a determinant of
the direction of trade. On the demand side of Linder’s theory, countries with high income per
capita spend a larger fraction of their income on high quality goods. On the supply side, countries
develop a comparative advantage in the goods that are in high domestic demand. Thus, high (low)
income countries develop a comparative advantage in the production of high (low) quality goods
because those are the goods that are highly demanded in their domestic markets. Demand and
supply are combined to argue that the overlap of production and consumption patterns between
countries of similar income per capita should induce them to trade more intensely with one another,
    1
        Brooks (2005) and Verhoogen (2006) provide evidence based on U.S. imports from Colombia and firm-level
exports of Mexico, respectively. Hallak (2006) and Choi et al. (2006) provide evidence based on bilateral import
patterns.
   2
     See World Bank (1999) and WTO (2005). See also Maskus et al. (2005) and Chen et at. (2006).




                                                        2
a prediction commonly known as “the Linder hypothesis”.
       The Linder hypothesis has attracted the attention of scholars for decades due to its sharp
contrast with the predictions of the Heckscher-Ohlin (or factor proportions) theory — the usual
benchmark for most empirical work on determinants of trade patterns and eﬀects of trade policies
— which suggests more intense trade between countries of dissimilar income per capita. In light of
the strong evidence confirming the empirical relevance of both sides of Linder’s theory, however, it
is puzzling that decades of testing the Linder hypothesis have failed to provide consistent support
of its empirical validity.3 This paper solves the puzzle and shows that product quality plays an
important role in driving patterns of bilateral trade.
       Several theoretical studies have formulated models capturing the key insights of Linder’s theory.4
In those models, high income countries have a comparative advantage in the production of high
quality goods and consume those goods in greater proportions.5 However, this literature does not
yield the Linder hypothesis since all the models consider a world with only two countries while the
Linder hypothesis involves at least four.
       The paper presents a theoretical framework that captures the role of quality emphasized by
Linder and delivers his conjecture as a formal prediction. However, while the Linder hypothesis is
stated as a prediction for bilateral trade patterns at the aggregate level, this paper shows that it
can only be expected to hold at the sector level. In contrast to the results obtained from standard
estimates of the Linder hypothesis — using aggregate trade data — the empirical results of this paper
provide support for the “sectoral Linder hypothesis”.
       In its standard (aggregate) formulation, the Linder hypothesis confounds the impact of two
forces. First, product quality aﬀects production and consumption patterns within sectors (e.g.
high quality furniture versus low quality furniture). Second, other determinants of trade patterns,
such as those at the center of traditional trade theories (e.g. the Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin
models), operate and vary between sectors. Consequently, tests of the hypothesis at the aggregate
   3
       Deardorﬀ (1984), Leamer and Levinsohn (1995), and McPherson, Redfearn, and Tieslau (2001) survey the em-
pirical literature.
   4
     Falvey and Kierzkowski (1987), Flam and Helpman (1987), Stokey (1991), Copeland and Kotwel (1996), and
Murphy and Shleifer (1997).
  5
    The source of comparative advantage in quality supply varies across models, but high income countries are always
assumed to possess a comparative advantage in the production of high quality goods.




                                                         3
level do not provide a meaningful test for the role of quality on bilateral trade patterns. The
sectoral Linder hypothesis does capture the role of quality because its specification controls for
inter-sectoral determinants of trade.
   In this paper, countries are modeled as diﬀering in their valuation of quality. In particular, a
parameter governs the variation in countries’ expenditure shares across varieties of diﬀerent quality.
On the supply side, since several plausible theories relate quality production to per-capita income,
their common implications are captured by simply assuming that quality supply and per-capita
income are systematically related. The interaction of demand for and supply of quality results in
a gravity-type specification in which sectoral bilateral trade is a function of exporter and importer
fixed eﬀects, proxies for bilateral trade costs, and a “Linder term” measuring income (per-capita)
dissimilarity between pairs of countries. When both quality demand and quality supply increase
with income per capita — as postulated by Linder — the model predicts a negative coeﬃcient on the
Linder term. This prediction is the formal characterization of the sectoral Linder hypothesis.
   The sectoral Linder hypothesis is estimated using a sample of bilateral trade flows at the 3-digit
level among 64 countries during 1995. Based on Rauch (1999), I classify sectors as “Diﬀerentiated”,
“Reference-priced” and “Homogeneous”, and use only the first group for the baseline estimates be-
cause those are the goods with characteristics that most closely match the theoretical assumptions.
The empirical results support the prediction of the theory: countries with similar income per capita
tend to trade more intensely with one another.
   The unanimous empirical framework in the preceeding literature has been the gravity equation.
This framework is inappropriate because it is specified at the aggregate level and is therefore unable
to control for sector-specific determinants of trade. The omission of those controls is not innocuous.
Since patterns of sectoral specialization within manufacturing are strongly correlated with income
per capita, the inability to include such controls induces a systematic upward bias in the estimated
coeﬃcient of the Linder term. The bias increases with the level of aggregation at which the Linder
hypothesis is estimated. In particular, when the Linder hypothesis is estimated aggregating all
trade flows in diﬀerentiated products, the bias is suﬃciently strong to reverse the estimated sign of
the Linder eﬀect.
   A related theoretical literature also focuses on the aggregate Linder hypothesis but does not rely
on product quality as its driving force. This literature emphasizes the role of inter-sectoral non-


                                                  4
homotheticities in demand. Such non-homotheticities can generate higher trade intensity between
countries of similar income per capita if per-capita income and comparative advantage in high-
elasticity sectors are positively related.6 While inter-sectoral non-homotheticities might generate
trade flows consistent with the “aggregate” Linder hypothesis, the gravity-equation framework
using aggregate data yields results that do not support the empirical prevalence of this eﬀect.7
        This paper simultaneously supports Linder’s intuition on the link between product quality and
the direction of trade and explains the failure to find consistent empirical support for the Linder
hypothesis. The data bear out the premises of Linder’s theory: countries of similar income have
similar production and consumption patterns — they produce and consume goods of higher quality.
But the hypothesized corollary that countries of similar income trade more with each other only
holds at the sector level, where inter-sectoral determinants of trade are controlled for. At the
aggregate level, the Linder hypothesis does not follow from the premises that are supposed to
imply it. When it is properly formulated and estimated, it is empirically supported.
        Section 2 of the paper follows the standard approach for estimating the Linder hypothesis
(using aggregate trade data) and finds that it is strongly rejected. Section 3 develops a theoretical
framework from which the sectoral Linder hypothesis is derived. Section 4 shows that the empirical
estimates are consistent with the sectoral Linder hypothesis. Section 5 provides theoretical and
empirical evidence on the existence of a systematic aggregation bias. Section 6 concludes.


2        The “aggregate” Linder hypothesis

The “Linder hypothesis” states that countries with similar income per capita trade more intensely
with one another. The standard approach for testing this hypothesis relies on a gravity-equation
framework, estimated using trade data aggregated across sectors. To obtain comparable results, this
section follows the standard approach. Later sections demonstrate that the empirical framework is
inappropriate, and explain why it fails to identify the role of product quality as a determinant of
bilateral patterns of trade.
    6
        See Markusen (1986), Bergstrand (1989), Deardorﬀ (1998), and Matsuyama (2000). Hunter and Markusen (1988)
and Hunter (1991) assess the empirical relevance of these non-homotheticities.
   7
     While potentially relevant, this eﬀect might be overshadowed by the (opposite) eﬀect of other inter-sectoral
determinants of trade.



                                                         5
       Before presenting estimation results, this section describes some basic facts about the direction
of world trade. Table 1 reports the volume of trade in 1995 between two groups of countries, “rich”
and “poor”, divided according to their income per capita. The cut-oﬀ value used in the table is
a (PPP adjusted) GDP per-capita of $ 12000 U.S. dollars.8 Panel (a) includes all countries with
population above one million (107 countries), of which 26 countries are classified as “rich” and
81 countries are classified as “poor”. Total trade (both exports and imports) among these 107
countries in 1995 is 5049 billion dollars, 97% of total world trade. High-income countries account
for 81.1% of total exports ($ 4097 billion) and 78.8% of total imports ($ 3980 billion).
       The Linder hypothesis predicts relatively more trade between countries of similar income per
capita. On a first pass, this hypothesis can be assessed by comparing import and export shares
between groups. Those shares are presented in the second set of columns. Rich countries buy 81.1%
of their imports from other rich countries while they buy the remaining 18.9% from poor countries.
Poor countries buy 81.5% of their imports from rich countries and 18.5% from other poor countries.
Apparently at odds with the predictions of the Linder hypothesis, rich (poor) countries as a group
do not import relatively more from other rich (poor) countries. The last set of columns provides
the same message viewed from an exporter perspective. Rich countries export (slightly) relatively
more to poor countries while poor countries export relatively more to rich countries.
       The remainder of the paper focuses on a sample of 64 countries, those with population above
5 million and imports of “Diﬀerentiated” goods (Rauch 1999) above US$ 2 billion.9 This sample
includes 26 rich countries and 38 poor countries. The list of countries and their PPP GDP in 1995
is provided in Table A1. Panel (b) is analogous to panel (a), but is based only on trade flows
between these 64 countries. As is the case in the larger sample, countries do not trade more with
countries of similar per-capita income. For example, while poor countries’ share of rich countries’
imports is 16.8%, their share of poor countries’ imports is 15.8%.10
       Although informative about the structure of world trade, Table 1 cannot be used to assess
   8
       This cut-oﬀ level is chosen as a threshold because it is located at the trough of the (bimodal) distribution of
countries’ per-capita income.
   9
     I defer to Section 4 the description of data sources, classification of sectors into goods categories, and selection
criteria for countries and sectors.
  10
     The choice of an alternative cut-oﬀ value of US$ 15000, in which case Greece, Portugal, Taiwan, and South Korea
switch to the group of poor countries, yields the same qualitative result.




                                                           6
the empirical validity of the Linder hypothesis. Countries of similar income per capita tend to
be geographically close to each other. Since trade costs are not controlled for, more intense trade
between countries of similar income per capita may be due to their lower bilateral transport costs
rather than to income similarity. The empirical literature has long acknowledged this concern,
and addressed it by adopting a gravity-equation framework in which bilateral trade is expressed
as a function of the incomes of the trading partners and of proxies for their bilateral trade costs.
The gravity specification is then augmented to include a “Linder term”, a measure of income
dissimilarity between pairs of countries. The specification that is typically estimated is

       ln(importsij ) = β 0 + β 1 ln(Yi ) + β 2 ln(Yj ) + β 3 ln(Distij ) + β4 Iij + β 5 Linderij + εij   (1)

where i denotes the exporter, j denotes the importer, Yi (Yj ) is the GDP of country i (j), Distij
is the geographic distance between countries i and j, Iij is a vector of dichotomous proxy variables
for trade costs, and Linderij is the Linder term. Several Linder terms have been proposed in the
literature. The Linder term that will be used as baseline in this study is Linderij = (ln yi − ln yj )2 ,
where yi (yj ) is the income per capita of country i (j). The Linder term is larger the more dissimilar
are the two countries’ incomes. Therefore, the prediction of the Linder hypothesis is that β 5 < 0.
In its most simple form, this equation is estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS).
   I follow the empirical literature by estimating equation (1) with OLS using the sample of 64
countries. The vector Iij includes dummies indicating whether a country pair shares a common
border, a common language, a preferential trade agreement (PTA), a colony-colonizer relationship,
or a common colonizer. The results, presented in the first column of Table 2, strongly reject the
Linder hypothesis. Instead of a negative coeﬃcient on the Linder term, the estimated coeﬃcient
is positive and significant at the 1% level. The estimated coeﬃcients on the other variables have
the predicted sign in all cases. Larger GDP is associated with more trade, as are lower trade costs,
induced by shorter distance or by sharing a border, common language, PTA, colonizer-colony rela-
tionship, or a common colonizer. The remaining columns of the table report results from estimating
equation (1) including alternative Linder terms often used in the literature: |yi − yj | , ln |yi − yj |,
and |ln yi − ln yj |. The results are not sensitive to which Linder term is used. In contrast to the
prediction of the Linder hypothesis, it is countries with dissimilar income per capita that appear
to trade more with one another. In all cases, the coeﬃcient on the Linder term is positive and
significant at the 1% level.

                                                      7
         Theoretical derivations of the gravity equation (e.g. Eaton and Kortum 2002, Anderson and
Van Wincoop 2003) indicate that its standard formulation should be augmented to include ex-
porter and importer fixed eﬀects. For example, bilateral trade volumes are also influenced by the
importer’s “multilateral resistance”, a common importer eﬀect (across exporters) capturing trade
costs between the importer and third countries. I thus re-estimate equation (1) including exporter
and importer fixed eﬀects.11 The results are displayed in Table 3. Even though the magnitude and
precision of the estimated coeﬃcient on the Linder term decreases substantially with the inclusion
of the fixed eﬀects, the coeﬃcient is still uniformly positive, contradicting the prediction of the
Linder hypothesis.
         The estimation exercises of this section have the sole objective of reproducing standard empirical
tests of the Linder hypothesis. Since the literature fails to consistently support the hypothesis, the
failure to find support for it here also is not surprising.12 I will show next that this result is not due
to the absence of the eﬀects described by Linder, but due to a misspecified empirical framework to
test their impact on trade.


3         The “sectoral” Linder hypothesis: a theoretical framework based
          on quality

Product quality plays a central role in Linder’s theory. This section describes a theoretical frame-
work that captures the essential aspects of that theory by allowing a systematic relationship between
countries’ income per capita and their supply of and demand for quality. Building on the results
of previous theoretical work — which formalized Linder’s ideas but did not generate testable pre-
dictions in a multilateral context due to a focus on a two-country equilibrium — this framework
yields a formal derivation of the Linder hypothesis. In contrast to its standard formulation, the
Linder hypothesis is shown to be valid only when formulated at the sector level, after controlling
for inter-sectoral determinants of trade.
    11
         Note that Yi and Yj can no longer be included as separate regressors after the inclusion of exporter and importer
fixed eﬀects.
   12
      Thursby and Thursby (1987) finds suppoting results. However, since the study is based on a sample of only 17
countries, most of them OECD members, it does not exploit the most informative source of cross-country variation
in per-capita income levels.



                                                              8
3.1   Demand for quality

The demand side of the model is based on Hallak (2006). Preferences are represented by a two-
tier utility function. The upper tier is weakly separable into sectoral subutility indices {ujz }z=1,...,Z
and {ujg }g=Z+1,...,S , where j indexes countries, z indexes diﬀerentiated-good sectors, and g indexes
homogeneous-good sectors. The utility derived from consuming goods in diﬀerentiated-good sector
z is given by
                               ⎡                      ⎤ σz −1
                                                           σz
                                   X
                        ujz   =⎣            γ jz
                                        (θh )      qjh ⎦          ,         θh , γ jz > 0, σ z > 1     (2)
                                 h∈Ωz

where Ωz is the set of all varieties in sector z, θh is the quality of variety h, qjh is the quantity
consumed by country j of variety h, γ jz is the intensity of country j’s preference for quality (in
sector z), and σ z is the common elasticity of substitution between varieties in the sector. Demand in
diﬀerentiated sectors is obtained in two stages. In the first stage, conditional on prices and income,
the representative consumer chooses an allocation of expenditures across sectors {Ejz }z=1,...,Z and
{Ejg }g=Z+1,...,S . In the second stage, conditional on total expenditure Ejz in sector z, he chooses
expenditure ejh on variety h, which is given by
                                                                  Ã     pjh       !1−σz
                                                                      (θh )γ jz
                              ejh = sjh Ejz ,         sjh =                                            (3)
                                                                          Gjz

where sjh is the share of variety h in sectoral expenditure Ejz , pjh is the price of variety h faced
by consumers in country j, and
                                           "              µ               ¶1−σz # 1−σ
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      z
                                            P                   pjr
                                   Gjz =           r∈Ωz
                                                              (θr )γ jz

is an exact consumption price index for sector z in country j.
   Product quality (θh ) is modeled as a utility (or demand) shifter. This utility shifter captures
all attributes of a product that consumers value. Conditional on price, higher quality increases
the share spent on a given variety. The parameter γ measures intensity of preference for quality.
Countries with higher γ are willing to pay more for high quality varieties. The impact of γ on
expenditure shares is given by

                              ∂sjh                £       P              ¤
                                    = (σ z − 1)sjh ln θh − r∈Ωz sjr ln θr .                            (4)
                              ∂γ jz


                                                              9
   Since σ z > 1 and sjh > 0, the sign of this derivative depends on the sign of the term in square
brackets, i.e. on whether the quality of variety h is above or below the (weighted) average quality
of the sector. When the quality of variety h is higher (lower) than the average quality, the term
in brackets is positive (negative). In that case, expenditure shares increase (decrease) with the
intensity of preference for quality.
   Variation across countries in the value of γ provides this demand system with the flexibility
to capture cross-country variation in quality demand. Countries with higher γ spend a larger
proportion of their income on high quality goods. Such flexibility is convenient for capturing — in
reduced form — the demand side of Linder’s theory, which relates countries’ demand for quality to
income per capita. The demand system also embeds a relevant special case. When the intensity of
preference for quality does not vary across countries (γ jz = γ z ), the demand system is equivalent
to the demand system generated by Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, which are standard for modeling
demand for diﬀerentiated goods in international trade.
   Exporter i produces Niz symmetric varieties in sector z. Denote by sijz the share defined in
equation (3) when applied to a typical variety from country i in sector z. Using this notation,
denote by ωijz = Niz sijz country i’s total share in country j’s sectoral expenditure. The amount
of country j’s imports from country i in sector z is then:
                                                                                Ã    piz τ ijz   !1−σz
                                                                                    (θiz )γ jz
                       importsijz = ωijz Ejz ,              ωijz = Niz                                   ,   (5)
                                                                                      Gjz

where the import price pijz is expressed as the product of the export price, piz , and the (iceberg)
trade cost factor between countries i and j, τ ijz . Equation (5) shows that the import share of
country i decreases with the export price piz and increases with the quality of its varieties θiz .
   To gain intuition about the role that cross-country diﬀerences in preference for quality play on
                                                        0
the direction of trade, compare exporters i and i shares in countries j and j 0 ’s imports in sector z,
respectively, by focusing on the double ratio (or double diﬀerence if logarithms are taken on both
sides):
                                                        ω ijz /ω i0 jz
                                        rii0 jj 0 z =                       .                                (6)
                                                        ωij 0 z /ω i0 j 0 z
This ratio equals one when exporters i and i0 ’s shares in country j’s imports are proportional to
their shares in country j 0 ’s imports, i.e. numerator and denominator are equal. The ratio is greater
than one when exporter i’s share relative to that of exporter i0 is higher in country j ’s imports than

                                                        10
                                                                                       τ ijz /τ i0 jz
it is in country j 0 ’s imports. Abstracting from trade costs ( τ                                            = 1) and using the definitions
                                                                                        ij 0 z /τ i0 j 0 z

of ω ijz and sijz , we can express this ratio as
                                                               ∙                     ¸σz −1
                                                              (θiz /θi0 z )γ jz
                                              rii0 jj 0 z   =                                  .                                        (7)
                                                              (θiz /θi0 z )γ j 0 z

Equation (7) shows that the existence of quality diﬀerences between countries i and i0 is not
suﬃcient to induce more intense trade between particular country pairs. In the benchmark case
with no cross-country variation in γ jz , numerator and denominator of equation (7) are equal even
in the presence of quality diﬀerences (θiz 6= θi0 z ). Therefore, rii0 jj 0 z = 1, implying that importers
j and j 0 buy goods from exporters i and i0 in the same proportions.13 In contrast, when there is
variation in γ jz , quality diﬀerences do influence the direction of trade. For example, if exporter i
produces goods of higher quality than exporter i0 while importer j has a more intense preference
for quality than importer j 0 , then rii0 jj 0 z > 1. In this case, the country with higher γ jz (country
j) imports relatively more from the country that produces higher quality goods (country i). Even
though both importers prefer high quality rather than low quality goods, this preference is stronger
for importers with higher γ.
       Equation (5) is the basis of the empirical specification that will be used for estimation. I assume
that trade costs are determined by τ ijz = (Distij )ηz eζ z Iij e−υijz , where Iij is the vector of dummy
variables defined in section 2, and υ ijz is a random disturbance to bilateral trade costs. Substituting
τ ijz for this expression in (5) and taking logarithms, we obtain

                                             ez η z ln Distij + σ
                 ln importsijz = ϕiz + ψjz − σ                  ez ζ z Iij + σ
                                                                             ez γ jz ln θiz + σ
                                                                                              ez υijz                                   (8)

                                                                              ez = σ z − 1 re-scales
where ϕiz and ψ jz are, respectively, exporter and importer fixed eﬀects, and σ
the elasticity of substitution for notational convenience.
       The exporter fixed eﬀect ϕiz controls for all determinants of country i’s exports that are common
across importers. In particular, it captures the impact of export price (piz ) and number of varieties
(Niz ) on this country’s exports to any other country. The export price piz might reflect movements
in the real exchange rate, but it primarily reflects (between-sector) comparative advantage in sector
z, i.e. the ability of a country to produce goods at low cost, conditional on their quality.14 The
  13
       This prediction is also implied by standard Dixit-Stiglitz preferences. To see this, define e
                                                                                                   θiz = θiz γ z as a preference
parameter for goods from country i, which is common across importers.
  14
     It is worth distinguishing here the notions of within-sector and between-sector comparative advantage. Within


                                                                     11
number of varieties Niz primarily reflects exporter size, but it also reflects comparative advantage
in the sector, as sectors with lower export prices attract more resources relative to the size of
the economy [Romalis (2004), Bernard, Redding and Schott (2005)]. The importer fixed eﬀect
ψ jz controls for all determinants of country j’s imports that are common across exporters. In
particular, it captures the impact of country j’s price index (Gjz ) and sectoral expenditure (Ejz )
on its imports from any other country. The importer price index Gjz captures inbound trade costs
between importer j and every exporter, as well as comparative advantage. For example, a low
price pjz is given a disproportionate weight in Gjz , as domestic varieties do not pay trade costs.
Sector expenditure Ejz , in turn, is primarily driven by size but can also capture diﬀerences in sector
expenditure shares across countries. In sum, the exporter and importer fixed eﬀects in equation
(8) control for determinants of trade that operate at the sector level. Those controls are crucial for
identifying the Linder eﬀect.
    The systematic relationship between per-capita income and demand for quality predicted by the
theory can be formalized in this framework by postulating γ jz as a function of importer per-capita
income,
                                               γ jz = γ z + μz ln yj .                                             (9)

Equation (9) does not impose any parameter restriction on μz . For example, it allows for a bench-
mark case in which there are no cross-country diﬀerences in demand for quality (μz = 0). in which
case the distribution of import shares is common across importers — up to diﬀerences due to trade
costs. However, the demand side of Linder’s theory asserts that rich countries consume higher
sectors, countries have conventional comparative advantage in either low quality or high quality varieties. Either case
is compatible with a between-sector comparative advantage or disadvantage in the sector as a whole. The country
will have a between-sector comparative advantage if the cost of the goods it produces, relative to their quality, is
suﬃciently low to make it a net exporter in the sector. This will happen when a majority of world consumers find
the price/quality relation oﬀered by the country more appealing than the price/quality relation oﬀered by other
countries. For example, high income countries can be expected to have a within-sector comparative advantage in
high quality apparel. However, the price-quality relation of their high quality varieties is presumably less appealing,
for a majority of world consumers, than the price-quality relation of the low quality varieties oﬀered by low income
countries. The former are therefore net importers and the latter are net exporters in this sector. In Machinery,
the same pattern of within-sector comparative advantage is consistent with the opposite pattern of between-sector
comparative advantage, making high income countries net exporters and low income countries net importers.




                                                          12
quality goods. This prediction implies that μz > 0.15
       Combining equations (8) and (9) we obtain

                                           ez η z ln Distij + σ
              ln importsijz = ϕiz + ψ jz − σ                  ez ζ z Iij + σ
                                                                           ez μz ln θiz ln yj + σ
                                                                                                ez υ ijz .       (10)

Since product quality (θiz ) is not observable, equation (10) cannot be estimated as such. Hallak
(2006) uses export unit values as indicators of product quality, which implies focusing only on the
demand side of Linder’s theory. However, since the Linder hypothesis is based on the interaction
of demand and supply forces, a formal characterization of Linder’s theory requires relating quality
supply to income per capita.


3.2       Supply of quality

Linder argued that high income countries have a comparative advantage in the production of high
quality goods. Several theories can explain a systematic relationship between per-capita income
and quality production. For example, a Ricardian view of quality specialization predicts that richer
countries will export high quality goods if their productivity advantage in those goods is relatively
larger. Alternatively, a Heckscher-Ohlin view of quality specialization predicts that rich countries —
which tend to be capital abundant — will export high quality goods if those goods are capital inten-
sive. Linder, in turn, proposed the idea that closeness to demand for high quality products, which
occurs disproportionately in high income countries, provides them with a comparative advantage in
the production of those goods. Finally, Vernon’s (1966) product cycle theory16 can also explain high
income countries’ comparative advantage in high quality production if most innovations consist of
quality upgrading of old varieties.17 The Linder hypothesis’ prediction on the direction of trade can
hold under any of these theories about the supply-side determinants of quality production. Their
  15
       Aggregate consumption of high quality goods should also depend on the distribution of income (see Choi et al.
for recent empirical evidence). The connection between income distribution and the Linder hypothesis is explored
empirically by Francois and Kaplan (1996) and by Dalgin et al. (2005) which, however, do not address the role of
product quality.
  16
     See also Flam and Helpman (1987), Stokey (1991) and Antràs (2005).
  17
     The relationship between quality and income per capita could also be founded on subjective grounds. Evidence
from the marketing literature finds that consumers take the origin country’s development level as an extrinsic cue of
product quality when quality is imperfectly observable. For a review of this literature, see Bilkey and Nes (1982) and
Verlegh and Steenkamp (1999).


                                                          13
common implications are captured here by simply postulating a systematic relationship between
quality supply and per-capita income,

                                               ln θiz = ϑz + δ z ln yi + ς iz                               (11)

where ς iz is a stochastic disturbance. The supply side of Linder’s theory predicts that δ z > 0.


3.3       Demand and supply interaction: The sectoral Linder hypothesis

Substituting equation (11) into (10), we obtain:

                   ln importsijz = ϕiz + ψ jz − β Dz ln Distij + β Iz Iij + β yz ln yi ln yj + εijz         (12)

             ez ηz , β Iz = σ
where β Dz = σ              ez ζ z , β yz = σ
                                            ez μz δ z , and εijz = σ            ez vijz .18 The disturbances ς iz
                                                                   ez μz ς iz + σ
and vijz are assumed to be uncorrelated with the regressors; therefore, so is εijz .
       The parameter of interest is the coeﬃcient on the term interacting the trading partners’ per-
                       ez μz δ z . Since σ
capita incomes, β yz = σ                 ez > 0, the sign of β yz corresponds to the sign of μz δ z .
Linder’s theory postulates that richer countries consume higher quality goods (μz > 0) and also
produce higher quality goods (δ z > 0). The interaction of these forces then implies that β yz > 0.
This prediction is in fact equivalent to the prediction of the Linder hypothesis, as typically specified
in empirical exercises. The equivalence is easy to show; basic algebraic manipulation of the term
Linderijz = (ln yi − ln yj )2 yields

                                              1            1           1
                              ln yi ln yj =     (ln yi )2 + (ln yj )2 − (ln yi − ln yj )2 .                 (13)
                                              2            2           2

This expression, substituted back into equation (12), results in

               ln importsijz = ϕiz + ψ jz − β Dz ln Distij + β Iz Iij + β Lz (ln yi − ln yj )2 + εijz       (14)

where the exporter and importer fixed eﬀects absorb, respectively, the first two terms of (13), and
β Lz = − (1/2) β yz . The last equality implies the equivalence between the prediction that β yz > 0
in equation (12) and the prediction that β Lz < 0 in equation (14).
       These results demonstrate that the Linder hypothesis can be derived from a theoretical frame-
work that captures the supply and demand forces originally described by Linder. They also show
  18
       The importer fixed eﬀects absorb the interaction of the constant ϑz with ln yj .


                                                            14
that a gravity-equation specification, augmented with a Linder term, is appropriate for testing the
role of quality described by the theory when it is formulated at the sector level. I henceforth refer
to such formulation as the “sectoral Linder hypothesis”.


4     The “sectoral” Linder hypothesis: Empirical results

4.1   Data

Estimating equation (14) requires bilateral trade flows at the sector level, which I obtain from the
World Trade Flows data set (Feenstra 2000). This dataset breaks down trade flows up to the 4-
digit SITC (Rev.2) level of aggregation. However, I define sectors at the 3-digit SITC level because
information at the 4-digit level is often missing.
    I follow Rauch’s (1999) classification of sectors into three categories. Homogeneous sectors
include goods that are internationally traded in organized exchanges, with a well-defined price
(e.g., wheat). Reference-priced sectors include goods that are not traded in organized exchanges,
but have reference prices available in specialized publications (e.g., polyethylene). Diﬀerentiated
sectors are those that do not satisfy either of the two previous criteria. I use Rauch’s “liberal”
classification because it is more stringent in the classification of goods as Diﬀerentiated. When a
3-digit sector includes 4-digit subsectors that belong to diﬀerent categories, the 3-digit sector is
broken down accordingly, each part including only the relevant 4-digit sectors.
    The criterion for selecting the countries in the sample attempts to balance two considerations.
On the one hand, including more countries increases sample size and estimation precision. On the
other hand, concentrating on relatively large countries decreases the proportion of bilateral country
pairs with zero trade at the sector level, which prevents zero-trade observations from dominating
the sample. The sample includes 64 countries, all of those with a population larger than 3 million,
and with more than 2 billion-dollar imports of Diﬀerentiated goods. I also drop very small sectors,
keeping only sectors with a volume of trade (among the 64 selected countries) above 2 billion
dollars. The final sample includes 116 Diﬀerentiated sectors, 56 Reference-priced sectors, and 39
Homogeneous sectors. They are listed in Table A2.
    The variable distance measures great circle distance between capital cities and comes from
Shatz (1997). Dummies for border, common language, colonizer-colony relationship, and common-


                                                     15
colonizer relationship were constructed using the CIA Factbook. Only “oﬃcial” languages are taken
into account in the construction of the common language variable, except for Malaysia-Singapore,
which is coded here as sharing a common language. Colonial links are only considered if the
colonizer-colony relationship was still in force after 1922. The indicator variable for Preferential
Trade Agreement includes PTAs in force and with substantial coverage in 1995: Andean Pact,
ASEAN, CACM, EFTA, EEA, EU, MERCOSUR, NAFTA, Australia-New Zealand, EC-Turkey,
EFTA-Turkey, EC-Israel, EFTA-Israel, and US-Israel. Data on PPP GDP come from the World
Bank WDI.


4.2   Estimation issues

Equation (14) predicts bilateral trade at the sector level. Aggregation implicitly forces the parame-
ters of this equation to be equal across sectors, which in particular precludes the use of sector-specific
exporter and importer fixed eﬀects that control for inter-sectoral determinants of trade. I thus es-
timate equation (14) by sector. I also estimate pooling the observations across sectors but allowing
for cross-sector variation in all the parameters and fixed eﬀects except for the “Linder” coeﬃcient
(β Lz = β L ). While in the first case the estimation yields sector-by-sector estimates of the parameter
of interest, in the second case the estimation yields a single estimate of this parameter.
   I focus on Diﬀerentiated goods because those are the goods for which the assumptions of the
theory most clearly apply. Equation (14) can also be estimated using intermediate-good sectors if
we interpret equation (2) as a production function of a final good. The interpretation of the sectoral
Linder hypothesis in that case is that richer countries consume a larger proportion of high-quality
intermediate inputs, presumably as a requirement to produce high-quality final goods.
   Estimation of gravity-type equations using OLS are known to suﬀer from a potential selection
bias, as the OLS procedure drops bilateral pairs with zero trade. To deal with this problem, I use a
generalized Tobit estimation with random and unobserved censoring value. The estimation strategy
is based on the idea that zero-values of trade are due to the presence of fixed costs of exporting. The
magnitude of fixed costs is unobservable but can be modeled as a function of observable variables.
In particular, I postulate a censoring equation of the following form:

                  ln cijz = δ 0z + δ dz ln Distij + δ Iz Iij + δ xz ln Yi + δ mz ln Yj + uijz        (15)

where the (unobserved) censoring value is determined by the level of trade that generates suﬃcient

                                                      16
profits to cover the fixed costs, Fijz . Given the constant elasticity of demand, the censoring value is
proportional to those costs (cijz = σ z Fijz ). The vector Iij includes the same dummy variables as in
(14), and uijz is a normally distributed random disturbance. Joint estimation of the parameters of
equations (14) and (15), respectively the “Imports equation” and the “Fixed-cost equation”, can be
performed using maximum likelihood (ML) estimation under the assumption that the distribution
of the two errors is bivariate normal. This estimation strategy is explained in more detail in Hallak
(2006).19


4.3       Estimation results

Equation (14) is first estimated by OLS separately for each of the 116 Diﬀerentiated sectors. Panel
A of Table 4 provides a summary report of the estimated coeﬃcients, by sign (columns 1 and 2)
and by significance level (columns 3 to 5). Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity in all
cases. The results support the empirical validity of the “sectoral Linder hypothesis”. The estimated
coeﬃcient on the Linder term is negative, as predicted, in more than 2/3 of the sectors (82), while
it is positive in less than 1/3 of the sectors (34). The coeﬃcient is negative and significant at the 5%
level in approximately one half of the sectors (59) and it is positive and significant in less than 1/5
of the sectors (21). The variables that control for trade costs aﬀect trade volumes in the predicted
direction; shorter distance promotes trade, as does sharing a common border, common language,
PTA, colonial relationship, or common colonizer. Column 6 shows the median magnitude of the
estimated coeﬃcients. The median has the predicted sign for all variables.
       The last column of the table reports the parameter estimate and standard error for the coeﬃcient
on the Linder term when all the observations are pooled (but not aggregated) across sectors and
the coeﬃcient is constrained to be the same across sectors.20 The magnitude of the estimated
coeﬃcient is substantially smaller than the median value of the sectoral estimates.21 Nevertheless,
the eﬀect of the Linder term is still negative and it is significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 1%
level.
  19
       Two more recent methodologies for dealing with zero-trade observations are proposed by Silva and Tenreyro
(2005) and by Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2005).
  20
     The coeﬃcients on all other variables are not constrained to be equal across sectors. Summary measures of those
estimates are not reported to save space.
  21
     All reported standard errors in pooled regressions are calculated allowing for clustering by country pair.



                                                          17
                   h                    i
       The term exp βb (ln yi − ln yj )2 provides a measure of the impact of the Linder eﬀect on
                      Lz

the volume of bilateral trade. We can calculate the magnitude of this eﬀect using the estimate
b = −0.0435 obtained in the pooled regression. For example, as a consequence of income per-
β Lz

capita similarity, the U.S. is predicted to import from Switzerland 10% more than it imports from
Colombia, 20% more than it imports from the Philippines, 40% more than it imports from Pakistan,
and 70% more than it imports from Nigeria.
       Panel B of Table 4 provides the results of the censoring model using ML estimation.22 The
censoring model yields qualitatively similar results, even though there is now a smaller number of
sectors with negative and with negative and significant estimates of the Linder term. The median
coeﬃcient on this term is also substantially smaller (in absolute value), and is close in magnitude to
the pooled-sample OLS estimate. The estimates for the other controls in the Imports Equation have
the expected sign in most sectors. They also have the expected sign in the Fixed Cost Equation,
except for common border and importer GDP, which are estimated to have a positive eﬀect on the
fixed costs of exporting.
       Even though the theoretical framework of this paper suggests the use of a particular Linder
term, alternative Linder terms can be used to assess the robustness of the results. Table 5 shows
the results from estimating (14) with diﬀerent Linder terms.23 As was the case with the aggregate
data, the results are not very sensitive to the choice of Linder term. Regardless of which one is
used, the estimates support the sectoral Linder hypothesis: controlling for sectoral determinants of
trade, countries with similar income per capita tend to trade more with one another.
       The fact that estimated coeﬃcients are positive and significant in a number of sectors (21 and 27
sectors when OLS and the censoring model are respectively used to estimate) raises the concern that
forces correlated with the interaction of the country pair’s per-capita incomes, but other than those
highlighted by Linder’s theory, might have a substantial influence on the results. This concern can
be addressed by testing the sectoral Linder hypothesis using Reference-priced and Homogeneous
sectors. Since the assumptions of the theory match the characteristics of those sectors in varying
degrees, the results can be used to assess whether it is the Linder mechanism that drives the results
for Diﬀerentiated goods.
  22
       Estimating the censoring model on the pooled data is unfeasible due to the dimentionality of the computational
problem. The pooled ML estimation requires over 10,000 sector-specific exporter and importer fixed eﬀects.
  23
     To conserve space, all subsequent tables only report results on the Linder term.


                                                          18
   The sectoral Linder hypothesis is derived under the joint assumption that both quality supply
and quality demand are systematically related to income per capita. On the supply side, despite
the fact that quality diﬀerences often exist even among goods that are not classified as Diﬀeren-
tiated, such diﬀerences are likely to be smaller for Reference-priced sectors and yet even smaller
for Homogeneous sectors. Further, even if quality diﬀerences exist in those sectors, quality supply
is less likely to be correlated with income per capita, mostly so in the case of Homogeneous sec-
tors. It is reasonable to think, for example, that among manufactured goods (typically classified
as Diﬀerentiated or Reference-priced) specialization of a country in the high quality end results
from a high proportion of (human or physical) capital to labor. High income countries, which are
usually abundant in capital, then produce high-quality capital-intensive manufactures. In contrast,
among agricultural and mineral commodities (typically classified as Homogeneous), high quality
production often results from a country’s abundance of high quality natural resources, which is
not necessarily related to the country’s per-capita income. This suggests that the supply-side
assumptions of the sectoral Linder hypothesis should weaken as we move from Diﬀerentiated to
Reference-priced goods, and should weaken considerably more as we move from the latter goods to
Homogeneous goods.
   On the demand side, horizontal diﬀerentiation — as assumed in the theory — is a more appropriate
characterization of Diﬀerentiated sectors than it is of Homogeneous sectors. To the extent that
quality diﬀerences exist in the latter sectors, richer countries might still consume relatively more
high quality products, and thus import relatively more from the countries that produce them.
However, as there is no justification for a “love for variety” assumption in this case, they will
be expected to import, among countries producing high quality, only from those with the lowest
price (net of trade costs). Therefore, the bilateral predictions of equation (14) will only capture an
average eﬀect.
   The combination of a weak relationship between per-capita income and quality supply and a
weak relationship between per-capita income and quality demand implies that the theoretical results
of the paper should not apply to Homogeneous sectors. In the case of Reference-priced sectors,
it is not a priori obvious whether the supply and demand relationships predicted by the theory
are suﬃciently strong to induce bilateral patterns of trade consistent with the Linder hypothesis,
leaving its validity as an open empirical question.


                                                 19
    Table 6 compares the distribution of coeﬃcient estimates for the baseline Linder term between
the three groups of sectors (results for Diﬀerentiated goods reproduce those previously reported).
Even though the theoretical prediction is ambiguous for Referenced-priced sectors, the results for
those sectors are still consistent with the predictions of the sectoral Linder hypothesis. When OLS
is used to estimate, the coeﬃcient is negative in 4/5 of the sectors (43 out of 56) and is negative
and significant in more than 1/3 of the sectors (21). When the censoring model is used to estimate,
the coeﬃcient is negative in 2/3 of the sectors (37) and is negative and significant in less than
half of the sectors (24). Compared to the results for Diﬀerentiated sectors, a larger proportion
of Reference-priced sectors display no significant Linder eﬀect. The discrepancy between the OLS
and ML results is not substantial here; for example, the median estimate is very similar in both
cases. Finally, the estimation using the pooled sample yields a negative and significant coeﬃcient
estimate, close in magnitude to the estimate for Diﬀerentiated goods.
    The results are radically diﬀerent in the case of Homogeneous goods. The table shows that
the estimated coeﬃcient is more often positive than negative, more often positive and significant
than negative and significant, and not significant for most sectors. In addition, both the median
coeﬃcient and the pooled coeﬃcient are positive (in the latter case, significant at the 10% level).
The failure to find Linder eﬀects for Homogeneous sectors is consistent with the fact that the
characteristics of those sectors violate the assumptions of the theory. Therefore, these results
provide evidence that it is the interaction of supply and demand for quality stressed by the theory
that drives the estimates of the Linder eﬀect for the other categories of goods and not other
unobserved factors related to per-capita income. The estimates are consistent with the Linder
hypothesis only in those categories in which we expect quality supply and quality demand to be
correlated with income per capita.


5    Aggregation Bias

This section shows that standard estimates of the Linder hypothesis, which use the gravity-equation
framework at the aggregate level, suﬀer from a systematic bias. The bias explains the literature’s
failure to find empirical support for the hypothesis. The first part of the section estimates equation
(14) at diﬀerent levels of aggregation and shows that the estimated Linder coeﬃcient increases with



                                                 20
the aggregation level. The increase is suﬃciently strong to reverse the sign of the coeﬃcient at high
levels of aggregation. The second part of the section shows that failure to control for inter-sectoral
determinants of trade at aggregate levels generates a bias that can account for the reversal of the
estimated Linder eﬀect. The third part provides further evidence on the nature of the bias by
comparing estimation results at diﬀerent levels of aggregation in Diﬀerentiated, Reference-priced,
and Homogeneous sectors.


5.1    Empirical evidence on the aggregation bias

Table 7 displays the results of estimating the Linder hypothesis using Diﬀerentiated sectors defined
alternatively at the 3-digit level (116 sectors), 2-digit level (36 sectors), and 1-digit level (6 sectors).
The table also reports estimates of the Linder hypothesis using aggregate trade flows for all Diﬀer-
entiated sectors. When trade flows are aggregated at the 2-digit level, the results are very similar
to those obtained at the 3-digit level (reproduced in the first row), both in terms of magnitude
and distribution of estimates across significance levels. However, when trade flows are aggregated
at the 1-digit level, the results no longer support the Linder hypothesis. In particular, both the
median of the sectoral estimates and the estimate of the pooled regression reverse signs, which
are now estimated to be positive. Finally, when all trade in Diﬀerentiated sectors is aggregated
into only one sector, the reversal of the estimated Linder eﬀect is even starker. In that case, the
Linder coeﬃcient is positive and significant at the 1% level. The ML estimates in panel B show
a similar pattern: the coeﬃcient on the Linder term becomes more positive as we aggregate, with
the sign reversing (significantly at the 1% level) when the estimation is performed aggregating all
Diﬀerentiated sectors into one category.


5.2    The nature of the bias

To describe the bias, we will focus on the double ratio rii0 jj 0 z defined in equation (6) (countries i
and i0 are exporters and countries j and j 0 are importers). This double ratio can be obtained by
double-diﬀerencing the estimating equation (14):

         ln rii0 jj 0 z = ln importsijz − ln importsi0 jz − ln importsij 0 z + ln importsi0 j 0 z                      (16)
                                                                                      ¡               ¢
                        = β Dz deii0 jj 0 + β Iz Ieii0 jj 0 + −2β Lz (ln yi − ln yi0 ) ln yj − ln yj 0 + e
                                                                                                         εii0 jj 0 z


                                                             21
where deii0 jj 0 = ln distij − ln disti0 j − ln distij 0 + ln disti0 j 0 , Ieii0 jj 0 = Iij − Ii0 j − Iij 0 + Ii0 j 0 , and
e
εii0 jj 0 z = εijz − εi0 jz − εij 0 z + εi0 j 0 z . Equation (16) is isomorphic to the baseline specification (14)
with respect to β Lz . Therefore, we will use this equation to describe the nature of the bias since it
allows for a simpler exposition.
     Consider two sectors: z = 1, 2. To describe the aggregation bias more transparently, we focus
on a case in which the Linder eﬀect is identical across sectors (β L1 = β L2 = β L ) and the eﬀect
of trade costs cancels out in the double diﬀerence (deii0 jj 0 = Ieii0 jj 0 = 0). Averaging equation (16)
across the two sectors, we obtain

     1¡                                   ¢                                 ¡              ¢ 1¡                              ¢
           ln rii0 jj 0 1 + ln rii0 jj 0 2 = −2β L (ln yi − ln yi0 ) ln yj − ln yj 0 +              e
                                                                                                    εii0 jj 0 1 + e
                                                                                                                  εii0 jj 0 2 .          (17)
     2                                                                                           2
                         √                                                     ¡               ¢                         ¡                           ¢
                                                                                                      εii0 jj 0 A = 12 e
Define rii∗ 0 jj 0 A = rii0 jj 0 1 rii0 jj 0 2 , yeii0 jj 0 = (ln yi − ln yi0 ) ln yj − ln yj 0 , and e                     εii0 jj 0 1 + e
                                                                                                                                          εii0 jj 0 2 .
Then, equation (17) can be written as

                                                ln rii∗ 0 jj 0 A = −2β L yeii0 jj 0 + e
                                                                                      εii0 jj 0 A .                                       (18)

If the OLS estimator of β L in the baseline specification (14) is consistent, then so is the OLS
estimator of β L in (18). Without loss of generality, assume that yi > yi0 and yj > yj 0 . Then,
the term yeii0 jj 0 is larger the larger are per-capita income diﬀerences between countries i and i0
and countries j and j 0 . The ratios rii0 jj 0 1 and rii0 jj 0 2 are later interpreted as odds ratios. By
construction, the “aggregate” odds ratio rii∗ 0 jj 0 A is bounded between the sector-level odds ratios
rii0 jj 0 1 and rii0 jj 0 2 .
     Standard tests of the Linder hypothesis — as described and performed in section 2 — estimate
equation (14) aggregating trade flows across sectors. Double-diﬀerencing that equation as is done
above, we can interpret such estimates as the result of regressing (18) using a wrongly constructed
dependent variable. In that case, the dependent variable is ln rii0 jj 0 A , where

                  ln rii0 jj 0 A = ln importsijA − ln importsi0 jA − ln importsij 0 A + ln importsi0 j 0 A

and subindex A indicates that trade flows are summed across sectors. Defining uii0 jj 0 A = ln rii0 jj 0 A −
ln rii∗ 0 jj 0 A and substituting for ln rii∗ 0 jj 0 A in (18), the standard specification for testing the Linder
hypothesis can be expressed as

                                         ln rii0 jj 0 A = −2β L yeii0 jj 0 + e
                                                                             εii0 jj 0 A + uii0 jj 0 A .                                  (19)

                                                                       22
Under conditions described below, uii0 jj 0 A < 0, i.e. the aggregate odds ratio rii0 jj 0 A is systematically
lower than rii∗ 0 jj 0 A . Furthermore, uii0 jj 0 A is negatively correlated with yeii0 jj 0 , inducing an upward
bias in the Linder coeﬃcient β L . The form in which aggregation induces this systematic bias is
illustrated next with a simple example. The Appendix demonstrates it in a more general setting.
    Consider trade flows between two exporters, the U.S. and China, and two importers, Switzerland
and South Africa, in two diﬀerent 2-digit sectors, Industrial Machinery (SITC 72: Machinery
Specialized for Particular Industries) and Apparel (SITC 84: Articles of Apparel and Clothing
Accesories). Since U.S. per-capita income is higher than China’s and Switzerland per-capita income
is higher than South Africa’s, U.S. quality is presumably higher in both sectors, as is Switzerland’s
intensity of preference for quality.
    Reported trade flows between exporters U.S. (i) and China (i0 ) and importers Switzerland (j)
and South Africa (j 0 ) in each of the two sectors (in 1995) are displayed in the first set of rows of
Table 8. The three vertical panels of this table can be thought of as frequency tables between an
exporter variable I = i, i0 and an importer variable J = j, j 0 . The second set of rows reports
exporter shares in import markets, where entry ij is the probability that $1 of j’s imports comes
from i. The last row reports the double ratio, which in this context is an odds ratio. The odds
ratio is higher than one in both sectors — 1.44 in Machinery and 3.32 in Apparel — indicating that
Switzerland is more likely to import from the U.S. than is South Africa, as predicted by the theory.
However, the last set of columns shows that, when we aggregate trade flows across the two sectors,
the odds ratio is 0.29. In contrast to rii∗ 0 jj 0 A , which is inside the bounds defined by the sectoral
odds ratios, rii0 jj 0 A is not only outside those bounds but is also below 1, indicating a reversal in the
direction of association between the exporter and importer variables. In the aggregate, Switzerland
is less likely to import from the U.S. than is South Africa. This result is a typical example of
Simpson’s Paradox, a well-known case of association reversal due to aggregation [Simpson (1951),
Samuels (1993)]. In this case, the paradox is driven by the fact that Switzerland (S. Africa) and
the U.S. (China), the countries with similar income per capita, also have similar sectoral trade
patterns. Therefore, Switzerland imports relatively more from China in the aggregate because it is
a relatively large importer in the sector in which China is a large exporter (Apparel). The Appendix
shows formally that the rii0 jj 0 A < rii∗ 0 jj 0 A aggregation bias occurs whenever countries’ patterns of
inter-sectoral trade are related to per-capita income. It also shows that the bias increases with


                                                       23
the strength of those patterns. As a result, uii0 jj 0 A is positively correlated with yeii0 jj 0 , inducing
                  bL obtained from estimating (19). This bias can explain the failure to find
an upward bias in β
consistent support for the (aggregate) Linder hypothesis.
       Empirical estimates at the 3-digit level and at the 2-digit level are very similar — as shown in
Table 7 — because determinants of trade patterns across sectors are often similar for 3-digit sectors
in the same 2-digit category. For example, countries that are net exporters of Apparel (SITC 84)
are often net exporters of both Outer Garments, Mens, of Textile Fabrics (SITC 842) and of Outer
Garments, Womens, of Textile Fabrics (SITC 843). When we aggregate at the 2-digit level, we
are unable to control for determinants of trade at the 3-digit level, as only exporter and importer
fixed eﬀects at the 2-digit level can be included in the estimation. Despite this limitation, the
similarity of trade determinants among 3-digit sectors in the same 2-digit category implies that
fixed eﬀects at the 2-digit level can still reasonably control for trade determinants at the 3-digit
level, without inducing substantial bias.24 This is not the case when we aggregate at higher levels,
as determinants of trade can be drastically diﬀerent across 2-digit sectors. In particular, when we
aggregate all trade in Diﬀerentiated goods, the exporter and importer fixed eﬀects that we include
at such a high level of aggregation are unable to control for the wide heterogeneity in patterns of
sectoral trade across the 2-digit sectors included in the aggregate.


5.3       The aggregation bias across diﬀerent types of goods

A condition for the existence of systematic aggregation bias is that sectoral trade patterns are
systematically related to countries’ per-capita income. This is often the case in Diﬀerentiated sec-
tors. For example, high income countries tend to be net exporters of Machinery and net importers
of Apparel while low income countries tend to be net exporters of Apparel and net importers of
Machinery).25 The reversal of the estimated Linder coeﬃcient when we aggregate Diﬀerentiated
sectors suggests that inter-sectoral determinants of trade prevail over the intra-sectoral forces em-
phasized by Linder. As a result, aggregate trade flows in Diﬀerentiated products are more intensive
  24
       A similar argument addresses concerns related to the fact that even trade flows at the 3-digit level aggregate
more narrowly defined subsectors.
 25
    A possible explanation for this pattern is that comparative advantage in those sectors might stem from the relative
abundance of accumulable factors (e.g. physical and human capital), which is observed to be strongly correlated with
countries’ per-capita income.



                                                          24
between countries of dissimilar income per capita.
    The systematic relationship between per-capita income and sectoral trade patterns is probably
less pronounced for Reference-priced sectors. In those sectors, patterns of trade are sometimes
related to the availability of natural resources (e.g. countries with abundant forests tend to be net
exporters of paper products), in which case the correlation of these patterns with per-capita income
are not as strong. Therefore, a weaker aggregation bias should be expected for those goods. This
prediction is consistent with the results displayed in Table 9; even though there is a substantial
aggregation bias, the Linder coeﬃcient in this case is not significantly diﬀerent from zero. In the
case of Homogeneous sectors, aggregation induces a reversal of the estimated coeﬃcient but in the
opposite direction. However, this reversal is diﬃcult to interpret in light of the fact that, as argued
before, even the regressions at the sector level are not properly specified for Homogeneous goods.
    Before concluding, it is interesting to note that Linder explicitly made the point that the
connection between income and quality demand should operate within sectors instead of across
sectors, even though he later used aggregate trade information to provide preliminary evidence in
support of his theory. In particular, he argued that (Linder 1961, p. 95): “Qualitative product
diﬀerences are not well brought out in empirical studies of consumer behavior along the lines first
followed by Engel. The qualitative factor is submerged by taking broad groups of goods such as
“food” or “clothing”.” His own work and the work of subsequent empirical researchers did not
follow this early lead.


6    Conclusions

Despite the persistent appeal of the Linder hypothesis, a large body of empirical work testing its
validity has failed to find consistent support for it. This failure is the result of the unanimous use of
a misspecified empirical benchmark, the gravity equation estimated using aggregate data. Building
a theoretical framework that captures the main aspects of Linder’s theory, this paper shows that
the Linder hypothesis should be formulated at the sector level, where inter-sectoral determinants of
trade can be controlled for. The “sectoral Linder hypothesis” is tested and confirmed empirically.
Further, it is shown that aggregation across sectors induces a systematic bias against finding support
for the Linder eﬀect.



                                                   25
References

 [1] Anderson, J. and E. Van Wincoop (2003), “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
    Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 93, 170-192.

 [2] Antràs, P. (2005), “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle,” American Economic Review,
    95 (3), 1054-1073.

 [3] Bergstrand, J. (1989), “The Generalized Gravity Equation, Monopolistic Competition, and the
    Factor-Proportions Theory of International Trade,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
    71 (1), 143-153.

 [4] Bernard, A., S. Redding and P. Schott (2005), “Heterogenous Firms and Comparative Advan-
    tage,” mimeo.

 [5] Bilkey, W. and E. Nes (1982), “Country-Of-Origin Eﬀects on Product Evaluations,” Journal
    of International Business Studies, Spring/Summer, 89-100.

 [6] Bils, M. and P. Klenow (2001), “Quantifying Quality Growth,” American Economic Review,
    91, 1006-1030.

 [7] Brooks, E. (2005), “Why Don’t Firms Export More? Product Quality and Colombian Plants,”
    Forthcoming Journal of Development Economics.

 [8] Chen, M., T. Otsuki, and J. Wilson (2006), “Do Standards Matter for Export Success?” World
    Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3809.

 [9] Choi, Y., D. Hummels, and C. Xiang (2006), “Explaining Import Variety and Quality: the
    Role of Income Distribution, Purdue University, mimeo.

[10] Dalgin, M., Mitra, D., and V. Trindade (2005), “Inequality, Nonhomothetic Preferences, and
    Trade: A Gravity Approach,” mimeo.

[11] Deardorﬀ, A. (1984), “Testing Trade Theories and Predicting Trade Flows,” in R.W.Jones and
    P.B.Kenen, ed., Handbook of International Economics, Vol.1, (Amsterdam, Elsevier).




                                              26
[12] Deardorﬀ, A. (1998), “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical
    World?,” in J. Frankel, ed., The Regionalization of the World Economy, (Chicago, Chicago
    University Press).

[13] Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002), “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70,
    1741-1779.

[14] Falvey, R. and H. Kierzkowski (1987), “Product Quality, Intra-industry Trade and (Im)perfect
    Competition,” in H. Kierzkowski, ed., Protection and Competition in International Trade,
    (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).

[15] Feenstra, R. (2000), “World Trade Flows, 1980-1997,” Center for International Data, Institute
    of Governmental Aﬀairs, UC Davis.

[16] Flam, H., and E. Helpman (1987), “Vertical Product Diﬀerentiation and North-South Trade,”
    American Economic Review, 77 (5), 810-822.

[17] Francois, J. and S. Kaplan (1996), “Aggregate Demand Shifts, Income Distribution, and the
    Linder Hypothesis,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 244-250.

[18] Hallak, J. (2006), “Product Quality and the Direction of Trade,” Journal of International
    Economics, 68(1), 238-265.

[19] Helpman, H., Melitz, M., Rubinstein, Y., (2005), “Trading Partners and Trading Volumes,”
    mimeo.

[20] Hummels, D. and P. Klenow (2005), “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 95: 704-723.

[21] Hunter, L. (1991), “The Contribution of Non-homothetic Preferences to Trade,” Journal of
    International Economics, 30, 345-358.

[22] Hunter, L. and J. Markusen (1988), “Per-Capita Income as a Determinant of Trade, in R.
    Feenstra, ed., Empirical Methods for International Trade, (Cambridge, MA, MIT Press).




                                               27
[23] Leamer, E. and J. Levinsohn (1995), “International Trade Theory: The Evidence,” in G.
    Grossman and K. Rogoﬀ, ed., Handbook of International Economics, Vol.3, (Amsterdam, El-
    sevier).

[24] Linder (1961), S., An Essay on Trade and Transformation, (Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell).

[25] Markusen, J. (1986), “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach,” American
    Economic Review, 76 (5), 1002-1011.

[26] Maskus, K. (2005), “The Cost of Compliance with Product Standards for Firms in Developing
    Countries: An Econometric Study,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3590.

[27] Matsuyama, K. (2000), “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under Nonhomothetic
    Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and North-South Trade, Jour-
    nal of Political Economy, 108 (6), 1093-1120.

[28] McPherson, M., M. Redfearn, and M. Tieslau (2001), “International Trade and Developing
    Countries: An Empirical Investigation of the Linder Hypothesis,” Applied Economics, 33,
    649-657.

[29] Murphy, K.M. and A. Shleifer (1997), “Quality and Trade,” Journal of Development Eco-
    nomics, 53, 1-15.

[30] Rauch, J. (1999), “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International
    Economics, 48, 7-35.

[31] Romalis, J. (2004), “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade”, American
    Economic Review, 94, 67-97.

[32] Samuels, M. (1993), “Simpson’s Paradox and Related Phenomena,” Journal of the American
    Statistical Association, 88, 81-88.

[33] Santos Silva, J. and S. Tenreyro (2005), “The Log of Gravity,” Forthcoming The Review of
    Economics and Statistics.

[34] Schott, P. (2004), “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International
    Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2), 647-678.

                                               28
[35] Shatz, H. (1997), “Note on Distance Data”, mimeo.

[36] Simpson, E. (1951), “The Interpretation of Interaction in Contingency Tables,” Journal of the
    Royal Statistical Society Series B, 13, 238-241.

[37] Stokey, N. (1991), “The Volume and Composition of Trade between Rich and Poor Countries.”
    Review of Economic Studies, 58, 63-80.

[38] Thursby, J. and M. Thursby (1987), “Bilateral Trade Flows, The Linder Hypothesis, and
    Exchange Risk,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 69 (3), 488-495.

[39] Verhoogen, E. (2004), “Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Man-
    ufacturing Sector: Theory and Evidence from an Exchange Rate Shock,” mimeo.

[40] Verlegh, P. and J-B. Steenkamp, “A Review and Meta-Analysis of Country-Of-Origin Re-
    search,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 20, 521-546.

[41] Vernon, R. (1966), “International Investment and International Trade in the Product Cycle,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80 (2), 190-207.

[42] World Bank (1999), World Development Report: Knowledge for Development, (Oxford Uni-
    versity Press: Oxford).

[43] World Trade Organization (2005), World Trade Report 2005: Exploring the Links Between
    Trade, Standards, and the WTO.




                                                29
A     Appendix

This appendix derives necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the existence of aggregation bias.
Consider a general case of the example in Table 8. Denote by xijz the exports of country i to
country j in sector z. To facilitate interpretation of the results, we focus on the case with no Linder
eﬀect, i.e. the case in which rii0 jj 0 z = 1 for z = 1, 2. When the odds ratio is 1 in both sectors,
                           xij1     xij 0 1
                                  =           ⇒ xij 0 1 = axij1 , xi0 j 0 1 = axi0 j1 , a > 0           (20)
                           xi0 j1   xi0 j 0 1
and
                           xij2    xij 0 2
                                 =           ⇒ xij 0 2 = cxij2 , xi0 j 0 2 = cxi0 j2 , c > 0.           (21)
                           xi j2
                             0     xi0 j 0 2
    Since the odds ratio equals 1 in both sectors, a negative bias will exist if the aggregate odds
ratio is lower than 1, i.e. if
                                         xij1 + xij2       xij 0 1 + xij 0 2
                                                         <                       .
                                         xi0 j1 + xi0 j2   xi0 j 0 1 + xi0 j 0 2
Using again (20) and (21), this inequality can be expressed as

                                     (a − c)xij2 xi0 j1 < (a − c)xij1 xi0 j2 .                          (22)

    The condition that generates bias in the aggregate odds ratio is that countries’ between-sector
pattern of trade is related to per-capita income. Without loss of generality, assume that higher
(lower) income per-capita is associated with a comparative advantage in z = 1 (z = 2) and that
yi > yi0 and yj > yj 0 . This condition is formally expressed here as
                                        xij1 + xij 0 1           xi0 j1 + xi0 j 0 1
                                                           >
                                        xij2 + xij 0 2           xi0 j2 + xi0 j 0 2
                                        xij1 + xi0 j1            xij 0 1 + xi0 j 0 1
                                                           <
                                        xij2 + xi0 j2            xij 0 2 + xi0 j 0 2
The first inequality states that, since exporter i has a comparative advantage in sector 1, it exports
relatively more in that sector compared to exporter i0 . The second inequality states that, since
importer j has a comparative advantage in sector 1, it imports relatively less in that sector compared
to importer j 0 . Using (20) and (21), these inequalities can be simplified to

                                               xij1 xi0 j2 > xij2 xi0 j1                                (23)

and
                                                         c < a.                                         (24)

                                                           30
   Conditions (23) and (24) imply that (22) also holds. Therefore, they are suﬃcient to induce
bias. Furthermore, the stronger are the diﬀerences in the pattern of inter-sectoral trade between i
and i0 and between j and j 0 , i.e. the stronger the inequalities in (23) and (24), the stronger will be
the bias. Therefore, to the extent that sectoral trade patterns are related to per-capita incomes,
the bias will be stronger the larger is the diﬀerence in per-capita income levels between i and i0 and
between j and j 0 .




                                                  31
                                                Table 1. Trade flows between Rich and Poor countries in 1995
                                                         (cut-off per-capita income level: US$ 12000)

                                     Trade volume (billion US$)               Exporter group share in imports              Importer group share in exports
                                    Rich       Poor         Total              Rich        Poor         Total               Rich        Poor        Total
                                  importers importers                        importers importers                         importers importers
a. 107 countries1
         Rich exporters               3,226          871       4,097            81.1%        81.5%        81.1%                78.7%    21.3%       100.0%
         Poor exporters                 754          198         952            18.9%        18.5%        18.9%                79.2%    20.8%       100.0%
                  Total               3,980        1,069       5,049           100.0%       100.0%       100.0%                78.8%    21.2%       100.0%

b. 64 countries2
        Rich exporters                3,181          711       3,892            83.2%        84.2%        83.4%                81.7%    18.3%       100.0%
        Poor exporters                  641          133         774            16.8%        15.8%        16.6%                82.8%    17.2%       100.0%
                 Total                3,822          844       4,666           100.0%       100.0%       100.0%                81.9%    18.1%       100.0%
1
    Includes countries with population greater than 1 million
2
    Includes countries with population greater than 5 million and imports of Differentiated goods greater than US$ 2 billion
                           Table 2. The aggregate Linder hypothesis
                                     Standard formulation

                                                         Linder term

                          (lnyi-lnyk)2         |yi-yk|             ln|yi-yk|      |lnyi-lnyk|

 Linder term                 0.176 ***         0.289 ***            0.129 ***       0.394 ***
                           (0.020)           (0.058)              (0.032)         (0.055)
 Exporter GDP                1.461 ***         1.357 ***            1.365 ***       1.450 ***
                           (0.045)           (0.046)              (0.046)         (0.046)
 Importer GDP                1.110 ***         1.006 ***            1.013 ***       1.098 ***
                           (0.047)           (0.044)              (0.044)         (0.048)
 Distance                   -0.797 ***        -0.796 ***           -0.808 ***      -0.794 ***
                           (0.048)           (0.048)              (0.048)         (0.048)
 Border                      1.263 ***         1.183 ***            1.187 ***       1.249 ***
                           (0.203)           (0.203)              (0.206)         (0.204)
 Common language             0.352 ***         0.372 ***            0.343 ***       0.388 ***
                           (0.116)           (0.118)              (0.118)         (0.117)
 PTA                         0.337 ***         0.381 ***            0.297 **        0.389 ***
                           (0.123)           (0.126)              (0.124)         (0.124)
 Colonial link               2.241 ***         2.454 ***            2.493 ***       2.336 ***
                           (0.160)           (0.164)              (0.166)         (0.161)
 Common Colony               1.357 ***         1.428 ***            1.479 ***       1.416 ***
                           (0.240)           (0.233)              (0.233)         (0.235)

 Number of obs.             3789              3789                 3789            3789

 R2                        0.415              0.406                0.404          0.410

Estimation of equation (1) by OLS using 64 countries in the sample. Standard errors in parenthesis
***, **, * significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively
                          Table 3. The aggregate Linder hypothesis
                          (with exporter and importer fixed effects)

                                                         Linder term

                         (lnyi-lnyk)2          |yi-yk|             ln|yi-yk|     |lnyi-lnyk|

 Linder term                  0.027 *           0.082**              0.036*         0.055
                            (0.015)           (0.033)              (0.019)        (0.035)
 Distance                    -1.218 ***        -1.214***            -1.216***      -1.217 ***
                            (0.038)           (0.039)              (0.039)        (0.039)
 Border                       0.026             0.034                0.037          0.029
                            (0.151)           (0.151)              (0.151)        (0.151)
 Common language              0.783 ***         0.804***             0.796***       0.790 ***
                            (0.093)           (0.094)              (0.094)        (0.094)
 PTA                         -0.198 **         -0.171*              -0.197**       -0.199 ***
                            (0.096)           (0.097)              (0.096)        (0.097)
 Colonial link                0.820 ***         0.819***             0.827***       0.827 ***
                            (0.184)           (0.183)              (0.184)        (0.184)
 Common colony                0.622 ***         0.604***             0.613***       0.615 ***
                            (0.195)           (0.195)              (0.194)        (0.194)

 Exporter fixed eff.          Yes               Yes                    Yes          Yes
 Importer fixed eff.          Yes               Yes                    Yes          Yes

 Number of obs.              3789              3789                    3789        3789

 R2                         0.819             0.819                0.819          0.819

Estimation of equation (1) by OLS using 64 countries in the sample. Standard errors in parenthesis
***, **, * significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively
                                   Table 4. The sectoral Linder hypothesis
                                 Differentiated goods: OLS and ML estimates


                                                    Regressions by Sector                            Pooled
                                                                                                    Regression
                                      Sign                    Significance (5%)
                               Pos.          Neg.      Pos.      Not Sig.     Neg.   Median

A. OLS Estimation
    Linder term                 34           82         21          36        59     -0.0714         -0.0435***
                                                                                                    (0.0111)
   Distance                      0           116         0           0        116    -1.0154
   Border                      107            9         58          58         0      0.3827
   Common language             114            2        101          15         0      0.5766
   PTA                         103           13         69          47         0      0.4048
   Colonial link               112            4         88          28         0      0.7742
   Common colony                98           18         29          86         1      0.4026

B. ML Estimation
   Imports Equation
    Linder term                42            74        27           34        55     -0.0396
    Distance                     0           116         0           0        116    -1.1375
    Border                     108            8        58           58         0      0.3950
    Common language            115            1        107           9         0      0.6356
    PTA                         90           26         57          55         4      0.2544
    Colonial link              114            2        101          15         0      0.8601
    Common colony              101           15        46           70         0      0.4859

  Fixed Cost Equation
   Distance                     89            27        38          78         2      0.0901
   Border                       98            18        23          93         0      0.4571
   Common language              10           106         1          79        36     -0.2687
   PTA                          14           102         2          63        51     -0.4298
   Colonial link                31           85          2         99         15     -0.4789
   Common colony                43           73          0         105        11     -0.1643
   Exporter GDP                 27            89         2          71        43     -0.0935
   Importer GDP                 79           37         44         63          9      0.0598

 Notes: Estimation of equation (14) in Panel A. Estimation of censoring model (equations 14 and 15) in Panel B.
 The Linder term is (ln yi –ln yj)2. Columns 1 and 2 provide a breakdown of the total number of sectors by sign of
 the estimated coefficient. Columns 3 to 5 provide a breakdown by sign and significance. Heteroskedasticity-robust
 standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors in pooled regression. Standard errors
 in parentheses.
    ***, **, * Significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                       Table 5. The sectoral Linder hypothesis: Alternative Linder terms
                                 Differentiated goods: OLS and ML estimates


                                                     Regressions by Sector                             Pooled
                                                                                                      Regression
                                       Sign                    Significance (5%)
                                Pos.          Neg.      Pos.      Not Sig.     Neg.   Median
A. OLS Estimation
   (ln yi –ln yj)2               34           82         21          36        59     -0.0714          -0.0435***
                                                                                                      (0.0111)
   |yi-yk|                       34           82         20          38        58     -0.0136          -0.010***
                                                                                                      (0.0024)
   ln(|yi-yk|)                   37           79         17          46        53     -0.0554          -0.0402***
                                                                                                      (0.0129)
   |ln(yi)-ln(yk)|               33           83         22          34        60     -0.1739          -0.1144***
                                                                                                      (0.0267)
B. ML Estimation
   (ln yi –ln yj)2               42           74         27          34        55     -0.0396

   |yi-yk|                       43           73         27          28        61     -0.0102

   ln(|yi-yk|)                   45           71         24          37        55      0.0455

   |ln(yi)-ln(yk)|               39           77         25          31        60      0.1136

 Notes: Estimation of equation (14) in Panel A. Estimation of censoring model (equations 14 and 15) in Panel B.
 Only results for the Linder terms are displayed in the table. Columns 1 and 2 provide a breakdown of the total
 number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 3 to 5 provide a breakdown by sign and
 significance. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors
 in pooled regression. Standard errors in parentheses
   ***, **, * Significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                    Table 6. The sectoral Linder hypothesis on different categories of goods
                                      All goods: OLS and ML estimates


                                                    Regressions by Sector                             Pooled
                                                                                                     Regression
                                      Sign                    Significance (5%)
                               Pos.          Neg.      Pos.      Not Sig.     Neg.   Median
A. OLS Estimation
   Differentiated               34           82         21          36        59     -0.0714          -0.0435***
                                                                                                     (0.0111)
   Reference-priced             13           43         5           30        21     -0.0455          -0.0423***
                                                                                                     (0.0121)
   Homogeneous                  24           15         9           26         4      0.0287           0.0250*
                                                                                                     (0.0144)
B. ML Estimation
   Differentiated               42           74         27          34        55     -0.0396

   Reference-priced             19           37         7           25        24     -0.0411

   Homogeneous                  26           13         10          27         2      0.0349

Notes: Estimation of equation (14) in Panel A. Estimation of censoring model (equations 14 and 15) in Panel B.
Only results for the baseline Linder term are displayed in the table. Columns 1 and 2 provide a breakdown of the
total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 3 to 5 provide a breakdown by sign and
significance. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors
in pooled regression. Standard errors in parentheses
  ***, **, * Significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                    Table 7. The sectoral Linder hypothesis at different levels of aggregation
                                  Differentiated goods: OLS and ML estimates


                                                     Regressions by Sector                             Pooled
                                                                                                      Regression
                                       Sign                    Significance (5%)
                                Pos.          Neg.      Pos.      Not Sig.     Neg.   Median
A. OLS Estimation
   3-digit                       34           82         21          36        59     -0.0714          -0.0435***
                                                                                                      (0.0111)
   2-digit                       12           24          6          11        19     -0.0652          -0.0345***
                                                                                                      (0.0113)
   1-digit                       3             3          1          3          2      0.0070          0.0078
                                                                                                      (0.0116)
   All Differentiated            1             0          1          0          0                      0.0988***
                                                                                                      (0.0148)
B. ML Estimation
   3-digit                       42           74         27          34        55     -0.0396

   2-digit                       14           22          1          27         8     -0.0343

   1-digit                       3             3          2          2          2      0.0069

   All Differentiated            1             0          1          0          0                      0.0950***
                                                                                                       (0.0142)
 Notes: Estimation of equation (14) in Panel A. Estimation of censoring model (equations 14 and 15) in Panel B.
 Only results for the baseline Linder term are displayed in the table. Columns 1 and 2 provide a breakdown of the
 total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 3 to 5 provide a breakdown by sign and
 significance. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors
 in pooled regression. Standard errors in parentheses
   ***, **, * Significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                Table 8. The aggregation bias: An illustrative example using actual trade flows in 1995


                                   Industrial Machinery (SITC 72)                  Apparel (SITC 84)                                 Total

                                         Importer                                 Importer                                 Importer
                                    Switz.    S.Africa      Total            Switz.    S.Africa       Total           Switz.    S.Africa      Total
                                     (j)         (j’)                         (j)         (j’)                         (j)         (j’)

Value of exports (US$ millions)
             U.S. (i)                 116.0       260.0      376.1              32.7          4.7       37.4              148.8       264.7    413.5
 Exporter: China (i’)                   3.0         9.7       12.7             176.9         84.0      260.9              179.9        93.6    273.5
             Total                    119.0       269.7      388.7             209.6         88.6      298.3              328.7       358.3    687.0

Exporter shares
             U.S. (i)                97.5%        96.4%     96.7%             15.6%          5.3%     12.5%            45.3%          73.9%    60.2%
 Exporter: China (i’)                 2.5%         3.6%      3.3%             84.4%         94.7%     87.5%            54.7%          23.1%    39.8%
             Total                  100.0%       100.0%    100.0%            100.0%        100.0%    100.0%           100.0%         100.0%   100.0%

Ratios
                Ratio i/i’            38.76       26.92                          0.18        0.06                          0.83        2.83

             Odds Ratio
            (i/i’)j/( i/i’)j’             1.44                                      3.32                                      0.29
                      Table 9. The sectoral Linder hypothesis at different levels of aggregation
                        Reference-priced and Homogeneous goods: OLS and ML estimates


                                                      Regressions by Sector                            Pooled
                                                                                                      Regression
                                        Sign                    Significance (5%)
                                 Pos.          Neg.      Pos.      Not Sig.     Neg.   Median
1. Reference-priced
 A. OLS Estimation
    3-digit                       13           43         5           30        21     -0.0455         -0.0423***
                                                                                                      (0.0121)
    2-digit                        6           22         3           13        12     -0.0471         -0.0531***
                                                                                                      (0.0122)
    1-digit                        3            4         0           4          3     -0.0248         -0.0304**
                                                                                                      (0.0132)
    All Ref.-priced                1            0         0           1          0                     0.0157
                                                                                                      (0.0190)
 B. ML Estimation
    3-digit                       19           37         7           25        24     -0.0411
    2-digit                        8           20         3           12        13     -0.0315
    1-digit                        3            4         1            4         2     -0.0199
    All Ref.-priced                1            0         0            1         0                       0.0258
                                                                                                        (0.0161)
2. Homogeneous
 A. OLS Estimation
    3-digit                       24           15         9           26         4      0.0287          0.0250*
                                                                                                        (0.0144)
    2-digit                        8           12         2           16         2     -0.0231          -0.0092
                                                                                                        (0.0143)
    1-digit                        3            3         0           5          1     -0.0010          -0.0163
                                                                                                        (0.0158)
    All Homogeneous                0            1         0           0          1                     -0.0488**
                                                                                                        (0.0222)
 B. ML Estimation

    3-digit                       26           13         10          27         2      0.0349
    2-digit                       11            9          3          16         1      0.0156
    1-digit                        4            2          1           4         1      0.0313
    All Homogeneous                0            1          0           1         0                       -0.0126
                                                                                                        (0.0201)
 Notes: Estimation of equation (14) in Panel A. Estimation of censoring model (equations 14 and 15) in Panel B.
 Only results for the baseline Linder term are displayed in the table. Columns 1 and 2 provide a breakdown of the
 total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 3 to 5 provide a breakdown by sign and
 significance. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors
 in pooled regression. Standard errors in parentheses
   ***, **, * Significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                 Table A1. List of countries and PPP GDP per capita in 1995

Country          GDP per Capita                           Country             GDP per Capita
                  (PPP) US$                                                    (PPP) US$
USA                 27,395                                Libya                  7,180
Switzerland         25,475                                Mexico                 7,061
Norway              24,693                                Poland                 6,605
Japan               23,211                                Brazil                 6,572
Canada              23,085                                Romania                6,430
Denmark             22,947                                Thailand               6,217
Belgium-Lux.        22,700                                Colombia               6,151
Singapore           22,270                                Venezuela              5,979
Hong Kong           22,166                                Costa Rica             5,940
Austria             22,089                                Turkey                 5,803
Germany             21,478                                Bulgaria               5,608
Australia           21,267                                Iran                   4,968
Netherlands         20,812                                Tunisia                4,870
Italy               20,512                                Algeria                4,697
France              20,492                                Paraguay               4,598
Sweden              20,030                                Peru                   4,329
United Kingdom      19,465                                Dominican Rep.         3,997
Finland             18,764                                Lebanon                3,964
New Zealand         17,705                                Philippines            3,518
Israel              17,394                                Guatemala              3,444
Ireland             17,264                                Syria                  3,211
Spain               15,163                                Ecuador                3,162
Portugal            13,613                                Morocco                3,052
South Korea         13,502                                Indonesia              2,869
Taiwan              13,335                                Egypt                  2,869
Greece              13,147                                Sri Lanka              2,741
Saudi Arabia        10,766                                China                  2,560
Argentina           10,736                                India                  1,877
South Africa         8,581                                Pakistan               1,733
Malaysia             8,145                                Vietnam                1,478
Uruguay              7,831                                Bangladesh             1,253
Chile                7,544                                Nigeria                 832
Table A2. List of 3-digit SITC sectors


Differentiated goods sample (116 sectors)
  034        048        056       073        098   248   291   292   533   541
  551        553        554       591        598   611   612   621   625   628
  635        642        651       652        653   654   655   656   657   658
  659        661        662       663        665   666   667   673   678   679
  691        692        694       695        696   697   699   711   712   713
  714        716        718       721        722   723   724   725   726   727
  728        736        741       742        743   744   745   749   751   752
  759        761        763       764        771   772   773   774   775   776
  778        781        782       783        784   785   786   791   792   793
  812        821        831       842        843   844   845   846   847   848
  851        871        872       874        881   882   884   885   892   893
  894        895        896       897        898   899

Reference-priced goods sample (56 sectors)
  011       014        034       036         037   054   057   058   081   112
  122       233        251       266         273   278   322   323   334   335
  341       511        512       513         514   515   516   522   523   524
  533       541        562       582         583   584   592   634   641   642
  651       652        653       661         662   671   672   673   674   677
  678       682        684       693         699   778

Homogeneous goods sample (39 sectors)
 001      011       022        023           024   041   042   043   044   054
 057      058       061        071           081   222   232   246   247   251
 263      268       281        282           287   288   333   334   423   424
 522      634       667        681           682   683   684   686   689
