NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A COMMENT CONCERNING DEPOSIT INSURANCE AND MORAL HAZARD
Gary Richardson
Working Paper 12719
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12719

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

I thank colleagues for comments on earlier drafts of this essay. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

A Comment Concerning Deposit Insurance and Moral Hazard
Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 12719
December 2006
JEL No. E42,E44,E65,N1,N13,N2
ABSTRACT
Hooks and Robinson argue that moral hazard induced by deposit insurance induced banks to invest
in riskier assets in Texas during the 1920s. Their regressions suggest this manifestation of moral hazard
may explain a portion of the events that occurred during the 1920s, but some other phenomena, hitherto
overlooked, must also be at work. Economic logic and evidence form the archives of the Board of
Governors suggest that phenomenon is mismanagement and defalcation by corporate officers, which
increases when insurance reduces depositors' incentives to monitor and react to the safety and soundness
of banks.
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

An article by Linda Hooks and Kenneth Robinson, “Deposit Insurance and Moral
Hazard: Evidence from Texas Banking During the 1920s”contains a contradiction (Hooks
and Robinson, 2002). Pondering it reveals an insight which the authors may have
overlooked.
The Contradiction
Hooks and Robinson examine balance sheet data for banks in Texas. Table 3
focuses on state banks during the 1920s and finds “evidence that declines in capitalization
led to increases in asset risk, as measured by loan concentrations. Such activity on the part
of insured banks would indicate that banks with weakened financial conditions increased
the riskiness of their asset portfolios, which would be consistent with a moral-hazard effect
at work (p. 848).” Table 4 examines two control groups: state banks in 1909, and national
banks during the 1920s. Neither group exhibits correlations between capitalization and
loan concentration, suggesting that a difference between the control and treatment groups,
one of which was deposit insurance, encouraged poorly capitalized state banks to invest in
assets, such as loans to local farmers and businessmen, with higher expected return and
risk.
According to Hooks and Robinson’s regressions in Table 2, however, such
behavior did NOT increase the likelihood that banks failed. Banks whose portfolios
contained a higher proportion of loans had LOWER failure rates than other banks, all else
being equal (see coefficient on the portfolio concentration variable, which measures the
ration of loans to assets, LOANASS). The beneficial effect of additional loans was large.
An extra $1 of loans reduced the probability of failure to the same extent as an additional

2

43 cents of retained earnings (-0.140/-0.327) (see Table 2, column 1). The authors
acknowledge this result when they write “we expect a positive sign on LOANASS …
However, LOANASS is negative and significant, the opposite of what was hypothesized.”
Their hypothesis rests on the notion that “declines in capitalization can induce ‘gofor-broke’ strategies among insured banks. With less of their own funds at risk as capital
declines, insured banks may be tempted to gamble on risky projects with a small
probability of payoff. If these ventures prove successful, the bank gains, otherwise the
insurance fund suffers the losses (p. 844).” The expectation of a “positive sign on
LOANASS” presumes that investing in loans rather than safer assets, such as government
securities and eligible commercial paper, actually resulted in large losses and high failure
rates. Table 2’s regressions indicate the opposite. Texas banks benefited from lending more
money. Their ex ante gambles yielded ex post profits. This is understandable since the
banks made these loans during the era known as the Roaring 20s, when the national
economy prospered, and Texas experienced oil and industrial booms.
Table 2’s regressions contain another variable, INSURED, an indicator for state
banks, all of which had to participate in one of the two Texas deposit insurance systems.
The author’s argue that “if moral hazard incentives are present at insured banks, leading
them to pursue excessively risky activities, then we would expect a positive sign on
INSURED (p. 843).” The sign is indeed “positive and significant at the 10-percent level,
indicating that deposit insurance significantly increased the likelihood of failure (p. 843).”
This brings us to the contradiction in the essay, and I believe, an overlooked
insight. The author’s interpretations of LOANASS and INSURED in Table 2 are
inconsistent with their interpretations of Tables 3 and 4. For the latter tables, the authors

3

claim that the structure of a bank’s assets, measured by loan concentrations in the
portfolio, serves as a good proxy for risk. “Loans are one of the riskiest assets that banks
can hold (p. 842).” “A higher proportion of loans leaves a bank more exposed to credit risk
and more vulnerable to adverse economic shock (p. 843).” The statistically significant
relationship between LOANASS, TOTCAP, and CAPLOAN reveals moral hazard at work.
In Table 2, however, the authors’ argue that the coefficient on INSURED indicates that
moral hazard induced excess risk taking and influenced the survival of banks. But the
regressions also contain the variable LOANASS. If LOANASS serves as a good proxy for ex
ante portfolio risk, as the authors argue throughout their essay and in Tables 3 and 4, then
the variable INSURED cannot also do so. Regression analysis imposes a ceteris paribus
assumption. The coefficient on INSURED measures the correlation between insurance and
failure that is orthogonal to LOANASS, that is holding the loan to asset ratio constant.
In other words, if the coefficient on INSURED reveals moral hazard at work, it
must reveal moral hazard operating through a channel other than distorting banks decisions
concerning the bearing of risk. What might that channel be?
Resolving the Contradiction
The literature on deposit insurance discusses two types of moral hazard. The first,
which the authors explicitly search for in this essay, involves excess risk-taking among
insured banks. The relationship at issue is that between managers and regulators, who
indirectly underwrite gambles gone bad by zombie banks. The Savings and Loan crisis
inspired this line of research.

4

The second occurs when the presence of insurance reduces the incentives for
depositors to monitor the safety of their savings. Depositors stop monitoring the behavior
of bankers, and no longer bother to move deposits from worse to better managed
institutions. Mismanagement increases. Bad banks proliferate. Competitive pressures force
good banks to cut costs and corners, initiating what may become a race to the bottom.
Mismanagement of this type does not generate predictable patterns in bank balance
sheets. Some classic examples of mismanagement illustrate this point. One, a bank never
bothers to make loans. Instead, it invests in eligible paper, deposits funds in correspondent
banks, and keeps the bulk of its resources in its vault. Its costs exceed revenues, and it goes
bankrupt, because its portfolio has too low of a return and too little risk. Two, a bank
invests in a large, expensive building with beautiful new furniture and artwork, which it
cannot afford on current revenues, and goes bankrupt. Three, bank managers do not
perform due diligence and fail to collect outstanding debts. Losses rise. Bankruptcy results.
In the first two examples, the balance sheets of the banks would exhibit low ratios of loans
to assets. In the third example, the balance sheet of a bank could exhibit any level of
investment risk.
This property of mismanagement makes it a likely explanation for the positive
coefficient on INSURED in Table 2, since the logic of regression analysis dictates that the
factor generating the coefficient must be orthogonal to LOANASS and to the underlying
phenomena, portfolio concentration and overall asset risk, for which LOANASS proxies.
Data on the causes of bank suspensions during the 1920s that I have recently
recovered from the archives of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors supports this
supposition. Each year when deposit insurance existed in Texas between 1921 and 1926,

5

mismanagement forced an average of 3.2% of all state banks to suspend operations. That
fraction amounted to nearly 80% of all state bank suspensions. In the four years after
deposit insurance, mismanagement forced an average of only 1.2% of all state banks to
suspend operations. The share of suspensions attributed to mismanagement fell similarly
(see Chung and Richardson 2004 for a description of the source).
Conclusions
Hooks and Robinson indicate that their article provides additional evidence
supporting the conventional academic wisdom. This comment argues that their essay does
that and much more. Their regressions demonstrate that while the prevailing paradigm
explains a portion of the events that occurred during the 1920s, some other phenomena,
hitherto overlooked, must also be at work. Economic logic and evidence form the archives
of the Board of Governors suggest that phenomenon is mismanagement, which increases
when insurance reduces depositors’ incentives to monitor and react to the safety and
soundness of banks.

6

Bibliography
Chung, Ching-Yi and Gary Richardson. “Deposit Insurance Altered the Composition of
Bank Suspensions During the 1920s. Evidence from the Archives of the Board of
Governors.” Forthcoming in Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy.
Chung, Ching-Yi and Gary Richardson. “Deposit Insurance and the Composition of Bank
Suspensions in Developing Economies: Lessons from the State Deposit Insurance
Experiments of the 1920s,” NBER Working Paper w12594, October 2006.
Linda M. Hooks and Kenneth J. Robinson. “Deposit Insurance and Moral Hazard:
Evidence from Texas Banking During the 1920s.” The Journal of Economic History,
Vol. 62, No. 3 (September 2002).

7

