                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     QUARTERLY DATA ON THE CATEGORIES AND CAUSES OF BANK DISTRESS
                     DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                             Gary Richardson

                                          Working Paper 12715
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12715


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2006




I thank Shagufta Ahmed, Shaista Ahmed, Jacqueline Chattopadhay, Ching-Yi Chung, Nathan Montgomery,
Yuiichi Inomata, Mark Ng, Mitra Pai, Doris Sum, Brandon Tsang, Ian Wagner, and Eve Wang for
research assistance. I thank Reid Click, Deborah Kauffman, Ed and Edwin Richardson, and Gloria
Richardson for accommodations near the National Archives. I thank Erik Heitfield for the loan of
photographic equipment. I thank Marigee Bacolod, Dan Bogart, William Branch, Mark Carlson, Milton
Friedman, Michelle Garfinkel, Joseph Mason, Kris Mitchener, and Elmus Wicker for comments on
earlier drafts of this essay. I thank numerous friends and colleagues for comments, advice, and encouragement.
Portions of this research was funded by NSF Grant D/SES-0551232. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Quarterly Data on the Categories and Causes of Bank Distress During the Great Depression
Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 12715
December 2006
JEL No. E0,E4,E44,N1,N12,N2

                                           ABSTRACT

During the contraction from 1929 through 1933, the Federal Reserve System tracked changes in the
status of all banks operating in the United States and determined the cause of each bank suspension.
This essay introduces quarterly series derived from that hitherto dormant data and presents aggregate
series constructed from it. The new data series will supplement, and in some cases, supplant the data
currently used to study banking panics of the Great Depression, which was published by the Federal
Reserve Board of Governors in 1937.

Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
Introduction

         The causes, consequences, and possibilities of preventing the banking panics of

the Great Contraction have been debated for seven decades. The debate’s factual

foundations rest upon data published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin. The September

1937 issue contains the only comprehensive collection of statistics on suspended banks,

and is the sole source of aggregate bank failure rates (Board of Governors 1937, hereafter

FRB’37).1 Scholars studying the contraction continuously redefine, reinterpret, and reveal

new relationships between data from FRB’37 and measures of industrial, commercial,

and financial activity.

         The principal reason the debate continues may be the primary source of evidence.

FRB’37 provides imperfect information about bank distress. It distinguishes neither temporary

from terminal suspensions, nor voluntary from involuntary liquidations, nor institutions afflicted

by illiquidity from banks suffering insolvency. It contains information neither on the causes of

bank suspensions nor the number of bank mergers. The smallest period of aggregation at the

national level is the month and at the Federal Reserve district level is the year. Key terms remain

undefined, leaving much open to interpretation.

         This essay introduces new statistical series that provide precise, detailed, aggregate

information about categories of bank distress and causes of bank suspensions. The source for the

new series is the same as for the old series.2 From 1929 though 1933, the Board of Governors


1
    Reprints of these series (or cross-tabulations based upon them) appeared in Banking and Monetary Statistics
    (Board of Governors 1943) and Historical Statistics of the United States (Bureau of Census 1975). Precursors to
    these series appeared in various publications of the Board of Governors and in Bank Suspension in the United
    States (Goldenweiser et. al. 1931). Studies of the banking panics published prior to 1938 employ these
    predecessor series.
2
    The St. 6386 forms were the basis of the Federal Reserve’s bank data collection system from 1929 to 1933. All
    facts and figures about bank distress published by the Board of Governors or the Federal Reserve district banks
    and much of the material published by state banking authorities originated with this source.



                                                         0
collected data on changes of status for all banks operating in the United States, both members of

the Federal Reserve System and nonmembers, state and national, incorporated and private. The

Board also analyzed the cause of each bank suspension. The Division of Bank Operations

recorded this information on the St. 6386 series of forms. Form St. 6386a reported bank

consolidates. Form St. 6386b reported bank suspensions. Form St. 6386c reported all other bank

changes.3 Facsimiles of the forms appear in the appendix.

         The St 6386 series comprehensively covered the commercial banking industry from

January 1929 through the national banking holiday in March 1933. Observations existed for a

wide array of events affecting banks. These events included the major, such as openings,

closings, reopenings, receiverships, and consolidations, and the minor, such as changes in

Federal Reserve membership, capital stock, charter type, and even street address. The forms also

included financial information for each bank on the date of each transaction. The complete series

of St. 6386 forms survives in the National Archives of the United States.

         The remainder of this essay introduces this recently rediscovered source. Section 1

reviews the relevant literature, highlights FRB’37’s role in academic debates, discusses how the

extant evidence shapes academic opinions about the contraction, and elucidates the utility of the

archival evidence. Section 2 describes the data, defines key concepts, and discusses issues

important for interpreting empirical work based upon this source. Section 3 describes the original

sources of information and the procedures that the Federal Reserve used to validate and cross-

check the evidence. The purpose of the extended discussion is to reassure the reader of the


3
    The surviving forms may be found in the National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject
    File, file number 434.-1, “Bank Changes 1921-1954 Districts 1929-1954 - Consolidations, Suspensions and
    Organizations-St. 6386 a,b,c, (By States) 1930-1933.” The forms are filed alphabetically by state, name of town
    or city, and name of bank. Multiple entries for individual banks appear in chronological order. To avoid
    repeated, lengthy citations in the body of the essay and this appendix, after quotations from the archival data, the
    information required to locate the form (i.e. name of state, town, bank) is indicated in brackets.



                                                           1
veracity of the Federal Reserve’s observations. Section 4 compares the archival data to the extant

aggregate series and to studies based on microeconomic evidence. The comparisons show that

aggregate series constructed from the archival data match equivalent series published in FRB’37

and that the Division of Bank Operation’s conclusions about the causes of suspensions match

those of modern scholars using historical and econometric methods. Section 5 presents new

quarterly series on the categories and causes of bank distress. The new series supplement the

FRB’37 series most often used by to study the contraction. Section 6 discusses potential uses of

the new data.


1. Review of the Literature

       Scholars have long studied the banking crises of the Great Contraction. The initial studies

analyzed data from FRB’37 aggregated at the national level. Later studies scrutinized FRB’37

data aggregated at lower levels. Recent studies combine data from FRB’37 with data drawn from

the balance sheets of national and Federal Reserve member banks. This section reveals

correlations between the sources that scholars have analyzed and the conclusions that scholars

have reached.

       Scholars ask three general questions about the banking system during the contraction of

the early 1930s. Why did bank suspensions surge at certain points in time? How did bank

suspensions affect commercial and industrial activity? Could Federal Reserve intervention have

prevented (or did its actions trigger) this crisis? Despite 70 years of analysis, debate persists

about the answer to each inquiry.

       Concerning the reasons that banks failed, some scholars conclude that a contagion of

fear, a flight to cash holdings, and withdrawals en masse drained deposits from banks and pushed

financial markets towards collapse. Illiquidity of assets and Federal Reserve inaction exacerbated



                                                  2
the credit crunch. Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963) argue that the Federal Reserves’

failure to act as a lender of last resort, prevent banking panics, and stem the decline of the money

supply transmogrified what would have been an ordinary recession into the Great Depression by

examining seasonally-adjusted series of deposits in suspended banks from FRB’37 to determine

the dates of banking panics and correlating those dates with changes in monetary aggregates.

Elmus Wicker (1996) uses district-level data on suspensions from FRB’37 to illuminate the

regional patterns of panics.

         Other scholars conclude that banks failed because the economy contracted. Loan default

rates rose. Asset values declined. Deteriorating fundamentals forced banks into insolvency,

continuing a process of liquidation that began during the 1920s. Peter Temin (1976) argue that

real, rather than monetary, forces caused banks to fail and the economy to contract by regressing

state-level FRB’37 suspension data on various explanatory variables. Charles Calomiris and

Joseph Mason (2003) support the supposition that contagion forced banks to fail by regressing

time-to-liquidation for individual Fed member banks on an array of bank characteristics,

aggregate variables, and state-level FRB’37 suspension rates. Eugene N. White (1984) initiated

the use of bank balance sheet data to analyze these issues. His seminal work employed a sample

of national banks. He regressed their fates (survival or liquidation) on their financial

characteristics and aggregate variables.4

         Concerning the consequences of the banking crises, some scholars believe that banking

panics had monetary effects. Panics eroded depositors’ confidence, induced further withdrawals,


4
    Eugene White (1984) pioneered efforts to examine samples of data from national banks. Subsequent work
    examines banks within individual cities, states, and Federal Reserve districts (Charles Calomris and Joseph
    Mason 1997, Mark Carlson 2004). The most recent and comprehensive work (Calomiris and Mason 2003),
    which analyzes a panel of all Federal Reserve member banks, yields a strong and stark conclusion. The “two
    Friedman-Schwartz crises are not associated with positive unexplained residual failure risk, or increased
    importance of bank illiquidity for forecasting failure (2003).”



                                                         3
forced banks to liquidate assets at deep discounts, lowered asset prices, encouraged banks to hold

excess reserves, and reduced the money multiplier. This vicious cycle reduced the money supply

and turned what would have been a typical recession into a cataclysmic contraction. Friedman

and Schwartz (1963) contains the seminal statement of the monetarist position, whose roots date

back at least to the publications of Lauchlin Curry (1931 and 1932) and the Chicago monetary

tradition which arose at that time. Friedman and Schwartz employed data from FRB’37. The

early monetarists did not have access to this data. Instead, they used data drawn from earlier

editions of the Federal Reserve Bulletin.

       Other scholars see bank failures as symptoms of ongoing events with no special role in

the propagation of the downturn. This view arises from Keynesian, classical, real business cycle,

and other macroeconomic models. Temin’s spending hypothesis (Temin 1976) is the seminal

statement of the stark Keynesian conception of the contraction, which sees bank failures as a

symptom of the autonomous decline in consumption and investment expenditure, and which

dates back at least to the publication of Keynes’ General Theory.

       Another set of scholars maintains that bank panics influenced economic activity by

disrupting financial intermediation. Bank failures increased the cost of credit intermediation,

dislocated the financing of small and medium firms, disrupted current production, and curtailed

investment spending. This financial acceleration deepened the depression. In the seminal articles

in this line of research, Ben Bernanke (1982) regresses growth rates of industrial production on

first differences of deposits in suspended banks (drawn from FRB’37) to show that suspensions

increased the cost of credit intermediation.

       Concerning the possibilities of preventing the banking panics, some scholars argue the

Federal Reserve could have done little to aid ailing banks. Fundamental forces pushed banks into




                                                 4
insolvency; monetary intervention could not pull them out. Liquidity assistance could not

eliminate loan losses. Open-market expansion – even on a massive scale – could not lift the

economy out of the liquidity trap (Temin 1976).

         Other scholars argue that the Federal Reserve could not aid ailing banks directly, since

illiquidity and contagion caused few banks failures, but that massive open-market expansions,

such as those that the Roosevelt administration implemented after abandoning the gold standard,

could reignite economic progress, and thus indirectly alleviate the banking situation (Calomiris

and Mason 2003, Eichengreen 1992, Romer 1992, Temin 1989).

         Another set of scholars argue that even limited assistance from the Federal Reserve might

have mitigated banking panics. By acting as a lender of last resort and extending loans to solvent

but illiquid institutions, the Federal Reserve could have kept ailing institutions afloat. A credible

commitment to do so might have calmed consumers, reassured bankers, raised the money

multiplier, alleviated the credit crunch, and eased the economic situation (Richardson and Troost

2005).

         A final and influential set of scholars concludes that the Federal Reserve’s sins were of

commission as well as omission. The Federal Reserve not only neglected to aid ailing banks, but

by raising interest rates, reducing the monetary base, and restricting discount lending, the Federal

Reserve weakened all banks, and created conditions conducive to panics. As evidence, these

scholars highlight the Federal Reserve’s monetary contraction in 1928 and the Federal Reserve’s

defense of the gold standard in 1931 (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, Meltzer 2003).

         The policy views of all of these schools of thought stem from their views on the causes of

the banking crisis. Scholars who think that banks failed because they lacked liquidity believe that

the Federal Reserve could have alleviated the situation by acting as a lender of last resort.




                                                  5
Scholars who think that banks failed because the economy contracted and borrowers defaulted

believe that the Federal Reserve could not have saved the situation by acting as a lender of last

resort, but might have aided the banks indirectly by reinflating the economy. As I noted

previously, these beliefs arise largely from the data which the scholars examine. The debate

about policy, therefore, indirectly reflects the use of data sources.

        A correlation exists between the sources that scholars utilize and the conclusions that

scholars reach. Scholars who study aggregate data tend to view illiquidity and the withdrawal of

deposits as the root cause of the banking crisis. Scholars who study micro data tend to view

insolvency and the declining value of investment portfolios as the root of the crisis. The

correlation exists for two reasons. First, different sources illuminate different dimensions of the

banking industry and highlight different points in time and space, leading to different

interpretations of events. Each source portrays a portion of a complex, dynamic mosaic. None

portrays the entire picture. Second, the extant sources share several weaknesses. All of the

sources provide imperfect information about changes in banks’ status. They distinguish neither

temporary from terminal suspensions, nor voluntary from involuntary liquidations, nor

institutions afflicted by illiquidity from banks suffering insolvency. They describe neither on the

causes of bank suspensions nor the number of bank mergers. They neglect consolidations of

banks in financial difficulties and seeking to avoid suspension. Unclear and inconsistent

terminology leaves much of the information in the sources subject to interpretation. Reconciling

scholars’ views requires comprehensive, definitive data. The remainder of this essay turns to that

task.


Section 2: Data Origins and Definitions

        This section discusses the data on bank distress collected by the Federal Reserve Board of



                                                  6
Governors during the early 1930s. The discussion emphasizes the methods that Federal Reserve

agents employed to ascertain the causes of bank suspensions and the lexicon that the Board of

Governors devised during the 1920s to facilitate their analysis. The discussion cites the memos

and training materials distributed to Federal Reserve employees undertaking this task and

outlines the algorithms that they employed when analyzing the evidence.

       During the 1920s, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors embarked on an ambitious

project: the creation of standard statistical reports for all banks operating in the United States,

both members of the Federal Reserve System and nonmembers, national and state, incorporated

and private. In August 1925, the Board began collecting information on the causes of bank

suspensions. The Division of Bank Operations introduced Form X-4401, “Notification of Bank

Suspension or Insolvency,” and Form X-4402, “Notification of Termination of Insolvency or

Suspension.” The forms remained in use for four years.

       During that period, the Board of Governors strove to improve the accuracy of the

information that they collected. The process was interactive and ongoing. The Board circulated

forms to agents around the country and asked them to suggest improvements. They solicited

comments from bureaucrats, bankers, examiners, and academics. They amended the forms to

make them more concise and complete. Correspondence between the Board of Governors and

the Federal Reserve district banks announced up-and-coming modifications and important

decisions concerning the coding of ambiguous cases. A series of memos defined key terms and

explained how to fill out the forms.

       Analysts strove to standardize the definitions of the words with which they worked.

Standardization was important, because definitions of banking terms varied across time and

jurisdictions. Each state-banking bureau published its own report and used terms as it saw fit.




                                                  7
Explicit definitions seldom appeared. This lexical ambiguity caused confusion. Multiple

definitions existed for frequently used terms. Many varied according to context. For example, the

nine letters l-i-q-u-i-d-a-t-e referred in some circumstances to the sale of assets, in other

circumstances to a change in a corporate charter, and at other times to the dissolution of a

financial institution and its departure from the banking business. At the end of the 1920s, as the

Federal Reserves’ lexicon approached its final form and its research staff assimilated the lessons

that they had learned, the Board of Governors authorized a comprehensive revision of the

panoply of forms used to gather information on the status of banks.

       In 1929, the Board of Governors introduced the documents devised via that endeavor: the

St. 6386 series of forms. Form St. 6386a reported bank consolidations. The Federal Reserve

defined consolidation in a de facto rather than de jure sense.

       A consolidation is the corporate union of two or more ongoing banks into one
       bank which continues under a single charter, either new or old. The term is used
       not in a legal or technical sense, but in an economic sense, the essential feature
       being that the business of two or more going banks becomes concentrated under
       one charter and one management. The method of effecting the consolidation,
       whether by purchase of assets, assumption of deposit liabilities, exchange of
       stock, or other procedure, varies with circumstances and is unessential for the
       present purpose. What is here described as a consolidation is frequently
       designated by the terms “merger,” “absorption,” “amalgamation,” “combination,”
       or “purchase,” according to different points of view. It includes those cases where
       one bank absorbs another and turns it into a branch. It also includes those cases
       where a given bank is absorbed by two or more banks, which distribute its
       business among themselves. A consolidation is not a simple transaction like a
       conversion, a liquidation, a primary organization, etc., but is inevitable
       complicated by the fact that these other transactions are incidental to it. That is, a
       consolidation as often as not entails a voluntary liquidation and the issuance of a
       new charter; but these attendant circumstances should not obscure the important
       fact that a concentration of banking has been effected by the transaction as a
       whole (Goldenweiser et. al. 1931, pp. 87-88).

Form St. 6386a recorded these transactions and the attendant circumstances. Details included the

name of the absorbing bank, the fate of offices and charter of the bank being absorbed, and




                                                  8
whether the banks consolidated because they faced financial difficulties or in order to avoid

suspension.

       The latter information helped distinguish between the categories of consolidation and

suspension. The distinction involved several simple rules. First, a bank that merged with another

bank was classified as a consolidation if it was “not at any time closed to depositors, even though

the reason for the consolidation or succession may have been financial difficulties encountered

by the bank (Federal Reserve memo, November 18, 1929).” Second, a transaction was classified

as a consolidation if the assets and liabilities of a weak bank were transferred to another bank,

and then, the denuded bank suspended and surrendered its charter (Goldenweiser et. al. 1931, p.

88). Third, a transaction was classified as a terminal bank suspension if at the time of absorption

or merger the bank had been closed for at least one business day.

       Form St. 6386b reported bank suspensions. According to the Federal Reserve’s financial

lexicon, a bank suspension occurred when payments were halted

       to the public either temporarily or permanently by supervisory authorities or by
       the bank’s board of directors on account of financial difficulties, regardless of
       whether or not the bank is ultimately classed as a suspension by the supervisory
       authorities (Federal Reserve memo, November 18, 1929)

and regardless of whether or not the depositors ultimately suffered losses. A suspension had to

last overnight. A bank that closed its doors in the morning and reopened them in the afternoon

did not fit into the classification. A suspension had to include the cessation of normal banking

business. A bank that slowed withdrawals by holding depositors to the agreements that they

signed when opening accounts and requiring them to provide 30, 60, or 90 days notice of savings

withdrawals did not fit into the classification. A bank which, without actually closing, obtained

agreements from depositors to waive a portion of their deposits or to defer the withdrawal of a

portion of their deposits was not classified as a suspension. A bank that closed during a special



                                                 9
holiday declared by civil authorities and remained closed only during such holiday or part

thereof was not classified as a suspension.

       Form St. 6386c reported changes in the status of financial institutions, including

voluntary liquidations and the reopening of suspended banks. A voluntary liquidation occurred

when a bank’s directors paid off all depositors and creditors in full, sold the remaining assets,

distributed proceeds to stockholders, annulled the bank’s charter, and abandoned the banking

business. Some voluntary liquidations were orderly affairs arranged months in advance. Others

resembled suspensions. A sudden shock, such as the death of the founder, forced a bank to close

its doors, and the discouraged board of directors decided to repay depositors rather than attempt

to reopen the institution. The latter case was classified as a voluntary liquidation, rather than a

suspension, as long as the winding up of the bank’s business did not require the intervention of

regulators or courts, and as long as the owners of the bank could repay all creditors the full value

of their claims.

        A reopening occurred when a suspended bank resumed operations. A bank could resume

operations voluntarily at any time until regulators used legal powers to take authority over the

institution or the courts appointed a receiver to liquidate the bank. After either event, a bank

could reopen only with the consent of judicial authorities. In certain circumstances, reopening

also required the agreement of creditors such as depositors and stockholders. In many cases,

reopenings entailed the reorganization of affairs. Depositors waived rights to portions of their

deposits. Stockholders waived their original capital and paid assessments of up to 100% of the

value of their stock. In most cases, these reorganizations appear to have been voluntary

agreements among the interested parties, facilitated by banking authorities on some occasions

and laws in some states.




                                                 10
       A reopening could involve an array of incidental transactions, such as changes in the

name, charter, capital stock, and legal status of a bank. As with consolidations, the entire

package of transaction was recorded as a single event. Rules indicated how to handle confusing

cases. For example,

       A reopening consequent upon consolidation of two or more suspended banks
       should be classed as a single reopening. If a suspended national bank reopens as a
       State bank, however, or vice versa, the transaction must be accounted as a primary
       organization and not as a reopening (Federal Reserve memo, November 18,
       1929).

Thus, if two banks suspended operations, merged a few days later in the morning, and reopened

that afternoon, the Federal Reserve recorded two suspensions, one reopening, one liquidation,

and no consolidations. The bank whose charter continued in use was listed as reopened. The

bank whose charter lapsed was listed as liquidated. If two banks suspended operations, reopened

a few days later in the morning, and merged that afternoon, however, the Federal Reserve

recorded two suspensions, two reopenings, and one consolidation. If a national bank suspended

operations, changed to a state charter, and then reopened for business with exactly the same staff,

depositors, and borrowers, the Federal Reserve recorded one national bank suspension, one

national bank liquidation, and the opening (i.e. primary organization) of a newly state-chartered

bank. If a similar national bank suspended operations, reopened for business, and then adopted a

state charter, however, the Federal Reserve recorded one suspension, one reopening, and one

conversion from national to state charter.

       Completing forms St. 6386c and St. 6386a involved implementing algorithms to

determine how to classify complex transactions. Completing the 6386b form required additional

knowledge, judgment, and effort. The 6386b form attributed bank suspensions to one or more of




                                                 11
five common causes (definitions from Federal Reserve memo, November 5, 1930).5 The first

was slow, doubtful, or worthless paper. The term worthless paper indicated an asset with little or

no value. The term doubtful paper meant an asset unlikely to yield book value. Examples

included loans to businesses in financial difficulties and securities such as stocks and bonds

which had depreciated since purchase. The term slow paper meant an asset likely to yield full

value in time, but whose repayment lagged or that could not be converted to full cash value at

short notice. An example was a loan to a profitable corporation with cash-flow problems

struggled to make timely payments. The term structure prevented the bank from calling in the

unpaid balance. Uncertainty over the value of the stream of payments prevented the bank from

selling the loan at face value.

         The second common cause of suspension was failure a banking correspondent.

Correspondents were banks with ongoing relationships facilitated by deposits of funds. Services

rendered by correspondents included extending lines of credit, clearing checks, absorbing

exchange charges, redeeming coupons from bonds, conducting wire transfers, supplying coins

and cash, and facilitating investments in stocks and bonds. A typical situation involved a small

state bank outside a reserve city (called a country bank) that deposited funds in a large national

bank in a reserve city (called a city bank) and received services in return. Such deposits often

formed a large portion of country banks’ legal reserves. In many cases, the suspension of the city

bank precipitated the suspension of the country bank, because the latter lost its reserves and

linkages to the wider financial system.

         The third and fourth common causes of suspension were the failure of a large debtor and


5
    Note that a sixth option existed. Agents completing St. 6386b forms could check a box entitled “other cause” and
    add a description of the phenomenon. The form also contained space for written remarks. About one-third of all
    forms contained such additional and/or extended comments.



                                                        12
defalcation. Of particular interest were debtors with connections to the bank via overlapping

ownership, interlocking directorates, or intermingled management. Defalcation was a monetary

deficiency in the accounts of a bank due to fraud or breach of trust for which the management

was legally liable. Embezzlement was a common example.

       The fifth common cause of suspension was heavy withdrawals. Some banks experienced

such large withdrawals that they could no longer continue operations. These deposit declines

could be dramatic events in which multitudes of small-account holders lined up in the streets

outside of banks hoping to empty their accounts. But, long queues of despondent depositors

could be a symptom, rather than a cause, of a bank’s demise. Significant deposit losses usually

occurred before ordinary men and women lined up on the streets outside of their banks.

Businesses, banks, and wealthy individuals possessed the ability to transfer funds quickly via

wire or check to other financial institutions. They often also possessed better-than-average

information about financial events and transferred large sums out of banks in weeks before

ordinary individuals panicked over the safety of their savings or banks suspended payments on

deposits. Researchers at the Federal Reserve called these events invisible runs.

       The Board of Governors spent several years refining this checklist and teaching

representatives how to complete the form. Instructions were straightforward. If acts for which

management faced criminal liability precipitated the suspension of payments, check the box

labeled defalcation. If the failure of a correspondent or debtor precipitated the suspension of

payments, check the appropriate box and note the name of the institution or individual. If

withdrawals reduced the liquidity of a bank to the point that it could not continue operations or

forced the bank to sell assets at fire sale prices, and thus to choose between suspending payments

or suffering insolvency, check the box for heavy withdrawals. If bad assets accumulated to such




                                                 13
an extent that a bank could not continue operations, either because it could not maintain the

necessary cash flow, because it could no longer absorb the losses, or because auditors determined

it to be insolvent, check the box for slow, doubtful, and worthless paper. Place the check in the

column labeled primary cause if that factor alone forced the bank to suspend operations. Place

the check in the column labeled contributing cause if that factor aggravated or accelerated the

bank’s demise.

       Agents often checked multiple boxes, indicating that multiple causes contributed to a

bank’s suspension. The most common combination was heavy withdrawals and slow, doubtful,

and worthless paper. That should be no surprise. Withdrawals forced a bank to suspend

payments only if the bank could not convert assets to cash quickly enough to cover claims

against it. Bad assets would not force a bank out of business if it retained sufficient deposits and

eventually covered its losses. Runs and frozen assets, in other words, could be flip sides of the

same coin.

       Differences did exist, however, between the asset and liability side of the balance sheet.

Agents attempted to communicate these distinctions by marking primary and contributing causes

in particular patterns. If the problems precipitating suspension arose on the asset side of a bank’s

balance sheet, agents checked slow, doubtful, or worthless paper as the primary cause and

withdrawals as a contributing cause or not at all. Checking paper as the primary cause indicated

that problems with the bank’s assets necessitated suspension regardless of other factors. The

banks’ assets possessed little value. Collections had fallen far behind scheduled. The capital was

impaired. The bank was or would soon be insolvent. Checking withdrawals as a contributing

cause indicated that depositors’ demands exacerbated the situation. Withdrawals could

complicate asset problems in several ways. A run on a bank on the edge of insolvency might




                                                 14
hasten its demise. Fears of runs might force a bank to hold large reserves of liquid assets, such as

cash, rather than large portfolios of remunerative assets, such as loans, preventing the bank from

earning profits and writing off bad debts. In an effort to satisfy depositors’ demands, a bank

might sell so many of its good assets that only bad assets remained, or a bank might borrow

against so many of its better investments, that it could not earn enough profits to retire its

substandard loans.

       If the problems precipitating suspension arose on the liability side of the bank’s balance

sheet, agents checked heavy withdrawals as the primary cause and paper as a contributing cause

or not at all. Checking withdrawals as the primary cause indicated that deposits declined to such

an extent that the bank could not continue operations. Its reserves of cash were depleted. It could

not longer convert assets to currency. It could not satisfy depositors’ demands. Checking paper

as the contributing cause indicated that the condition of the bank’s assets exacerbated the

situation. Doubtful and worthless assets could neither be sold nor rediscounted. Slow assets

could not be converted to cash quickly enough to alleviate a run. Substandard assets of any kind

reduced banks’ liquidity and prevented them from converting resources to cash.

       If problems arose equally on both sides of the balance sheet, agents checked both

withdrawals and paper as primary causes. In this case, the bank’s position was doubly difficult.

Its assets appeared so problematic that insolvency approached, and its depositors withdrew so

much of their savings that illiquidity loomed. Checking two primary causes indicated that either

factor alone would have caused the closure of the bank.

       Table 1 summarizes the issues discussed in this section. Column (1) indicates the changes

in status tracked by the Division of Bank Operations. Column (2) indicates whether a change in

status was a form of bank distress. Column (3) indicates which of the changes in status involved




                                                  15
the creation or dissolution of a bank (or several banks) charters. Column (4) indicates type of St.

6386 form (a, b, or c) on which the information should have been reported. Column (5) contains

a concise definition of the change in status. For exact definitions and a clarification of borderline

cases, please consult the discussion above.


Section 3: Data Sources and Cross-Validation

       This section delves into details of the data collection process and the procedures that the

Federal Reserve used to validate and cross-check the evidence. The purpose of the extended

discussion is to reassure the reader of the veracity of the Federal Reserve’s observations,

illuminate their value for historical research, and elucidate the information available in the

database, so that readers may effectively employ it in their own research.

       The Board of Governors strove to gather information about causes of suspension from the

man on the spot who knew the facts of the issue at hand. Annotations on the forms reveal these

efforts. Comments on hundreds of forms indicate that the information agrees with the receiver’s

report or was taken “From receiver’s report as of date of closing,” a phrase often imprinted with

an ink stamp. Federal Reserve agents often communicated directly with receivers, requesting

additional information or inquiring about complex or unclear cases. Receivers’ replies appear on

many forms. For example, the receiver for Mayo’s Money Exchange Bank of San Antonio,

Texas, stated “the primary cause of failure was due to investments of funds in stocks and bonds

representing real estate investments.” The Central Bank and Trust Company of Chicago, Illinois,

which was the liquidation trustee of the Mecca Bank of Mecca, Indiana, stated the bank should

be classified as a voluntary liquidation because “all of the creditors will be paid off in full within

a reasonable period.” A letter dated 6 October 1932 and written by F. E. J. Bower, the receiver

for the First National Bank of Bradley Beach, New Jersey, described the “reorganization plan as



                                                  16
follows: Creditors were to waive 40% of claims against the closed bank, total amounts of such

waiver equal 90% of present liabilities. Old stock of bank ($100 par) to be surrendered and then

resold at $25 per share in this way raising $125,000.”

       The Division of Bank Operations also consulted call reports and examination reports and

communicated directly with bank examiners and banking departments. Examples abound. The

examiner of the Central National Bank in Bartleaville, Oklahoma, which suspended on March

22, 1930, classified “$235,000 of assets as worthless and $164,000 as doubtful.” The examiner

of the First National Bank of Bixby, Oklahoma, which suspended on February 18, 1929, stated

“the suspension of this bank is chargeable directly to top heavy and other ill-advised loans made

during the period of inflation following the recent war, together with the incompetency of

succeeding officers in the matter of enforcing any effective policy of collection over the

following period of deflation.” On 28 February 1931, a letter from the Bank Commissioner of

Connecticut stated

       the Central Fairfield Trust Company of Norwalk, now the Merchants Bank and
       Trust Company, resumed business on Friday, February 20, 1931. The name of the
       institution was changed by special act of the legislature. While the name has been
       changed, it is still the same corporation which has resumed business upon the
       discharge of the temporary receiver appointed by the courts.

In January 1930, a telegram from the Indiana State Banking Department explained the

complicated series of transactions surrounding the suspension of the Argos State Bank of Argos,

Indiana, and its reopening under a new charter. In March 1933, the Utah State Bank

Commissioner reported that Gunnison Valley Bank of Gunnison, Utah, would reopen shortly. On

27 March 1930, an employee of the Division of Bank Operations with the initials M.F. called

Mr. Gough of the Comptroller of Currency after “examination of agent’s reports proved

inadequate.” Mr. Gough explained that the myriad of transactions reported for the town of




                                                17
Bartow, Florida, pertained to the closure of a single institution, the Polk County National Bank,

which unsuccessfully attempted to shed dubious assets, change its charter, and establish itself as

a new bank under a different name in hopes of saving itself.

       The Division of Bank Operations also contacted institutions and individuals with local

knowledge of particular banks. Local courts provided access to liquidation records, names and

addresses of court-appointed receivers, and opinions about suspended banks under their

jurisdiction. Local postmasters provided another means to attain such information. For example,

on 10 December 1930, a letter from the postmaster at Sandia, Texas, informed the Federal

Reserve that W.T. Mumme, the private bank in the town, ceased operations and liquidated

voluntarily.

       For country banks, a good source of information was their banking correspondent.

Correspondents in reserve cities held deposits of county-bank clients, provided clients with

services such as check clearing and wire transfers, and monitored clients’ financial health and

creditworthiness. Correspondents frequently replied to inquiries concerning the closures of the

clients. Many examples exist. The correspondent of Juan McKeyes and Company, a private bank

in Lawton, Michigan, wrote that McKeyes suspended operations on May 9, 1932 due to the

financial consequences of grape crop failures in the area, and reopened on June 2nd of that year

       after its depositors of their own volition had signed waiver agreements providing
       that no funds except such as are deposited after the bank reopened would be
       withdraw for a period of five years. Under the circumstances the court having
       jurisdiction over its affairs dismissed the receivership petition.

The Continental Illinois Bank and Trust Company, which was the correspondent of the

Commercial Bank of Wapellow, Iowa, stated that the latter closed its doors on October 13, 1931,

because the …

       bank unwisely expanded loans to care for needs of borrowers in communities



                                                18
       where banks had suspended and found itself unable to meet shrinkage in its
       deposits due to unrest among its own customers.

The Valley National Bank of Des Moines, Iowa stated that its client, the Farmers and Merchants

Bank of Scranton, Iowa, suspended operations primarily because it was “loaded with slow,

doubtful, and worthless paper.”

       Banks provided information about their own conditions. Reopened banks answered

inquiries about the cause of their temporary suspensions and the conditions under which they

reopened. Banks entering into voluntary liquidation released public statements explaining how

and why. Even the management of failed banks provided information in instances when Federal

Reserve agents contacted them directly. For example, in the fall of 1930, Harry M. Wilcox, the

President of the Citizens Bank of North Adams, Michigan, replied to an inquiry about the cause

of his bank’s suspension by stating “general business depression and decline in land value caused

the bank to close its doors.” Federal Reserve agents could gather this information because they

possessed the legal authority to compel truthful testimony. The law required bankers to answer

their inquiries. Untruthful respondents could be prosecuted for perjury. Federal Reserve agents

seeking answers from reticent witnesses could ask the Office of the Comptroller of Currency

(OCC) for assistance. OCC examiners could compel a response, since they possessed

investigative powers identical to secret service agents.

       Federal Reserve agents consulted the publications of the state banking departments.6

Most banking departments published annual reports. A few published biennially. Many banking

departments also published summaries of bank changes in the interim. Periodicity varied across

states. Indiana published a monthly bulletin. The New York State Banking Department published




                                                 19
a weekly bulletin with detailed descriptions of the causes of each state bank suspension. The

New York Superintendent of Banks also released an announcement at the time of each bank

suspension, stating the reasons why it was “deemed unsafe and inexpedient to permit the

institution to continue in business.” The Federal Reserve banks also compiled monthly

summaries of bank changes, which they forwarded to the Board’s Division of Bank Operations.

         Federal Reserve agents also consulted an array of business periodicals and popular

dailies. Citations to the following appear on the 6386 forms:

              •   Commercial and Financial Chronicle
              •   Bankers’ Monthly
              •   New York Sun
              •   New York Times
              •   Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia
              •   Rand McNally Bankers Directory
              •   Reports of R.G. Dunn & Company

Numerous newspapers from locales around the United States were also cited, but the typists who

transcribed the newspaper clippings merely stated that their source was a ‘local newspaper’

without additional bibliographic details.

         Each of these sources possessed its own strength. Federal Reserve officers had direct and

continuous contact with the management of member banks and the ability to comment credibly

on their competency. Correspondents could also provide vivid and valuable testimony on this

issue. Correspondents had ongoing relationships with the management of client banks, and

tracked the quality of their clients’ portfolios in case decisions had to be made about the

extension of credit. Call, examiners’, and receivers’ reports yielded financial data including the

kind, quality, and quantity of assets possessed by a bank on the date of suspension and the


6
    Katherine Tunis, head of the research library of the Board of Governors, reports that the Board’s library retained
    copies of all publications from the state banking departments until the late 1970s, when to conserve shelf space,
    the library sent all of these publications to the libraries of the Federal Reserve district banks.



                                                          20
patterns of deposit inflows and outflows before that date. Examiners of all national and most

state banks classified assets according to the categories good, slow, doubtful, and worthless,

which the Federal Reserve used on its suspension forms. Receivers of national and state banks

also listed assets and estimated values. Discussions with examiners, receivers, correspondents,

and bankers provided expert opinions about phenomena that they observed, often over a period

of years. Particularly useful are their opinions about the quality of the management and the

importance of correspondent linkages. Newspapers provided detailed descriptions of events that

interested their readers, such as defalcations and bank runs, and on important financial events in

their hometowns, such as the closing and reopening of local banks. Much of the information

provided by these sources could come from nowhere else.

       The Federal Reserve Board incorporated all of this information into the 6386 forms by

creating a nationwide reporting network. The law required member banks to report changes in

status to their local Federal Reserve Bank. Similar regulations required national banks to report

such information to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Federal Reserve agents at

district and branch banks completed initial drafts of the forms from information at their disposal

and forwarded the forms to the Board of Governors in Washington, where the Division of Bank

Operations checked the information against available sources (including copies of the materials

submitted to the OCC and routinely forwarded to the Federal Reserve), sorted and tabulated the

forms, compiled aggregate statistics, and disseminated the results. Nonmember banks reported to

state authorities, which cooperated in the Federal Reserve’s data-collection endeavors by

forwarding the relevant information. The Federal Reserve cultivated contacts with state agencies,

and during the Depression, subsidized the salaries of state employees who worked part time on

Board businesses.




                                                21
       In complicated, unclear, and unresolved cases, the Division requested additional

information and researched the events in greater depth. The definitive determination of the cause

of a bank suspension often took several months. The archives contain preliminary, in-process,

and final reports for many banks. These duplicates accumulated as agents incorporated additional

information into their analysis and updated their conclusions. Information flowed to the Division

of Bank Operations as institutions and individuals replied to Federal Reserve requests for

information. In several cases, the materials collected by the Division, such as examiners’ reports,

telegrams from receivers, press clippings, etcetera, remain clipped to the 6386 forms, although

routine procedure appears to have been to discard the source material after reaching a definitive

determination of the cause of a bank’s failure

       The Board’s efforts continued throughout the Depression. After the national banking

holiday, the Board joined forces with the Office of the Comptroller of Currency and the Federal

Deposit Insurance Corporation. With funding from the Works Project Administration, this

regulatory triumvirate strove to construct a data base containing information from all banks

operating in the United States since 1929. As part of the process, the Board of Governors

rechecked the 6386 forms against the records of the state banking bureaus, the OCC, and the

Rand McNally and Polk corporations. The Board published the initial results of this

reconciliation in the Federal Reserve Bulletin for September, 1937. Further publications were

planned, but the project lapsed as the Board allocated resources towards other projects.


Section 4: The Accuracy of the Archival Information

       The previous sections describe how the Board of Governors gathered information about

events effecting banks and how the Division of Bank Operations determined the cause of each

bank’s demise. The method involved gathering financial data for each institution; talking with



                                                 22
the regulators, examiners, receivers, correspondents, and bankers who knew the facts of the issue

at hand; applying a set of algorithms devised to determine the cause of the failure; and reporting

the results in a lexicon devised to convey the conclusions clearly, concisely, and consistently.

       This section compares the archival evidence to tabulations previously published in

FRB’37, a wide array of historical sources, and numerous scholarly studies. The comparisons

demonstrate four important points. One, the archives retain the original data set in its entirety.

Two, the archival information on events effecting banks is accurate. The information matches

facts revealed by other sources. Three, the archival information on the causes of bank

suspensions is accurate. The information matches conclusions drawn from historical studies of

particular institutions and econometric studies of the broader financial system. Four, the archival

evidence contains information previously unavailable to scholars.

       The initial question one should ask about the archival evidence is: do figures from it

correspond closely to the figures published in the FRB’37? Figures 1 and 2 answer that question.

In Figure 1, the solid line is the number of bank suspensions each month according to FRB’37.

This tally includes all banks: national, state, and private. The dotted line represents the archival

data. It is calculated from the St. 6386 forms in the National Archives using the definitions, rules,

and algorithms established by the Division of Bank Operations in the 1930s. The lines

correspond closely. The coefficient of correlation for the two series is 0.996.

       In Figure 2, the solid line is total deposits in the banks that suspended each month

according to FRB’37. This tally includes all banks and both temporary and terminal suspensions.

The dotted line represents the archival data. It is calculated from the St. 6386 forms in the

National Archives using the definitions, rules, and algorithms established by the Division of

Bank Operations in the 1930s. The lines correspond closely. The correlation coefficient for the




                                                 23
two series is 0.998.

       Similar exercises on other cross-tabulations duplicate the analogous series published in

1937. The replication of the FRB’37 series demonstrates that the archival data remains

comprehensive. The dataset retains observations for all (or almost all) of the banks represented

by the FRB’37 series. A discrepancy between the two series exists during the first five months of

1929. In each month, the archival data contains 15 to 30 fewer suspensions than the published

tabulations. I have not been able to determine the source of this discrepancy. I suspect the cause

lies in the Federal Reserves transition to a new reporting system beginning in January 1929.

After July 1929 (i.e. after the start of the contraction), the archival and published series are

nearly congruent. From July 1929 to February 1933, the correlation coefficient between the

archival and published series is 0.999.

       The slight discrepancies after July 1929 appear to be due to duplicate entries in the data

set and complicated or unclear cases where properly applying the coding algorithms is difficult.

The most common complications was a bank that suspended operations and then consolidated

with another institution. If the suspended bank reopened for business (for even a brief moment)

prior to consolidation, then the Division of Bank Operation’s algorithms reported these events as

a bank suspension (temporary), a reopening, and a consolidation (i.e. three transactions on three

separate dates). If the banks did not officially reopen, then the algorithm classified this

transaction as a terminal suspension (on the original date of suspension). In approximately 25

cases, information in the St 6386 forms did not clearly indicate the order of events and the

appropriate classification of the transaction. In several cases, preliminary St 6386 forms

contradicted revised St 6386 about the relevant details. Reference to contemporary publications –

such as newspapers and state banking reports – did not clarify the situation. So, in all of these




                                                  24
cases, I have assumed that the bank did reopen prior to consolidation, and that the events should

be recorded as a temporary suspension, a reopening, and a consolidation.

       Additional reassurance of the accuracy of the archival information comes from state-level

databases which I have constructed by combining information from government (state

examiners, Fed, and OCC reports) and commercial sources (Rand McNally’s Bankers Directory

and Polk’s Bankers Encyclopedia). For the four states that I have completed, Florida,

Mississippi, New York, and Tennessee, information about changes in bank status in the state-

level databases and St. 6386 forms match at rates over 99.5%. The few discrepancies appear to

be temporary suspensions (which were not recorded in many sources) and incorrect St. 6386

forms (for example, misspellings of bank names and locations and incorrect transaction dates).

The striking similarities between datasets derived from these independent sources suggests that

the archival dataset contains observations for all banks that suspended operations during the

Great Contraction.

       Does the quality of archival information about the causes of bank suspensions equal the

quality of information on the timing and nature of changes in bank status? A thorough

investigation of the evidence indicates that the answer is yes. This conclusion rests on three facts.

       First, for individual institutions whose demise has been the subject of academic analysis,

the conclusion of scholars coincides closely with the cause of suspension indicated on the

relevant St. 6386b form. For example, Wicker (1980) and McFerrin (1939) attribute the demise

of the Bank of Tennessee (Nashville, TN), the principal bank of the Caldwell conglomerate, to

an ill-informed strategy that lead to large investment losses. Wicker (1980) and McFerrin (1939)

attribute the demise of the American Exchange Trust Company (Little Rock, AR), a Caldwell

affiliate, to runs on the institution. The corresponding St. 6386 forms attribute the Bank of




                                                 25
Tennessee’s suspension to “depreciation in value of securities” and excessive debts on real estate

and bills payable. The corresponding St. 6386 forms attribute the American Exchange Trust

Company’s suspension to “heavy withdrawals due to rumors caused by failure of Caldwell and

Company, Nashville Tenn.”

       Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Joseph Lucia (1985) attribute the failure of The Bank

of United States to its large, underperforming real estate portfolio, which threatened its solvency

and prevented it from merging with other institutions, and to “runs on several of the bank’s

branches (Friedman and Schwartz, p. 310, note 9).” The corresponding St. 6386 form attributes

the suspension to the primary cause of “slow, doubtful, and worthless paper” with the

contributing cause of “heavy withdrawals.”

       Second, for broader events that have been the subject of academic analysis, the academic

conclusions coincide closely with the causes of suspension indicated on the relevant St. 6386b

forms. For example, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) attribute the surge in suspensions during

March 1931 to the public’s “resumed conversion of deposits into currency.” The St. 6386 forms

paint a similar picture. Federal Reserve agents reported that heavy withdrawals were the primary

cause of almost of the suspensions and stated laconically on most of the forms that the bank

closed its doors after runs depleted its cash reserves.

        Calomiris and Mason (1997) attribute the Chicago banking panic of June 1932 to

depositors’ confusion about bank asset quality. Depositors withdrew funds widely from banks

which they feared might be insolvent, because they did not know which institutions were, in fact,

insolvent. The St. 6386 forms tell a similar tale. For the preponderance of the banks which failed

during the panic, examiners concluded that the primary cause of suspension was doubtful and

worthless assets. Runs on these institutions were a contributing cause of their closure. Written




                                                 26
comments on the suspension forms indicate that banks suffered from declines in the value of

securities, bonds, and real estate and from large loan losses.

       Three, conclusions drawn from econometric studies of the causes of bank suspensions

correspond closely with the causes of suspension indicated on the relevant St. 6386b forms. One

example is the study by Calomiris and Mason (1997) discussed above. Another example comes

from my study of bank suspensions in the state of Mississippi. In 1929, the industrial depression

and the failure of local businesses caused the closure of banks in the surrounding community.

These closures were concentrated in the southern half of the state under the jurisdiction of the 6th

Federal Reserve District. In 1930, a banking panic swept through the state, forcing large numbers

of banks to suspend operations in the 6th District and an even higher percentage to suspend

operations in the northern half of the state, which was under the jurisdiction of the 8th Federal

Reserve District.

       Table 2 presents predictions from a parsimonious probit model using bank and county

characteristics in July 1929 to predict suspensions between July 1929 and June 1930. The table

also uses the coefficients from the 1929 regression and characteristics of banks and counties in

July 1930 to predict suspension rates between July 1930 and June 1931. Column (i) indicates the

average predicted probability of suspension for 1929. Column (iii) indicates the actual

suspension rate in 1929. The null hypothesis that the former equals the latter cannot be rejected,

demonstrating that the model fits the data reasonably well. Column (ii) indicates the average

predicted probability of suspension for 1930. The prediction for the 8th District changes little,

because the balance sheets of banks in the 8th District changed little between July 1929 and July

1930. The prediction for the 6th District falls substantially, because the 6th Districts high failure

rate for 1929 was driven by adverse shocks in particular counties. In 1930, fewer banks operate




                                                  27
in those counties (in fact, almost all of the banks in those counties failed). In the remainder of the

district, the balance sheets of banks, and thus the predicted probability of failure, changed little.

Comparing Columns (ii) and (iv) shows that our model of fundamentals which fit the data well

for 1929 does not predict the events that occurred in the following year.

       The standard interpretation of these regression results is that fundamentals caused banks

to fail in 1929 while unpredictable panics caused the failures one year later. The archival

evidence concurs with this conclusion. The St. 6386 forms indicate that the most common cause

of suspension in 1929 was problematic assets. Written comments reveal idiosyncratic shocks

such as a “large saw mill closing down caused withdrawal of deposits.” The St. 6386 forms

indicate that the most common cause of suspension in 1930 was heavy withdrawals. Half of the

suspensions were temporary. In sum, in the Mississippi case, the causes of suspension indicated

on the St. 6386 forms are consistent with the econometric evidence.

       The veracity of the archival evidence raises the question: what information is available in

the new dataset? What does the data reveal? Figure 3 summarizes the available information. The

solid black area at the bottom indicates the new observations on bank distress. The new

observations consist of voluntary liquidations and consolidations due to financial difficulties.

The gray area indicates the number of temporary bank suspensions. The FRB’37 reported these

suspensions, but did not differentiate them from permanent suspensions. The vertically striped

area indicates the number of terminal suspensions. The entire shaded area indicates the total

number of bank changes due to financial difficulties that occurred each week from January 1929

through March 1933. For all of these observations, the archival database adds an array of

information including the cause of the suspension, the date of the suspension, the financial

condition of the bank on that date, the identity of the institution or individuals who initiated the




                                                  28
change, and in many cases, written comments concerning the circumstances leading to and/or

resulting from the event.

       Three patterns in the new data should be noted. First, the new observations are clustered

between the fall of 1930 and winter of 1932. During that period, bank suspensions surged above

pre-depression levels in repeated waves. Second, the archival evidence allows us to view the data

without chronological aggregation. Weekly and daily series of suspensions display volatility

much greater than the monthly series published in FRB’37. On several occasions, the number of

bank suspensions rose (or fell) overnight by a factor of 20 or more. Such wild swings may be one

reason that bank failures made such an impression on public perceptions.

       Third, the banking holiday of March 1933 does not appear in the archival evidence. Why

not? The Federal Reserve’s reporting system was not designed to (and for that reason did not)

track the status of banks that closed during state or national banking holidays. The Division of

Bank Operations provided an approximation (4000) of the number of banks that did not reopen

within three months of the national banking holiday, which was published (with caveats) in

FRB’37. The exact number is unknown. This lacuna in the evidence is a problem universal to all

data sets. No extant source describes this event in detail.


Section 5: Chronological Data on Categories of Distress and Causes of Suspensions

       The previous sections described the nature and properties of the archival evidence. This

section presents aggregate series constructed from this rediscovered source. The series are

designed to illuminate the nature of the banking crises during the early 1930s, to supplement

(and in some cases replace) the series in FRB’37, and to enable economic historians and

macroeconomists to accurately assess the causes and consequences of the contraction.

       Tables 3 and 4 present annual hazard rates for categories and causes of distress. Table 3



                                                 29
focuses on permanent bank changes. Table 4 focuses on the causes of temporary suspensions. In

the tables, row (a) indicates the total number of banks suspending operations. Row (a.1) indicates

the total number of banks suspending operations due to problems with assets and liabilities.

Imbalances often arose on one side of the balance sheet, but could arise simultaneously on both

sides. Rows (a.1.1) through (a.1.5) display the possible combinations: (a.1.1) slow, doubtful, or

worthless assets listed as the primary cause of suspension; (a.1.2) assets listed as the primary

cause and heavy withdrawals listed as a contributing cause; (a.1.3) both withdrawals and assets

listed as primary causes; (a.1.4) heavy withdrawals listed as the primary cause and assets as the

contributing cause; and (a.1.5) withdrawals alone as the primary cause of suspension. Row (a.2)

indicates the number of banks suspending due to the closure of a correspondent. Row (a.3)

indicates the number of banks suspending due to defalcations, mismanagement, excessive loans

to officers and directors, excessive investment in building and facilities, and similar

circumstances. Row (a.4) indicates the number of banks suspending due to other or multiple

causes. The latter consists in part of complex cases which do not fit into the mutually exclusive

categories above, often because they spanned two or more classifications. An example is a

poorly managed bank which failed to enforce collections on its slow farm loans and which

experienced runs after local newspapers revealed that its president embezzled funds from savings

accounts. Row (b) indicates the number of consolidations due to financial difficulties. Row (c)

indicates the number of voluntary liquidations. Row (d) indicates the number of net changes for

reasons unrelated to financial difficulties. This series consists almost entirely of the number of

mergers minus the number of new openings.

       Table 5 indicates the number of banks in distress by category and quarter. The quarters

are defined as winter (January, February, and March), spring (April, May, and June), summer




                                                 30
(July, August, September), and fall (October, November, and December). Columns (1) through

(3) refer to the three categories of distress – terminal suspensions, voluntary liquidations, and

consolidations due to financial difficulties – in which banks departed from the banking business.

Column (4) indicates the total of the first three columns. Column (5) indicates the number of

temporary bank suspensions – a form of distress in which banks remained in business. Column

(6) indicates the total number of banks in distress (i.e. Columns (1) + (2) + (3) + (5)).

        The figures in Table 5 can be compared to Tables 1 and 12 of FRB’37. Those tables

report total number of bank suspensions, which is equivalent to the sum of Columns (1) and (5) in

Table 5 of this essay. Scholars studying the macroeconomic effects of bank suspensions should

rely on the FRB’37 series for the years 1927 through 1928 and 1933 through 1936, for which

there is little evidence of temporary bank suspensions. Scholars should interpret results for the

period 1921 through 1926 with caution, because narrative reports of temporary suspensions exist,

but data distinguishing temporary from permanent suspensions does not. Scholars should employ

bank suspension data from this essay when studying the contraction of the early 1930s (i.e.

summer 1929 through winter 1933), because the series of temporary suspensions peaks in the Fall

of 1930 and the Fall of 1931. Those quarters contain breaks in trend for many macroeconomic

time series (including money supply, interest rates, and output), and those quarters tend to be the

outliers that identify relationships in most macroeconomic models.

        Table 6 reports deposits in banks in distress by category and quarter in thousands of

dollars. Figures from this table can be compared to Tables 2 and 13 of FRB’37, which report total

deposits in suspending banks, which is equivalent to the sum of deposits in banks suspending

temporarily and terminally (i.e. the sum of Columns (1) and (5)). Scholars studying the

macroeconomic effects of deposits in suspending banks should treat this data in the same manner




                                                  31
as they treat data on the number of suspensions. For the years 1927 through 1928 and 1933

through 1936, rely on FRB’37. For the period 1921 through 1926, interpret results with caution.

For the period winter 1929 through winter 1933, employ the new data separating total deposits in

suspending banks into terminal and temporary components.

       Scholars studying data on deposits should keep in mind an additional caveat. Form St.

6386a, which reported bank consolidations, and Form 6386c, which reported voluntary

liquidations, did not contain a space for information on deposits. On occasion, Federal Reserve

agents included this information. For that reason, dollar values of deposits appear in the

spreadsheet in Columns (2) and (3), but those figures are far from complete, and do not

systematically represent dollar values of deposits in banks consolidating due to financial

difficulties or undergoing voluntary liquidation.

        Table 7 reports loans and investments in banks in distress by category and quarter in

thousands of dollars. Figures from this table can be compared to Table 3 of FRB’37, which

reports loans and investments in suspending banks, which is equivalent to the sum of loans and

investments in banks suspending temporarily and terminally (i.e. the sum of Columns (1) and

(5)). Scholars studying the macroeconomic effects of loans and investments should treat this data

in the same manner as they treat data from the previous two tables. For the years 1927 through

1928 and 1933 through 1936, rely on FRB’37. For the period 1921 through 1926, interpret results

with caution. For the period 1929 through winter 1933, employ use this table to separate loans

and investments in suspending banks into their total and temporary components.

       The data on loans and investments in Table 7 has an advantage over the data on deposits

in Table 6. All three St. 6386 forms report this information for banks on the date of a change in

status (i.e. suspension, liquidation, or consolidation). This information reveals, therefore, the




                                                    32
relative significance of different categories of distress, as measured by the productive assets of

the banks involved. The bottom line of Table 7 illuminates this issue. During the contraction,

loans and investments of the 5,191 banks suspending permanently amounted to $3.6 billion.

Loans and investments of the 877 banks suspending temporarily amounted to $607 million.

Loans and investments of the 659 banks consolidating due to financial difficulties amounted to

$1.7 billion. Most of these consolidations occurred during panics in the period beginning in the

fall of 1930 and continuing until the winter of 1932. The peak occurred during the fall of 1931,

after Britain abandoned the gold standard and the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate to stem

financial outflows. During that quarter, banks with assets totaling $725 million consolidated in

the face of financial difficulties. Banks with loans and investments totaling $698 million

suspended operations terminally. Banks with loans and investments totaling $291 million

suspended operations temporarily.

       Tables 8 through 10 report the causes of terminal bank suspensions. The columns of the

table have the same definitions as the rows of Table 3, and are labeled accordingly. Table 8

indicates the number of terminal suspensions by cause and quarter. Table 9 indicates deposits in

banks suspending permanently in millions of dollars. Table 10 indicates loans and investments in

banks suspending permanently in millions of dollars.

       Tables 11 through 13 report the causes of temporary bank suspensions. The columns of

the table have the same definitions as the rows of Table 3. Table 11 indicates the number of

temporary suspensions by cause and quarter. Table 12 indicates deposits in banks suspending

temporarily in millions of dollars. Table 13 indicates loans and investments in banks suspending

temporarily in millions of dollars.

        Tables 8 through 13 have no counterpart in FRB’37. The Federal Reserve never




                                                 33
published data on the causes of suspensions during the Great Contraction. Scholars interested in

the macroeconomic implications of these series must restrict their attention to the early 1930s.

Reasonable assumptions, however, should allow them to extend the series forward. The number

of banks suspending operations dropped dramatically after March 1933. In 1934, only 57 banks

suspended operations. In 1935 and 1936, the number of suspensions was 34 and 44 respectively.

In 1934, Congress established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. In the years that

followed, depositors returned funds to financial institutions, and banks held tremendous

quantities of cash reserves. In this environment, it seems probable that unlucky investments,

idiosyncratic asset shocks, and mistakes of management caused the bulk of bank failures, and that

bank runs and contagion through correspondent networks played a lesser part. So,

macroeconomists may be able to safely assume that the bulk of bank suspensions during the late

1930s stemmed from fundamental forces rather than the panics that appear to have plagued the

banking system at some points in the past.


Section 6: Discussion

        The evidence introduced in this essay has the potential to resolve many debates

concerning the causes and consequences of the banking crises during the Great Depression.

Academic debate continues because scholars lack detailed, comprehensive data on the nature and

timing of events. The St. 6386 database provides such evidence.

        Quarterly series of data constructed from the St. 6386 database make this information

available to scholars studying the macroeconomic aspects of the contraction. These series

supplement those published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin of 1937, enabling scholars to make

important distinctions between different forms of bank distress. For example, scholars can now

distinguish temporary from terminal suspensions. These two types of suspensions have different



                                                 34
macroeconomic implications. Temporary suspensions indicate periods of illiquidity when solvent

banks temporarily suspend the conversion of deposits to currency and when depositors demands

for currency increase to quickly for the financial system to respond. Temporary suspensions

reflect periods where the monetary problems described by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) afflict

the economy. Terminal suspensions indicate periods when banks cease operations, depositors

lose access to their savings, and borrowers lose access to sources of credit. Terminal suspensions

reflect periods of disintermediation where the non-monetary dynamics outlined by Bernanke

(1983) afflict the economy.

       The new series also enables scholars to observe events that could not be observed in the

past. For example, now scholars can observe consolidations due to financial difficulties (usually

consummated quickly in a rush to avoid suspension). The concentration of these consolidations

during the fall of 1931 may alter interpretations of that event. Could it be possible, for example,

that by forcing banks to consolidate, the banking crisis following Britain’s departure from the

gold standard reduced the competition among financial institutions, raising interest rates on

commercial loans, even though the banks remained open for business?

       The data series introduced in this essay should enable scholars to answer this and many

other questions concerning the financial crises of the early 1930s.




                                                 35
Figure 1
Comparing Archival and Published Data
Number of Bank Suspensions, by Month, January 1929 to March 1933

600
               Archival Data
               Published Data
500



400



300



200



100



  0
  Jan-29    Jul-29    Jan-30    Jul-30    Jan-31    Jul-31    Jan-32    Jul-32    Jan-33

  Sources: Archival data from National Archives and Record Administration, Record Group 82,
  as described in appendix. Published data from Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937,
  Table 12, p. 907




                                            36
                      Figure 2
                      Comparing Archival and Published Data
                      Deposits in Suspended Banks, Millions of Dollars, by Month, January 1929 to March 1933

                      600
                                      Archival Data
                                      Published Data
                      500



                      400
Millions of Dollars




                      300



                      200



                      100



                        0
                        Jan-29     Jul-29    Jan-30    Jul-30    Jan-31    Jul-31    Jan-32    Jul-32    Jan-33

                        Sources: Archival data from National Archives and Record Administration, Record Group 82,
                        as described in appendix. Published data from Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937,
                        Table 13, p. 909




                                                                  37
Figure 3
Comparing Archival and Extant Data
                            160
                                      All Observations
                            140       New Observations + Temporary Suspensions
                                      New Observations
                            120
 Number of Banks per Week




                            100


                             80


                             60


                             40


                             20


                             0
                             Jan-29              Jan-30               Jan-31     Jan-32   Jan-33


Notes: Solid black area indicates the number of voluntary liquidations plus consolidations in
financial difficulties. The gray area indicates the number of temporary suspensions. The
vertically striped area indicates the number of terminal suspension. The sum of these three
categories is the total number of new and extant observations (i.e. all observations).

Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                      38
Table 1
Changes in Bank Status, Definitions and Sources
January 1929 through March 1933


Change in Status                          Distress?     Change      Source     Brief Definition. A bank that …
                                                      in Charter?   St. 6386

(1)                                          (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)

Suspension, Terminal                        Yes          Yes           b       Ceased operations and entered liquidation under supervision of a receiver.
Suspension, Temporary                       Yes                       b, c     Ceased operations temporarily and then reopened for business.

Voluntary Liquidation                       Yes          Yes           c       Ceased operations and rapidly repaid depositors the full value of deposits.

Consolidation in financial difficulties     Yes          Yes           a       Merged with another bank while at risk of suspension or liquidation.
Consolidation                                            Yes           a       Merged with another bank while in a sound financial position.

Organization of New Bank                                 Yes           c       Acquired a charter and opened its doors to depositors.

Conversion – Nonmember to member                                       c       Joined the Federal Reserve System.
Conversion – Member to nonmember                                       c       Departed from the Federal Reserve System.
Conversion – State to national charter                   Yes                   Surrendered state charter but continued under a new, national charter.
Conversion – National to state charter                   Yes                   Surrendered national charter but continued under a new, state charter.

Change in capital stock                                                c       Increased or decreased the amount of paid-up capital.
Change in street address                                               c       Whose headquarters moved to a new location.



Sources: National Archives and Record Administration. See text for details.




                                                                                 39
Table 2
Comparing Econometric and Archival Evidence on Causes of Suspension
Probit Predictions, Mississippi, 1929 and 1930

                   Predicted              Actual
                1929    1930     1929      1930
                  (i)     (ii)    (iii)     (iv)

 6th District   7.1 % 4.5 %      7.1 % 14.2 %

 8th District   3.0 % 3.0 %      3.0 % 39.5 %




                                             40
Table 3
Categories and Causes of Permanent Bank Changes, Annual Hazard Rates, January 1929 through March 1933

                                                   1929            1930                  1931            1932           1933            Total

                                             %        #      %        #            %        #      %        #      %       #      %        #

Banks at beginning of year                        24,198          22,172                19,375          17,082      14,440             24,198
(a) Terminal suspensions due to            1.79     433    4.86    1,078        10.11    1,958   7.61    1,300   2.91    420   21.44    5,189
   (a.1) Assets and liabilities            0.88     212    3.18     704          7.70    1,491   5.91    1,010   2.15    310   15.40    3,727
      (a.1.1) Assets                       0.39      95    1.32     293          2.22     430    1.98     338    0.60     86    5.13    1,242
      (a.1.2) Assets (p) and withdrawals
(c)                                        0.17      42    0.51     114          1.29     250    1.25     214    0.40     58    2.80     678
      (a.1.3) Withdrawals (p) and assets
(p)                                        0.05      11    0.27      59          0.70     135    0.42      71    0.13     19    1.22     295
      (a.1.4) Withdrawals (p) and assets
(c)                                        0.13      32    0.51     113          2.24     434    1.46     250    0.73    106    3.86     935
      (a.1.5) Withdrawals                  0.13      32    0.56     125          1.25     242    0.80     137    0.28     41    2.38     577
   (a.2) Closure of correspondent          0.09      22    0.35      78          0.40      77    0.29      50    0.14     20    1.02     247
   (a.3) Defalcation and mismanagement     0.51     123    0.59     130          0.73     142    0.43      74    0.11     16    2.00     485
   (a.4) Other causes                      0.31      76    0.75     166          1.28     248    0.97     166    0.51     74    3.02     730
(b) Consolidations due to difficulties     0.22      54    0.61     136          1.59     309    0.88     151    0.26     38    2.84     688
(c) Voluntary liquidations                 0.16      39    0.39      86          0.57     110    0.58      99    0.26     37    1.53     371
(d) Net changes for other reasons          6.20    1,500   6.75    1,497        -0.43      -84   6.39    1,092                 16.55    4,005

Banks at end of year                              22,172          19,375                17,082          14,440      13,945             13,945


Notes: Statistics for 1933 include only the months January through March. The initial entry is the number of banks operating at
the beginning of January 1929. For each year, the percentage column indicates the fraction of the banks operating in that year
which experienced each event. For the total column, the percentage indicates the fraction of banks which experienced each event
at some point in time from January 1929 to March 1933. (p) indicates a primary cause. (c) indicates a contributing cause.

Sources: Data on banks in operation from Wicker 1996, Table 1.1, page 2 and Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937, Table



                                                                           41
12, p. 907. Suspension data from Record Group 82, National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                               42
Table 4
Causes of Temporary Bank Changes, Annual Hazard Rates, January 1929 through March 1933

                                                 1929           1930            1931          1932      1933             Total

                                                %    #     %       #        %      #     %       #     %     #     %        #

Banks at beginning of year                     24,198       22,172          19,375        17,082       14,440           24,198

(a) Temporary suspensions due to              0.29 70    1.25 278       1.63     316   0.94 161      0.33   48   3.70     873

   (a.1) Assets and liabilities               0.12 30    0.65 144       1.18     229   0.67 114      0.19   27   2.31     544
     (a.1.1) Assets                           0.03   7   0.10     23    0.14      27   0.09     16   0.03    5   0.33      78
     (a.1.2) Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)   0.01   2   0.13     28    0.23      44   0.20     35   0.02    3   0.47     112
     (a.1.3) Withdrawals (p) and assets (p)   0.02   5   0.05     12    0.14      28   0.02      3   0.02    3   0.22      51
     (a.1.4) Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)   0.02   6   0.14     32    0.27      53   0.26     44   0.07   10   0.61     145
     (a.1.5) Withdrawals                      0.04 10    0.22     49    0.40      77   0.09     16   0.04    6   0.67     158

   (a.2) Closure of correspondent             0.02   6   0.30     67    0.10      20   0.11     18   0.03    4   0.49     115

   (a.3) Defalcation and mismanagement        0.09 21    0.11     24    0.09      17   0.01      2               0.27      64

   (a.4) Other causes                         0.05 13    0.19     43    0.26      50   0.16     27   0.12   17   0.64     150


Notes: Statistics for 1933 include only the months January through March. The initial entry is the number of banks
operating at the beginning of January 1929. For each year, the percentage column indicates the fraction of the banks
operating in that year which experienced each event. For the total column, the percentage indicates the fraction of banks
which experienced each event at some point in time from January 1929 to March 1933. (p) indicates primary cause. (c)
indicates contributing cause.

Sources: Data on banks in operation from Wicker 1996, Table 1.1, page 2 and Federal Reserve Bulletin, September 1937,
Table 12, p. 907. Suspension data from National Archives and Records Administration, Record Group 82. See Richardson
(2006) for details.



                                                                       43
Table 5
Number of Banks in Distress, by Category and Quarter
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933




                                                                                                Total, Distressed Departures


                                                                                                                               Suspensions, Temporary



                                                                                                                                                          Total, Banks in Distress
                                            Voluntary Liquidations
                    Suspensions, Terminal




                                                                     Consolidations due to
                    (1)                     (2)                      Financial Difficulties
                                                                               (3)              (4)                            (5)                        (6)

 1929    Winter     102                        1                                  2            105                                9                      114
         Spring      92                        1                                  3             96                               17                      113
         Summer      96                       14                                 19            129                               25                      154
         Fall       141                       23                                 29            193                               20                      213

 1930    Winter     229                       30                                 38            297                              32                       329
         Spring     174                       17                                 19            210                              34                       244
         Summer     185                       19                                 15            219                              21                       240
         Fall       489                       21                                 52            562                             190                       752

 1931    Winter     316                       34                             65                 415                             63                        478
         Spring     306                       12                             57                 375                             13                        388
         Summer     496                       23                             58                 577                             53                        630
         Fall       844                       42                            119               1,005                            189                      1,194

 1932    Winter     435                       45                                 67            547                               81                      628
         Spring     282                       20                                 36            338                               23                      361
         Summer     244                       12                                 21            277                               38                      315
         Fall       340                       22                                 25            387                               21                      408

 1933    Winter     420                       38                                 34            492                               48                      540

 Total            5,191                     374                             659               6,224                            877                      7,101



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                              44
Table 6
Deposits in Banks in Distress,
by Category and Quarter, in Thousands of Dollars
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933




                                                                                                           Total, Distressed Departures




                                                                                                                                              Suspensions, Temporary




                                                                                                                                                                             Total, Banks in Distress
                                                   Voluntary Liquidations
                        Suspensions, Terminal




                                                                            Consolidations due to
                                                                            Financial Difficulties
                        (1)                        (2)                                (3)                  (4)                                (5)                            (6)

 1929    Winter      19,115                         0                            0                     19,115                               2,260                        21,375
         Spring      25,662                         0                            0                     25,662                               5,148                        30,810
         Summer      55,200                       744                          275                     56,219                              10,806                        67,026
         Fall        39,811                        73                        1,200                     41,083                               8,045                        49,128

 1930    Winter      75,196                       426                          232                     75,854                              12,694                        88,547
         Spring      90,169                        91                       17,097                    107,356                              14,225                       121,581
         Summer      69,145                        44                           23                     69,212                              10,315                        79,527
         Fall       524,594                       100                          273                    524,968                              89,142                       614,109

 1931    Winter     133,745                       107                        2,540                    136,393                              21,173                       157,566
         Spring     271,015                       241                            0                    271,256                               4,487                       275,743
         Summer     429,473                       770                        1,384                    431,627                              37,208                       468,835
         Fall       561,001                       242                        4,879                    566,122                             251,588                       817,709

 1932    Winter     263,645                          0                             842                264,487                              38,536                       303,023
         Spring     199,350                     10,737                               0                210,087                               9,259                       219,346
         Summer      83,443                         57                             525                 84,025                              16,316                       100,340
         Fall       130,903                          0                             331                131,234                               7,699                       138,933

 1933    Winter     191,520                      5,050                             510                197,080                              16,156                       213,236

 Total            3,162,988                     18,681                      30,111                   3,211,780                            555,054                      3,766,834



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                           45
Table 7
Loans and Investments of Banks in Distress,
by Category and Quarter, in Thousands of Dollars
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933




                                                                                                               Total, Distressed Departures




                                                                                                                                                  Suspensions, Temporary




                                                                                                                                                                                 Total, Banks in Distress
                                                    Voluntary Liquidations
                        Suspensions, Terminal




                                                                                Consolidations due to
                                                                                Financial Difficulties
                        (1)                         (2)                                   (3)                  (4)                                (5)                            (6)

 1929    Winter      11,320                         113                           316                      11,749                               1,688                        13,437
         Spring      10,722                          31                         1,189                      11,942                               2,222                        14,163
         Summer      39,710                         750                         9,123                      49,582                               2,616                        52,198
         Fall        37,132                       5,565                        16,949                      59,646                               5,463                        65,109

 1930    Winter      77,680                       3,999                        34,862                     116,540                              13,217                       129,758
         Spring      92,964                       5,415                        24,391                     122,770                              15,593                       138,363
         Summer      71,922                       2,735                        26,790                     101,447                               9,723                       111,170
         Fall       557,996                       1,793                        55,581                     615,370                              99,463                       714,833

 1931    Winter     147,393                       4,678                        53,402                      205,473                             22,934                        228,407
         Spring     310,684                       3,760                       298,349                      612,793                              4,788                        617,581
         Summer     495,800                       5,619                        95,067                      596,485                             40,649                        637,135
         Fall       698,744                       6,663                       725,454                    1,430,860                            290,563                      1,721,423

 1932    Winter     296,799                       8,348                       151,018                     456,165                              39,019                       495,183
         Spring     230,213                      37,628                       142,260                     410,100                              10,516                       420,616
         Summer      99,403                       1,620                        28,216                     129,239                              18,260                       147,499
         Fall       177,880                       1,656                        17,678                     197,215                               9,499                       206,714

 1933    Winter     233,555                      18,189                        44,623                     296,366                              20,458                       316,824

 Total            3,589,915                     108,560                      1,725,267                   5,423,742                            606,670                      6,030,412



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                46
Table 8
Number of Terminal Bank Suspensions, by Cause and Quarter
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933


                  Cause of Terminal Suspension

                  Assets and/or Withdrawals




                                                                                                                            Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)
                                                                                           Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)
                                                          Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Total, Terminal Suspensions
                                                                                                                                                                           Closure of correspondent
                     Assets and Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Other causes
                                                                                                                                                             Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Defalcation
                                                Assets
                                                (a.1.1)

                                                          (a.1.2)

                                                                                           (a.1.3)

                                                                                                                            (a.1.4)

                                                                                                                                                             (a.1.5)
                     (a.1)




                                                                                                                                                                           (a.2)


                                                                                                                                                                                                      (a.3)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (a.4)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (a)
 1929    Winter        55                       30           11                                1                               10                              3               6                       13            28             102
         Spring        56                       30           11                                1                                9                              5               1                        7            28              92
         Summer        50                       21            3                                5                               10                             11              15                        8            23              96
         Fall          96                       44           19                               10                                8                             15               3                       12            30             141

 1930    Winter     145                         70           25                               13                               15                             22               8                       21            55             229
         Spring     106                         46            7                                4                               22                             27              11                       21            36             174
         Summer     133                         68           12                               11                               17                             25               3                       17            32             185
         Fall       327                        109           77                               31                               59                             51              58                       21            83             489

 1931    Winter     258                         94         53                                 23                             36                               52               3                       14            41             316
         Spring     240                         66         21                                 25                            102                               26               5                       15            46             306
         Summer     346                        134         61                                 30                             65                               56              34                       18            98             496
         Fall       651                        150        111                                 51                            238                              101              42                       24           127             844

 1932    Winter     341                         91           46                               27                            108                               69              17                       17            60             435
         Spring     227                         82           41                               15                             57                               32               7                       13            35             282
         Summer     197                         70           49                               15                             40                               23               5                        5            37             244
         Fall       248                         86           85                               15                             49                               13              21                       11            60             340

 1933    Winter     304                         83           53                               20                            107                               41              21                            5        90             420

 Total            3,.780                      1,274       685                              297                              952                              572           260                        242           909            5,191



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                                                                                             47
Table 9
Deposits in Terminal Bank Suspensions,
by Cause and Quarter, in Millions of Dollars
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933


                  Cause of Terminal Suspension

                  Assets and/or Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                   Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)
                                                                                                Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)
                                                             Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Total, Terminal Suspensions
                                                                                                                                                                                      Closure of correspondent
                      Assets and Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Other causes
                                                                                                                                                                      Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Defalcation
                                                 Assets
                                                 (a.1.1)


                                                             (a.1.2)


                                                                                                (a.1.3)


                                                                                                                                   (a.1.4)


                                                                                                                                                                      (a.1.5)
                      (a.1)




                                                                                                                                                                                      (a.2)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a.3)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a.4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (a)
 1929    Winter      8.2                         3.6         1.3                                0.1                                2.9                                0.2             0.8                         2.8             7.3              19.1
         Spring     16.4                         4.8         1.8                                0.0                                9.2                                0.5             2.1                         1.7             5.6              25.7
         Summer     18.9                         5.9         1.1                                2.6                                7.2                                2.1            24.5                         1.5            10.4              55.2
         Fall       29.1                         9.5        10.5                                2.5                                3.0                                3.6             0.4                         2.4             8.0              39.8

 1930    Winter     49.6                        24.6         8.2                                7.1                                3.7                                6.1             1.0                        12.2            12.3              75.2
         Spring     67.8                        24.4        22.1                                1.8                                7.8                               11.6             6.5                         5.7            10.2              90.2
         Summer     52.4                        19.4         2.8                               16.9                                6.6                                6.6             0.7                         4.5            11.6              69.1
         Fall      461.8                        51.7       246.9                               13.1                               76.5                               73.7            16.7                         5.7            40.5             524.6

 1931    Winter    109.5                        32.3        22.8                               16.1                               19.8                               18.5             5.1                         6.0            13.1             133.7
         Spring    236.3                        24.7        10.4                               27.9                              133.8                               39.5             1.3                         3.3            30.1             271.0
         Summer    306.9                        35.2        60.0                               31.7                              106.6                               73.4            17.3                        10.7            94.7             429.5
         Fall      449.2                        40.9       100.7                               36.7                              176.2                               94.7            28.6                         9.9            73.3             561.0

 1932    Winter    187.7                        44.9        21.7                               14.2                               61.1                               45.9             4.3                         4.4            67.2             263.6
         Spring    184.1                        40.0        24.8                                2.1                               93.1                               24.1             1.4                         3.3            10.5             199.4
         Summer     64.7                        14.9        13.9                               12.0                                9.6                               14.3             0.7                         1.5            16.6              83.4
         Fall       86.7                        32.5        21.5                                7.7                               22.9                                2.0            16.4                         3.2            24.6             130.9

 1933    Winter    129.6                        20.5        21.1                                6.1                               62.5                               19.4            36.6                         2.0            23.3             191.5

 Total            2,458.8                      429.8       591.6                              198.8                              802.5                              436.2           164.2                        80.7           459.2            3,163.0



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                                                                  48
Table 10
Loans and Investments in Terminal Bank Suspensions,
by Cause and Quarter, in Millions of Dollars
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933


                  Cause of Terminal Suspension

                  Assets and/or Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                   Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)
                                                                                                Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)
                                                             Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Total, Terminal Suspensions
                                                                                                                                                                                      Closure of correspondent
                      Assets and Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Other causes
                                                                                                                                                                      Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Defalcation
                                                 Assets
                                                 (a.1.1)


                                                             (a.1.2)


                                                                                                (a.1.3)


                                                                                                                                   (a.1.4)


                                                                                                                                                                      (a.1.5)
                      (a.1)




                                                                                                                                                                                      (a.2)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a.3)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a.4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (a)
 1929    Winter      6.3                         2.9         1.0                                0.0                                2.1                                0.2             0.8                         1.6             2.6              11.3
         Spring      5.7                         3.3         0.9                                0.4                                0.6                                0.4             2.0                         0.6             2.5              10.7
         Summer     13.3                         9.3         1.1                                1.7                                0.3                                1.0            18.1                         1.3             7.1              39.7
         Fall       29.3                         8.8        12.0                                1.2                                3.7                                3.6             0.4                         0.9             6.5              37.1

 1930    Winter     53.6                        27.2         9.3                                6.5                                4.0                                6.8             1.1                        10.3            12.6              77.7
         Spring     71.2                        26.6        22.4                                2.1                                7.5                               12.6             5.6                         6.0            10.2              93.0
         Summer     55.5                        19.2         3.4                               17.8                                7.8                                7.3             0.3                         4.5            11.6              71.9
         Fall      498.5                        55.4       265.7                               11.0                               86.7                               79.6            18.6                         6.2            34.7             558.0

 1931    Winter    124.3                        36.2        26.6                               17.6                               23.1                               20.9             0.3                         7.0            15.8             147.4
         Spring    265.9                        28.7        10.6                               30.4                              153.8                               42.3             1.6                         3.5            39.6             310.7
         Summer    361.8                        54.2        75.5                               34.5                              118.3                               79.2            19.1                        11.8           103.1             495.8
         Fall      573.0                        50.3       113.1                               42.1                              258.7                              108.9            29.4                        10.9            85.5             698.7

 1932    Winter    221.6                        55.4        27.1                               16.2                               75.8                               47.1             5.8                         5.4            64.0             296.8
         Spring    211.6                        45.8        29.6                                3.7                              105.5                               27.0             1.5                         4.2            12.9             230.2
         Summer     77.6                        16.2        16.9                               15.3                               13.7                               15.5             0.8                         2.0            19.0              99.4
         Fall      122.8                        47.8        28.6                               12.5                               31.6                                2.3            18.1                         3.4            33.6             177.9

 1933    Winter    164.6                        26.8        27.2                                7.9                               79.4                               23.4            37.7                         2.7            28.6             233.6

 Total            2,856.6                      514.2       671.0                              220.8                              972.5                              478.2           161.3                        82.3           489.8            3,589.9



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                                                                  49
Table 11
Number of Temporary Bank Suspensions,
by Cause and Quarter, in Thousands of Dollars
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933


                  Cause of Temporary Suspension

                  Assets and/or Withdrawals




                                                                                                                       Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)
                                                                                      Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)
                                                     Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Total, Terminal Suspensions
                                                                                                                                                                      Closure of correspondent
                  Assets and Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Other causes
                                                                                                                                                        Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Defalcation
                                           Assets
                                           (a.1.1)

                                                     (a.1.2)

                                                                                      (a.1.3)

                                                                                                                       (a.1.4)

                                                                                                                                                        (a.1.5)
                  (a.1)




                                                                                                                                                                      (a.2)


                                                                                                                                                                                                 (a.3)


                                                                                                                                                                                                               (a.4)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (a)
 1929    Winter            3                   2                             0                           0                                     0                1                        0              1               5         9
         Spring            6                   3                             0                           1                                     0                2                        0              2               9        17
         Summer           11                   4                             0                           0                                     4                3                        6              2               6        25
         Fall             13                   1                             2                           4                                     3                3                        0              1               6        20

 1930    Winter           20                   6                 0                                       5                         3                         6                  4                       0           8          32
         Spring           20                   4                 1                                       1                         9                         5                  4                       6           4          34
         Summer           14                   4                 1                                       0                         5                         4                  0                       2           5          21
         Fall             84                   7                25                                       3                        17                        32                 59                       4          43         190

 1931    Winter    45                        6                  10                           3                                     6                        20                  3                       4          11          63
         Spring    11                        3                   1                           2                                     3                         2                  0                       0           2          13
         Summer    38                        4                   9                           4                                     6                        15                  3                       0          12          53
         Fall     138                       18                  23                          18                                    40                        39                 14                       1          36         189

 1932    Winter           61                   7                12                                       3                        26                        13                           5              0          15            81
         Spring           18                   3                 8                                       0                         5                         2                           1              0           4            23
         Summer           21                   4                10                                       0                         6                         1                           9              0           8            38
         Fall             14                   2                 5                                       1                         6                         0                           3              0           4            21

 1933    Winter           27                   5                             3                           3                        10                            6                        4              0          17            48

 Total            544                       83       110                                    48                         149                              154           115                        23            193            877



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                                                                                               50
Table 12
Deposits in Temporary Bank Suspensions, by Cause and Quarter
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933


                  Cause of Temporary Suspension

                  Assets and/or Withdrawals




                                                                                                                              Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)
                                                                                           Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)
                                                         Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Total, Terminal Suspensions
                                                                                                                                                                                   Closure of correspondent
                    Assets and Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Other causes
                                                                                                                                                                    Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Defalcation
                                              Assets
                                              (a.1.1)

                                                         (a.1.2)

                                                                                           (a.1.3)


                                                                                                                              (a.1.4)

                                                                                                                                                                    (a.1.5)
                    (a.1)




                                                                                                                                                                                   (a.2)



                                                                                                                                                                                                               (a.3)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (a.4)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (a)
 1929    Winter     0.9                       0.4        0.0                               0.0                                0.0                                0.5               0.0                         0.2             1.2              2.3
         Spring     2.5                       2.1        0.0                               0.3                                0.0                                0.1               0.0                         0.3             2.4              5.1
         Summer     5.8                       2.4        0.0                               0.0                                1.9                                1.5               2.4                         0.5             2.1             10.8
         Fall       5.4                       0.2        2.0                               1.3                                1.3                                0.5               0.0                         0.2             2.5              8.0

 1930    Winter     8.8                       1.1        0.0                               1.6                                0.5                                5.6               0.8                         0.0             3.1             12.7
         Spring     8.1                       0.8        0.4                               0.9                                3.8                                2.2               1.0                         3.0             2.2             14.2
         Summer     6.7                       1.2        0.1                               0.0                                1.4                                4.0               0.0                         0.8             2.8             10.3
         Fall      37.1                       1.4        7.9                               0.7                                8.5                               18.7              15.2                         5.6            31.2             89.1

 1931    Winter    14.9                       2.9        1.7                               0.8                                3.6                                5.9               0.6                         1.3             4.3             21.2
         Spring     3.8                       0.4        0.5                               1.2                                0.7                                1.0               0.0                         0.0             0.7              4.5
         Summer    30.3                       1.6        3.5                               3.4                               10.5                               11.3               1.8                         0.0             5.0             37.2
         Fall     147.2                      13.9       26.1                              37.1                               41.6                               28.4              38.8                         0.3            65.3            251.6

 1932    Winter    30.3                       2.6        8.4                               0.6                               13.5                                5.2               3.7                         0.0             4.5             38.5
         Spring     7.9                       0.4        4.4                               0.0                                2.7                                0.3               0.0                         0.0             1.3              9.3
         Summer    10.6                       1.6        2.6                               0.0                                6.2                                0.3               3.8                         0.0             2.0             16.3
         Fall       4.9                       0.2        2.0                               0.1                                2.5                                0.0               2.0                         0.0             0.7              7.7

 1933    Winter    11.5                       1.2        1.9                               0.8                                2.5                                5.2               0.6                         0.0             4.0             16.2

 Total            336.7                      34.2       61.5                              48.9                              101.3                               90.7              70.8                        12.1           135.4            555.1



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                                                                                               51
Table 13
Loans and Investments in Temporary Bank Suspensions, by Cause and Quarter
Winter 1929 through Winter 1933


                  Cause of Temporary Suspension

                  Assets and/or Withdrawals




                                                                                                                              Withdrawals (p) and assets (c)
                                                                                           Assets (p) and withdrawals (p)
                                                         Assets (p) and withdrawals (c)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Total, Terminal Suspensions
                                                                                                                                                                               Closure of correspondent
                    Assets and Liabilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Other causes
                                                                                                                                                                Withdrawals




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Defalcation
                                              Assets
                                              (a.1.1)


                                                         (a.1.2)


                                                                                           (a.1.3)


                                                                                                                              (a.1.4)


                                                                                                                                                                (a.1.5)
                    (a.1)




                                                                                                                                                                               (a.2)



                                                                                                                                                                                                           (a.3)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (a.4)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a)
 1929    Winter     0.6                       0.0        0.0                               0.0                                0.0                               0.5            0.0                         0.1             1.0              1.7
         Spring     1.6                       1.0        0.0                               0.0                                0.0                               0.5            0.0                         0.3             0.3              2.2
         Summer     1.5                       0.7        0.0                               0.0                                0.7                               0.0            0.0                         0.3             0.9              2.6
         Fall       4.6                       0.0        1.9                               1.2                                0.9                               0.5            0.0                         0.1             0.7              5.5

 1930    Winter     9.2                       1.1        0.0                               1.8                                0.7                               5.7            0.7                         0.0             3.3             13.2
         Spring     9.2                       1.0        0.5                               0.9                                4.4                               2.4            0.9                         3.2             2.3             15.6
         Summer     6.1                       0.9        0.1                               0.0                                1.6                               3.4            0.0                         0.9             2.7              9.7
         Fall      39.8                       2.0        9.5                               0.8                                9.8                              17.7           15.4                         5.0            39.2             99.5

 1931    Winter    16.9                       3.0        2.0                               0.8                                4.0                               7.1            0.5                         1.3             4.2             22.9
         Spring     4.1                       0.5        0.6                               1.2                                0.7                               1.1            0.0                         0.0             0.7              4.8
         Summer    33.6                       1.6        3.8                               3.9                               11.9                              12.4            1.8                         0.0             5.2             40.6
         Fall     162.5                      10.5       30.6                              42.7                               49.0                              29.6           42.1                         0.3            85.6            290.6

 1932    Winter    30.2                       2.9        4.4                               0.7                               16.7                               5.6            4.2                         0.0             4.6             39.0
         Spring     9.1                       0.4        4.8                               0.0                                3.5                               0.3            0.1                         0.0             1.4             10.5
         Summer    11.4                       1.8        2.9                               0.0                                6.4                               0.3            4.1                         0.0             2.8             18.3
         Fall       6.0                       0.3        2.7                               0.2                                2.8                               0.0            2.2                         0.0             1.4              9.5

 1933    Winter    16.3                       1.5        2.0                               1.0                                3.2                               8.6            0.6                         0.0             3.5             20.5

 Total            362.6                      29.1       66.0                              55.3                              116.4                              95.9           72.5                        11.7           159.9            606.7



Source: National Archives and Records Administration.




                                                                                                                                         52
Appendix: The St. 6386 Forms.


   F. R. Board
   Form St. 6386a                              BANK CONSOLIDATIONS
   November 1929                            (Include absorptions, mergers, etc.)


   Effective data of consolidation ________________                       Federal Reserve District ____________

                                             Member                                Surplus             Loans
    Name and Location of Banks                  or              Capital              and                and
                                            nonmember                              profits          investments

   (a) Banks entering into consolidation:




   (b) New or consolidated bank:




   Is the consolidated institution a newly chartered bank? ____. If not, give the name of the bank (before
   consolidation) under whose charter the consolidated institution is to operate:



   Give the names of banks, if any, that were in financial difficulties at time of consolidation:



   Disposition made of the head office of each bank entering into consolidation:



   Did any of the banks entering into consolidation have branches? ______
   Were any of the banks affiliated with banking groups or chains? _______
      (Report details on Forms St. 6386d and St. 6386e)


   Terms of consolidation, if known, etc.




                                                        53
F. R. Board
Form St. 6386b                           BANK SUSPENSIONS
November 1929

Date of suspension _____________________             Federal Reserve District _____________

Name and location of bank _____________________Member or nonmember _____________

                                    Loans and
Capital $ ________________          Investments $________________ Gross Deposits $
______________

Borrowings from Federal Reserve Bank $ _______________ From other banks $
_________________

Condition figures are as of ______________________

Closing directed by
__________________________________________________________________

Causes of suspension: Check in the appropriate column those of the following which apply,
either as primary or contributing causes, amplifying the indicated causes with such
supplementary data as may be available.

                                                       Primary cause   Secondary cause

 1. Slow, Doubtful or worthless paper

 2. Failure of banking correspondent
    (Name of failed correspondent)

 3. Failure of other large debtor
   (Name of failed debtor and
    connection with bank, if any)

 4. Defalcation

 5. Heavy withdrawals

 6. Other causes (specify)

 Remarks:




                                                54
F. R. Board
Form St. 6386c              ORGANIZATIONS, LIQUIDATIONS, CONVERSIONS,
Nov. 1929          AND OTHER CHANGES IN STATUS OF MEMBER AND NONMEMBER BANKS


Effective date of change _______________________                             Federal Reserve District _____________


Character of change __________________________________________________


Name and location of                                                                        Member or
  bank before change ________________________________________                               nonmember ___________


Name and location of                                                                        Member or
  bank after change _________________________________________                               nonmember ___________

                                         Surplus                                     Loans and
Capital $ ________________               and profits $________________               investments $ _______________


Condition figures are as of ____________________________________________________________


Is the above change in status final or merely preliminary to a further change, and if preliminary, what further change
     is contemplated?


Is the case of conversions and successions, were financial difficulties responsible to any extent for the change in
     status?


Remarks:
   (In the case of suspended banks reopened for business, give the change in capital account, the assessment paid
        by stockholders, etc.)




                                                          55
Bibliography

Bernanke, B. S. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
     Depression.” American Economic Review, June 1983, (73), pp. 257-276.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1929. “Memorandum Regarding Preparation of
       Reports of Changes in Status of Member and Nonmember Banks,” Memo: November 18, 1929.
       National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject File, 421.113.

-----   1930. Committee on Branch, Group and Chain Banking, “Bank Changes – Definitions of Terms,”
        Memo: November 5, 1930. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central Subject
        File, 421.113-1.

-----   1931. Committee on Branch, Group and Chain Banking. “Comments Regarding Preparation of
        Form F.” 23 November 1931. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central
        Subject File, 421.113-1, Forms and Instructions.

-----   1937. “Bank Suspensions in the United States.” Federal Reserve Bulletin. Washington, D.C.:
        Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. September, 1937.

----- Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve System, 1943.

----- All Bank Statistics, 1896-1955. Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve System, 1959.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. “Contagion and Bank Failures During The Great
    Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic.” American Economic Review, December 1997,
    87(5), pp. 863-883.

----- “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During the Depression.” American Economic Review,
      December 2003, 93(5): pp. 1615-1646.

Carlson, Mark. “Are Branch Banks Better Survivors? Evidence from the Depression Era.” Economic
     Inquiry, January 2004, (42), pp. 111-126

Eichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Friedman, Milton and Schwartz, Anna J. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Goldenweiser, E. A., et al. 1931. Bank Suspensions in the United States, 1892-1931. Volume 4. Material
      prepared for the information of the Federal Reserve System by the Federal Reserve Committee on
      Branch, Group, and Chain Banking.

Hamilton, David. “The Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930, Another View.” Journal of Southern
       History November 1985, (51), pp. 581-608.

Kennedy, Susan Estabrook. The Banking Crisis of 1933. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky,
    1973.

Lucia, Joseph. 1985. “The Failure of the Bank of the United States: A Reappraisal.” Explorations in
        Economic History 22 (October): 402-16.


                                                   56
McFerrin, James B. 1939. Caldwell and Company. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Meltzer, Allan H. “Monetary and Other Explanations for the Start of the Great Depression.” Journal of
     Monetary Economics 2 (1976): 455-72.

----- A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1, 1913-1951. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
      2003.

Mitchener, Kris James. 2004. Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability during the Great Depression.
       NBER Working Paper 10475. May 2004.

Gary Richardson. “The Records of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in the National Archives of
     the United States.” Financial History Review (forthcoming June 2006).

Richardson, Gary and William Troost. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics During the
     Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal Reserve Border in Mississippi,
     1929 to 1933..” UC Irvine Mimeo, 2005.

Romer, Christina. “The Nation in Depression.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol 7, No. 2
    (Spring, 1993), pp. 19-39.

Temin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York: W.W. Norton, 1976.

---- Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.

United States, Bureau of the Census. Historical statistics of the United States, colonial times to 1970.
        Bicentennial Edition. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1975

Wheelock, David. “Member Bank Borrowing and the Fed’s Contractionary Monetary Policy During the
    Great Depression.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking November 1990, (22) pp. 409-426.

White, Eugene. 1984. “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” Journal of Economic History
        44 (March): 119-38.

Wicker, Elmus. 1980. “A Reconsideration of the Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930.” Journal of
       Economic History 40 (September): 571-83.

-----   1996. The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
        1996.

Young, R. A. “Memorandum Regarding Preparation of Reports of Changes in Status of Member and
       Nonmember Banks.” Memo: November 18, 1929. National Archives, Record Group 82, Federal
       Reserve Central Subject File, 421.3, Group and Chain Banking (1924-1929).




                                                     57
