                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   LESSONS FROM THE 1919—1982
                   MONETARY POLICY EXPERIMENT


                       Benjamin M. Friedman



                     Working Paper No. 1272




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, W 02138
                         February 1984




The research reported here is part of the NBERTs research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #1272
                                                      February 1984




        Lessons From The 1979—1982 Monetary Policy Experiment



                              ABSTRACT




       The experience of U.S. monetary policy during 1979—82 provided

useful and potentially important new evidence about how monetary

policy affects economic activity. This paper considers, in the light

of that evidence, six familiar propositions supporting the use of

monetary aggregate targets for monetary policy. These propositions

deal with money and nominal income, with price inflation and real economic

growth, and with long—term interest rates. The evidence from the

1979-82 experiment leads to doubt rather than confidence in each of these

six propositions, and hence doubt rather than confidence in the use of

monetary aggregate targets.




                                   Benjamin M. Friedman
                                   Harvard University
                                   Department   of Economics
                                   Littauer   Center 127
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    (617) 495—4246
                                                                   Revised
                                                                   December, 1983


             LESSONS FROM THE 1979-1982 MONETARY POLICY EXPERIMENT


                               Benjamin M. Friedman*



       Macroeconomics is not a laboratory science. Economists must learn about

macroeconomic behavior from the events that occur in the real world, rather than

from controlled experiments which they can design and implement themselves.

Especially when they represent potentially substantial breaks from prior

experience —   in   other words, when they greatly increase the range and variance

of the available data — such real—world "experiments' can provide important

information about how economies, and the households and firms   that   comprise them,

behave. The quadrupling of oil prices in the early l97Os was one example, and

economists have been quick to learn from it. The experience of tJ.S. monetary

policy at the outset of the 1980s has now provided another such opportunity.

       The latest monetary policy experiment in the United States lasted almost

precisely three years. On October 6, 1979, the Federal Reserve System announced

a new policy orientation in which it would henceforth place renewed emphasis on

growth targets for the major monetary aggregates, and also implement new operating

procedures to help achieve those targets, The principal motivation for these

changes was an economic situation marked by rising price inflation, already at

or near record post—war levels, and a deteriorating international value of the

dollar. On October 9, 1982, the Federal Reserve chairman announced a tttemporaryll

abandonment of the stated growth target for the narrow Ml money stock, up to

then by far the most important monetary aggregate for policy purposes. The economic

situation motivating this reversal was a deepening business recession, with

unemployment at record levels, despite money growth in excess of targeted ranges.

       The object of this paper is to survey the lessons to be drawn from this

three—year monetary policy experiment. The focus is on lessons associated with
                                           —2—




the   overall use of monetary aggregate targets, rather than the specific

operating procedures used to achieve them. The plan of the paper is to consider

a series of familiar propositions often (but certainly not universally)

associated with the use of monetary aggregate targets for monetary policy, in

light of various forms of evidence from these three years ranging as seems

appropriate (given space limitations) from simple inspection of data series to

more elaborate statistical procedures. To anticipate, the evidence from the

1979—82 experiment leads to doubt, rather than confidence, in each of these

propositions.


I. Money and Nominal Income

         To begin, targeting monetary aggregates requires deciding what monetary

aggregates to target. In the short run — say, a year or so —          shifts   in the

portfolio preferences of the nonbank public may change the relationships defining

mutually consistent growth rates for different deposit-type aggregates.          Over

longer tine horizons, however, like those relevant for "gradualist" proposals to

slow money growth bye. say, 1% per annum until price inflation is eliminated, it

would   be   convenient for policy purposes to believe

Proposition     41:   The major monetary aggregates   move roughly together over
                      substantial spans of time, so   that the central bank can
                      simply pick one aggregate and   target it appropriately
                      without having to worry about   mixed signals.

         Table 1 shows the annual growth rates (fourth quarter over previous fourth

quarter, as the Federal Peserve formulates its targets) for the three major

monetary aggregates during 1978-1982. Even over a half-decade, the basic directions

indicated respectively by Ml, M2 and M3 disagreed. Given the inherited history of

1978, the Federal Peserve under the new policy did approximately achieve a 1% per

annum slowing in Ml growth over 1979, 1980 and 1981. By contrast, M2 growth

became consistently faster during these years, while M3 growth fluctuated without
                           TABLE 1


       Growth of Money arid Nominal Income, 1978-1982




                                                        Nominal
                      Ml             M2      M3          Income

1978                  8.1%           8.0%   11.2%         14.7%

1979                  7.4            8.1     9.6           9.7

1980                  7.2            9.0     9.7           9.3

1981                  5.1            9.4    11.7          10.8

1982                  8.5            9.3    10.1           2.6
                                         —3—




discernable   trend. Even in 1982, the year in which the experiment ended, the

widely discussed easing of monetary policy is apparent in a quickening of Ml growth

but not M2 growth, while M3 growth slowed sharply.

         The point here is not to determine whether these dissimilar growth rates

are explainable in terms of accepted portfolio—theoretic behavior in conjunction

with the financial innovations and regulatory changes affecting the U.S. banking

system during these years. It is instead that, even over a five—year period, the

answer to so basic a question as whether money growth is speeding up or slowing

down depends on which among the major monetary aggregates is doing the answering.

The implication for monetary policy is that "monetary aggregates" —    that   is,

the major aggregates collectively — are of limited usefulness as a central focus

for policy. To use monetary aggregates in this way, the central bank must have

a clear view of which specific aggregates it is using, and why.

         At a more basic level, placing monetary aggregates at the center of the

monetary policy process depends not just on their relationships among themselves

but on their connection to nonfinancial economic activity. Pn important line of

thinking has argued that it is appropriate to think about this connection, at

least at the outset, in terms of a relationship between money and nominal income.

Once again, for most policy purposes it is not important — or, given feasible

monetary control, even very relevant —to have a tight relationship over short

time periods. Nevertheless, for time horizons like those involved in the recent

experiment, it is difficult to motivate the use of monetary aggregate targets

for monetary policy without claiming

Proposition #2: The movement of at least some monetary aggregate roughly explains
                 the movement of nominal income over substantial time spans.

          Table 1 also shows the annual growth (again, fourth quarter over previous
fourth quarter) of nominal gross national product. Even after making allowance
 for   plausible time lags, it is difficult to examine the data in Table 1 as a
                                         —4—




whole and conclude that the movement of any one monetary aggregate has even

roughly accounted for the movement of nominal income over these years. The best

candidate for explaining the 5% fall in income growth in 1979 is M2 growth,

which declined from 11.2% in 1977 (not shown) to 8.0% in 1978.1 By contrast,

Ni growth is the only one of the three to have declined in 1981, and even that

decline is small in comparison with the more than 8% fall in income growth in

1982.

          In sum, the movement of nominal income during these years has been

difficult to reconcile with the respective movements in the major monetary

aggregates, at least without going well beyond the usual arguments for monetary

aggregate targets based on the presumption of a stable (and, usually, a

relatively interest insensitive) money—income relationship.


II. Price Inflation and Real Economic Growth

        Presumably policy makers care not just about nominal income growth but

also about price inflation and real growth separately. One of the most

interesting developments in macroeconomics within the past decade has been a line

of reasoning implying that, because of effects due to expectations, the use of

pre—announced monetary aggregate targets may favorably affect the respective

impacts of monetary policy on inflation and real economic activity. In the

context of a disinflation through monetary policy like that begun in the United

States in 1979, the idea is that a slowing of monetary growth that is widely

publicized in advance, as in October 1979   and thereafter,   would affect the

expectations   on which households and firms act, and thereby cause a given slowing
of nominal income: growth to consist of more rapid slowing of inflation, and less
slowing   of real activity, than would otherwise be the case.

          If valid, this role of monetary aggregate targets would be valuable indeed.
                                          —5—




Just as the idea of the stable Phillips curve held out the prospect of

solving the chief macroeconomic policy problem of the 1950s and 1960s,

unemployment, without the cost of accelerating inflation, the "new classical

macroeconomics" has more recently offered the prospect of solving the chief

macroeconomic problem of the l970s, inflation, without the conventionally

associated costs of foregone output, employment and income.

        This   view of the potential contribution of pre—announced monetary
aggregate targets involves several elements on which     the 1979—82 experiment

in U.S. monetary policy can shed light. One, following familiar criticisms

of the standard Phillips curve literature, is

Proposition #3: A pre—announced slowing of money growth        will lead to a more
                      rapid slowing of price inflation than would be consistent
                      with prior historical correlations.
        The    actual path of U.S. price inflation since October 1979, in comparison
to forecasts from equations based on prior data, shows just the opposite. The
small "structural" inacroeconometric model estimated using quarterly 1961:1—
1979:3   data in Clarida and Friedman (1983) includes a simple   linear function
relating price inflation to lagged values of real growth, changes in the terms
of trade, and inflation itself.2 Although the relevant F-test for the null
hypothesis of stable coefficients provides marginally significant evidence of

a break with the onset of the new monetary policy regime in 1979:4, the
equation's dynamic forecast for 1979 :4-1983:2 indicates that this break has
been in the opposite direction to that implied by the new classical macroeconomics.

The equation underpredicts inflation in fourteen of the fifteen forecast

quarters, with an overall average predicted inflation rate of only 5.0% per

annum    versus   the actual 7.0%, The slowing of price inflation since October

1979   has    been not more rapid but more sluggish than would have been consistent

with the correlations exhibited by prior experience, given the subsequent two
                                         —6—




business recessions and the sharp appreciation of the exchange rate. In

other words, what has been surprising about inflation during this period was

how sluggishly, not how rapidly, it slowed. Similar price equations — see,

for example, Perry (1983) — show similar results.

      Moreover, this result is not simply due to an arbitrarily specified set

of "structural" restrictions on the data. The vector autoregression model

estimated using data through 1979:3 in Clarida and Friedman (1984) includes the

inflation rate, the respective growth rates of real income, money (Ml) and total

credit, and the changes in the Treasury bill rate and the federal deficit. The

dynamic forecast generated by this completely non—structural way of summarizing

the correlations in the pre-1979 :4 data overpredicts inflation (8.4% per annum)

on average during 1979:4-1983:2, but the forecasting exercise which most closely

corresponds to the proposition relating the slowing of inflation to the use of

pre—announced monetary targets does the opposite. In particular, using a

technique due to Doan et al. (1983) to forecast inflation during each quarter

of 1979 :4-1983:2 on the basis of the historical correlations as summarized by

the model as well as the actual values of money growth in all quarters of this

period raises the nan forecast by an absurd amount     (to   24%) in comparison to

either   the actual experience or the unconditional forecast.3
      The other side of the coin of favoring the use of pre-announced monetary
aggregate   targets because the associated expectations effects may make

disinflation more rapid is that they may make    it less costly. Conventional
estimates, like those summarized by Okun (1978), have indicated that the cost of

each one percentage point reduction in the ongoing rate of price inflation

achieved via monetary policy is between two and six "point—years" of unemployment,

with a median estimate of three point-years (or, equivalently, 6—18% of a year's

total output, with a median   of   9%). Such pessimistic estimates have often
                                         —7-.




discouraged advocates of disinflationary monetary policy. By constrast, the

same reasoning associating a pre-announced slowing of money growth with

unexpectedly rapid disinflation suggests

Proposition #4: A pre—announced slowing of money growth will cause a given
                 slowing of price inflation to be accompanied by less foregone
                 output, employment and income than would be consistent with
                 prior historical correlations.

      Table 2 shows the annual rates of change of real gross national product

and the associated price deflator, and the annual average unemployment rate

during 1978—83. The final column of the table also shows, for 1980-83, the

cumulative excess of the unemployment rate above 6% (the approximate average

for the two   prior   years). The slowing of inflation from nearly 10% in 1980-81

                                                                        of excess
to 5% in 1982 has, just during 1980—83, required some 10 point-years

unemployment — about at the 2-to-l lower end of the range surveyed by Okun.

Stopping the accounts at 1983 makes no sense, however.     Even the optimistic

view that the U.S. economy will return to full employment fairly quickly, with

no reversal at all in the disinflation already achieved, puts the likely final

tally closer to Okun's 3—to—l median. If the current economic recovery falters,

or if inflation speeds up, the final tally could easily be nearer the 6—to-l

upper end.

      Whether this ratio ultimately turns out to be somewhat above or somewhat

below Okun's median is beside the point. What matters is that the real costs

of disinflation achieved by monetary policy have been about in line with earlier

conventional estimates, notwithstanding the use of monetary aggregate targets.


 iii. Monetary Policy and Long-Term Interest Rates

       Price inflation and real growth are not the oiily dimensions of economic

 activity for which the impact of monetary policy depends importantly on

 expectations. Perhaps the most familiar aspect of this subject is the behavior
                                        TABLE 2


                    Inflation,   Growth and Unemployment, 1978-1983



                                                                      Cumulative
                         Price             Peal      Unemployment       Excess
                       Inflation          Growth         Rate         Unemployment

                          7.4%             5.0%         6.1%              —
1978

1979                      8.6              2.8          5.8               —


1980                      9.3             —0.4           7.1             1.1%

1981                      9.4              2.6           7.6              2.7
1982                      6.0             —1.9           9.7              6.4
1983                      50a              34a                          10.1



aFirst   three quarters at annual rate.


bit eleven months.
                                      —8—




of the yields on (prices of) assets which represent explicit future claims, and

which therefore explicitly involve expectations about future events. A

standard distinction in this context is that between the respective effects of

monetary policy on short- and long-term interest rates. While a tightening of

monetary policy might well lead to higher short—term rates (unless the new

classical macroeconomics arguments discussed above are valid), it need not lead

to higher long—term rates if those rates embody expectations of lower price

inflation (and hence lower short-term rates) in the future. More specifically,

Proposition #5: A pre—announced slowing of money growth will lead to lower
                 long—term interest rates than would ordinarily be consistent
                 with the prevailing levels of short-term rates, given prior
                 historical correlations.

      The actual path of U.S. long-term interest rates since October 1979, in

comparison to forecasts from equations based on prior data, shows the opposite.

The "structural" model estimated using 1961 :1-1979:3 data in Clarida and

Friedman (1983) includes a simple linear function relating the bond rate to

current and lagged values of the Treasury bill rate, lagged changes in the

maturity composition of outstanding federal government debt, and the lagged

bond rate.4 As with the model's price equation, there is significant evidence

of a break after 1979:3, but here too the observed shift has been in the opposite

direction to that implied by the proposition about the use of monetary aggregate

targets. The equation underpredicts the bond rate in every quarter during

1979:4-1983:2, with an overall average predicted rate of only 10.91% versus the

actual 14.81%. Given short—term rates, long—term rates have been surprisingly

high, not surprisingly low. Other term structure equations — see, for example,

Shiller et al. (1983) — show similar results.

      Finally, ever since the Federal Reserve began to focus such attention on

its monetary aggregate targets, a familiar argument has been that market
                                         —9—




participants'   expectations have rendered it a "prisoner" to its own announcements.
The basic reasoning involved has been just the inverse of that examined above,
again   denying the ability of monetary policy to affect long-term interest

rates except by affecting expectations of future price inflation. 2ny easing

of monetary policy involving money growth significantly in excess of the

targeted range would lead long—term interest rates to rise rather than fall.

In the extreme case, the expectation associated with the abandonment of such

targets is

Proposition #6: abandonment of monetary aggregate targets for monetary policy,
                 especially in conjunction with money growth in excess of
                 previously targeted ranges, will cause long—term interest
                 rates to rise.

        The movement of U.S. long—term interest rates that accompanied the end

of 1979-82 monetary policy experiment was just the opposite. The Federal Peserve

began its move toward a degree of ease not warranted by the money growth targets

shortly after midyear 1982, and on October 9 the chairman publicly announced the

"temporary"   abandonment of the Ml   target. The Baa bond yield   declined from
16.78% in 1982:2 to 16,25% in 1982:3, as market participants began to infer that
policy   had changed, and the further decline to 14.39% in 1983:4 constituted the

largest one—guarter rally in the post—war experience of the U.S. fixed—income

seucirities market. The decline continued further, to 13.25% in 1983:2, as

money growth became still faster.

        Participants in the U.S. securities markets are apparently more sensible

than to hold monetary policy prisoner to a counterproductive policy structure.

When the Federal Reserve abandons a policy that is not working, the market

records   its approval,
                                               Footnotes


*Harvard University. I am grateful to Diane Coyle and Kenneth Weiller for

research assistance, and        to    the National Science Foundation and the Alfred P.

Sloan Foundation for research support.


1. Neither Ml growth nor M3 growth showed much slowing in 1978.


2. The equation is
          = .0895
            (34)
                       Ax
                         tl    +      .0542
                                      (3.9)
                                                 Al         +   .8700
                                                                (25.2)
                                                                            AP



    SE =     .00347                        =   .88              p =     —.1

    where P is the GNP deflator, X is real GNP, I is the dollar price of

    imports, and all variables are in natural logarithms.


3. A crucial question, of course — here                     and below       — is whether households
    and    firms believed that monetary policy would take the course it                              did

    1979-82.     perhaps the best that can be said is that, if                             the   experiment of
    these years was not an example of the kind of "regime changet' to which new
    classical macroeconomics arguments are supposed to be relevant then it                                  is


    not clear to what real—world event they ever would be relevant. Sargent
    and Wallace (1981) have made a potentially important qualification to the
    usual result as stated above, noting the necessity of a consistent
    accompanying fiscal policy; but the federal government's budget on a high-
    employment basis showed only small deficits in 1980 and 1982, and a surplus
     in 1981.


 4. The equation is

            = .0472      +    .1441    r        —.0579 r                +   .1376          (L—S)     +   .9100 r
     rLt                                St                                                                         L,t—1
               (1.4)          (1.1)             (-0.5)                        (2.3)                      (37.0)


     SE =      .020                               =   .98                   p =       .4
        where rL is the Baa bond rate, r5 is the 3-month Treasury bill rate,

        L and S are the respective amounts of long- and short-maturity federal

        government debt outstanding, and all variables are in natural logarithms.

        The coefficients on current and lagged r8 are highly significant jointly,

        though not individually.


                                            References

Clarida,      Richard H., and   Friedman,    Benjamin    M. "why Have   Short-Term Interest   Rates

        Been So High?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming 1983.
Clarida, Richard H., and Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Behavior of U.S. Short—Term
        Interest Rates since October 1979: A Statistical 2nalysis." Journal of
        Finance,   forthcoming 1984.

Doan,    Thomas, Litterman, Robert, and Sims,           christopher A. "Forecasting and

        Conditional   Projection Using Realistic Prior Distributions." Mimeo,
        National   Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.
Okun, Arthur M.       "Efficient Disinflationary Policies." American Economic Review,
        68    (May, 1978), 348—352.

Perry, George L. "What Have We Learned l½bout Disinflation?" Brookings Papers
        on Economic Activity, forthcoming 1983.
Sargent, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil. "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Irithmetic."

        Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, uarter1y Review, 5 (Fall, 1981), 1-17.

Shiller, Robert J., Campbell, John Y., and              Schoenholtz,    Kermit. "Forward Rates

        and   Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates."
        Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 1, 1983), 173-217.
