NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COARSE THINKING AND PERSUASION
Sendhil Mullainathan
Joshua Schwartzstein
Andrei Shleifer
Working Paper 12720
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12720

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

We are grateful to Nicholas Barberis, Gary Becker, Daniel Benjamin, Olivier Blanchard, Stefano Della
Vigna, Edward Glaeser, Xavier Gabaix, Matthew Gentzkow, Simon Gervais, Richard Holden, Emir
Kamenica, David Laibson, Steven Levitt, Ulrike Malmendier, Andrew Postlewaite, Matthew Rabin,
Christina Romer, Jesse Shapiro, Glen Weyl, Eric Zitzewitz, and especially Nicola Gennaioli and Giacomo
Ponzetto for helpful comments. Schwartzstein acknowledges financial support from an NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Sendhil Mullainathan, Joshua Schwartzstein, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Coarse Thinking and Persuasion
Sendhil Mullainathan, Joshua Schwartzstein, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 12720
December 2006
JEL No. G23,L15,M31,M37
ABSTRACT
We present a model of coarse thinking, in which individuals group situations into categories, and transfer
the informational content of a given message from situations in a category where it is useful to those
where it is not. The model explains how uninformative messages can be persuasive, particularly in
low involvement situations, and how objectively informative messages can be dropped by the persuader
without the audience assuming the worst. The model sheds light on product branding, the structure
of product attributes, and several puzzling aspects of mutual fund advertising.
Sendhil Mullainathan
Department of Economics
Littauer 208
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mullain@fas.harvard.edu
Joshua Schwartzstein
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
jschwart@fas.harvard.edu

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu

Introduction
In most societies, a tremendous amount of resources is devoted to persuasion
(McCloskey and Klamer 1995).

Selling, advertising, political campaigns, organized

religion, law, much of the media, and good parts of education are devoted to changing
beliefs in a way advantageous to the persuader. Moreover, persuasion is not simply about
expending resources: the exact content of the message crucially shapes its effectiveness2.
But what constitutes persuasive content?
Economists typically assume that only one type of persuasive content matters:
objectively useful information.

Stigler (1987, p. 243), for example, writes that

“advertising may be defined as the provision of information about the availability and
quality of a commodity.” Economists have typically modeled persuasion, including
advertising (Stigler 1961), political campaigns (Downs 1957), or legal argument
(Milgrom and Roberts 1986, Dewatripont and Tirole 1999) as provision of information.
In some frameworks, such as Grossman (1981), Grossman and Hart (1980), Milgrom
(1981), and Okuno-Fujiwara et al. (1990), the persuader uses information strategically,
but conveys information nonetheless3.
Psychologists understand persuasion quite differently. They argue that people
evaluate various propositions or objects using representativeness, metaphors, analogies,
and more generally associative strategies (Tversky and Kahneman 1982, Lakoff 1987,
Edelman 1992, Zaltman 1997). Associations play a central role in our approach. There
are two ways associations may operate, which one might call associative thinking and

2

Bertrand et al. (2006) present some clear evidence that persuasive content matters in a field experiment
using loan advertisements by a South African consumer lending institution.
3
Recent years saw a revival of research on communication and persuasion from the information-theoretic
perspective. See, e.g., Glazer and Rubinstein (2001, 2004).

2

associative feeling. Associative thinking is transference of information from one context
to another. When a message has some connotation in one context, a person may take it
to have a similar connotation in a related context (even when it does not). This kind of
association operates through a cognitive process. Associative feeling, on the other hand,
reflects an emotional response to some messages.

This response may be a quick and

dirty aggregator of many associations summarized in a message. Persuasion surely takes
advantage of both types of associations, but here we focus on the cognitive channel.
To motivate our analysis, consider three persuasive messages:
A successful television and print advertising campaign for American Express
Travelers Checks featured Karl Malden, an actor who played a detective on the television
show “The Streets of San Francisco.” The ads advised the audience that, for safety, they
should carry American Express Travelers Checks rather than cash.
After the crash of the internet bubble, the brokerage firm Charles Schwab
launched an advertising campaign that featured judges, ship captains, crossing guards,
doctors, grandmothers, and other steady and reliable individuals, each standing next to a
Schwab investment specialist. The headline of one ad, depicting a Schwab professional
standing next to a pediatrician, advised that “Both are seen as pillars of trust.”
As an example of political persuasion, consider Arnold Schwarzenegger’s
memorable speech at the 2004 Republican National Convention. In the best remembered
part of his speech, Schwarzenegger defended free trade: “To those critics who are so
pessimistic about our economy, I say: Don’t be economic girlie men!... Now they say
India and China are overtaking us. Don’t you believe it. We may hit a few bumps – but
America always moves ahead. That’s what Americans do.”

3

What do these persuasive messages have in common? In all of them, a piece of
information that has some objective value in one context gets transferred by the persuader
into another context, where it has limited or no value. A piece of data that might carry
objective weight in one situation is brought to bear on another, where it is uninformative.
In the American Express example, the listeners, many of whom have watched
“The Streets of San Francisco,” know that Karl Malden keeps people safe. The ads seek
to convince them that the travelers’ checks recommended by Karl Malden also keep
people safe. The information (Karl Malden is involved) that is useful in one context (an
episode of a television show) for predicting safety is being transferred to another context
(travelers checks), where it is objectively useless. For how can it matter objectively
which actor endorses travelers’ checks?
The Schwab ads take advantage of the belief that people in some positions –
judges, pediatricians, grandmothers – are both trustworthy and wise. The ads hope that
this information (trustworthiness), which from the general experience of the readers is a
good description of some types of professionals (judges and pediatricians), rubs off on its
investment professionals as well, where the proposition is not as self-evident.
Schwarzenegger taps into a common conceptualization of foreign trade as a
contest or even war. His audience undoubtedly finds the information (America always
moves ahead) as plausible for a contest, especially coming from a former champion.
Accepting that trade is a contest, Schwarzenegger invites the audience to transfer the
information that Americans typically win into that realm. Of course, both the contest
analogy and the winning message are largely irrelevant for the assessment of whether
free trade, outsourcing, or globalization is beneficial to the public.

4

Schwarzenegger’s speech was not accidental. In his advice to Congressional
candidates, the Republican political strategist Frank Luntz (2006) writes: “Never, never,
never begin a response to outsourcing by saying it is beneficial to the U.S. economy.
Never… Don’t talk like economists.

Words like ‘protectionist,’ ‘capitalist,’ and

‘isolationist’ turn the average voter off. The key word is winning. It is essential that you
capture the theme of winning and insert it into all your communications efforts.”
The transfer of data that is informative in one context into another, where it might
not be, is obviously related to associational, analogical, or metaphoric thinking, all of
which have been discussed by psychologists (e.g., Lakoff 1987, Zaltman 1997). Such
thinking is both common and extremely useful in everyday life because it reduces the
evaluation of new situations to comparison with familiar ones. Some writers think that,
for this reason, our brains have evolved so as to make metaphor and analogy standard
hard-wired forms of reasoning (Edelman 1992). Of course, the patterns of thought that
are usually extremely helpful are not always so.

We suggest that persuaders take

advantage of people utilizing a strategy which, though usually useful, may or may not be
useful in the situation of interest to the persuader.
To this end, we present a model of persuasion that assumes that individuals
deviate from Bayesian rationality in one key way. Specifically, people put situations into
categories, and failing to differentiate between co-categorized situations, use one model
for all the situations in the same category. We refer to such inference as coarse thinking.
Coarse thinking implies transference: the impact of a message in one situation depends
on how that message is interpreted in other co-categorized situations. Persuasion takes
advantage of coarse thinking.

5

The model yields several implications. First, it shows how messages that are noninformative in a given situation nonetheless affect beliefs, and delineates the contexts in
which they do so more effectively. Second, it demonstrates the effects of increasing the
sophistication of the audience on the efficacy of non-informative persuasion.

The

recognition by the audience that the persuader is acting strategically reduces, but does not
eliminate, the scope for non-informative persuasion. Third, with coarse thinking, the
persuader can get away with concealing payoff-relevant information without his audience
assuming the worst, even when the audience takes the persuader’s strategy into account.
This result gets us away from the full revelation conclusions of, for example, GrossmanHart (1980) or Milgrom (1981)4. On the other hand, if the audience is fully Bayesian and
treats each situation differentially – does not engage on coarse thinking – the possibility
of uninformative persuasion disappears, at least in our model.
Perhaps the largest literature looking at persuasion focuses on advertising.
Nelson’s (1974) classic study tried to broaden the range of what might be seen as
informative advertising. Stigler and Becker (1977) and Becker and Murphy (1993)
examine models in which advertising enters the utility function directly. Some recent
studies, such as Gabaix and Laibson (2006) and Shapiro (2006), offer explicitly
behavioral models of advertising. Recent research on persuasion has also gone beyond
advertising, and includes studies of hatred (Glaeser 2005), media (Mullainathan and
Shleifer 2002, 2005, Gentzkow and Shapiro 2006, Della Vigna 2007), and political
persuasion (Becker 2001, Murphy and Shleifer 2004, Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shapiro
4

Okuno-Fujiwara, Postlewaite, and Suzumura (1990) provide sufficient conditions for information
revelation and show that when these conditions are not met full revelation may not occur in equilibrium.
While these conditions can be restrictive (in particular, that all messages are certifiable) they are naturally
met in the applications we consider. For instance, past returns of a mutual fund are certifiable and are
known to the mutual fund at the time of advertisement.

6

2005). As far as we know, however, our paper is the first to study persuasion in a model
of associative thinking so central to psychological work.
Economic theory has also considered analogical reasoning. Aragones, Gilboa,
Postlewaite, and Schmeidler (2005) study persuasion as re-organization of available data.
Case Based Decision Theory (Gilboa and Schmeidler 1995) assumes that, when facing a
new problem, an agent chooses an action based on what has performed well in a similar
problem in the past. Our model focuses on beliefs rather than risk attitudes. Analogy
Based Expectation Equilibrium (Jehiel 2005, Jehiel and Koessler 2006, Ettinger and
Jehiel 2006) is a game theoretic solution concept that assumes that individual forecast
other players’ behavior in a coarse manner. Individuals group distinct situations, states,
and games together into analogy classes and expect others’ behavior to be their average
behavior across elements of the class. Our model focuses on beliefs about nature rather
than about other players’ strategies.
In Section 2, we present a model of inference and persuasion for both Bayesian
and coarse thinkers. We show how this model can account for the examples we have
described, as well as more generally for the creation of objectively uninformative
messages by persuaders. This is the case regardless of whether the audience understands
that the persuader is acting strategically. In Section 3, we ask whether persuaders can get
away with dropping informative messages. Again, with coarse thinkers, the answer is
yes, even if they understand that the persuader is acting strategically. In Sections 4-6, we
show that the basic model helps shed light on three important problems in industrial
organization: product branding, the choice of product attributes, and the advertisement of
mutual funds. Section 7 concludes.

7

2. Uninformative Messages
Basic setup
In this section, we show that persuaders may pay to create uninformative
messages. An individual must assess the quality of a given object, such as a traveler’s
check, a mutual fund, or a political candidate. We denote this underlying quality of the
object by q∈(-∞,∞). The individual receives a potentially informative message m∈{b, g}
about q. He then uses this message to form expectations about underlying quality.
The individual faces two similar, but not identical, situations s∈ {0, 1}. Absent
persuasion, the underlying joint distribution of quality, messages and situations is
p(q,m,s). We make several assumptions about this joint distribution. First, we assume
that the distribution of quality conditional on the situation is the same across situations:
p(q|s=0)=p(q|s=1)=p(q). Second, we assume that p(q) is such that the expected quality
is zero: EB[q|s=0]=EB[q|s=1]=EB[q]=0, where superscript B denotes the rational
(Bayesian) expectation. Third, we assume that p(m|s) > 0 for all m, s.
A key feature of our model is that messages are informative in one situation
(situation 1) but not in the other (situation 0). Specifically, the conditional distributions
p(q|m = b, s = 1) and p(q|m=g, s = 1) are such that EB(q|m=b,s=1)<EB(q|m=g,s=1).
That is, in s = 1, the message g reflects good news and b reflects bad news. Note that

E B (q | m = b, s = 1) = − E B (q | m = g , s = 1)

p(m = g | s = 1)
p(m = b | s = 1)

(1)

In contrast, we assume that these messages are uninformative in situation s=0, i.e,
p(q|m=g, s = 0) = p(q|m = b, s = 0) = p(q|s = 0) = p(q) for all q. The Bayesian
expectation of quality in situation 0 given message m is then:

8

E (q | m = g,s = 0) = E (q | m = b,s = 0) = E (q | s = 0) = 0
B

B

B

(2)

Schwarzenegger’s defense of free trade illustrates our setup. Let s=0 be foreign
trade, and s=1 be a military engagement or a sports contest. Let message b be some
neutral or null message5, and g be “Americans are likely to win.”

Message g is

informative for the assessment of American success in s=1, but not in s=0. A Bayesian
is able to distinguish among the different situations s he faces, and therefore to update his
beliefs correctly for each situation. By using a different model for each situation, a
Bayesian correctly infers that Schwarzenegger’s reminder would improve his assessment
of American success in a military engagement, but not in globalization.

Coarse Beliefs
The essential assumption in our model is that individuals do not have separate
mental representations for every situation. Instead, they have only one representation for
all the situations in a category and are effectively unable to differentiate between these
situations. For example, they might interpret the message “Americans are likely to win”
in the same way for foreign trade as for a military engagement. Categorical thinking has
been previously modeled by Mullainathan (2000), Fryer and Jackson (2004), and Peski
(2006); we rely most closely on Mullainathan (2000).
Specifically, we assume that individuals group situations s = 0 and s = 1 together
into the same category. Upon receiving the message m, the coarse thinker updates as a

5

In the formal model, the message b denotes a bad signal. Here also the neutral message would also imply
a negative update (relative to no news) since it indicates the absence of good news.

9

Bayesian who observes the category he is in but not the specific situation. Such a
thinker, for each situation s = 0, 1, derives the conditional distribution

pC (q | m,s) = p(q | m,s = 0) p(s = 0 | m) + p(q | m,s = 1) p(s = 1 | m)

(3)

Individuals respond not to the actual informativeness of a message in the current
situation s, but rather to a weighted average of its informativeness across all situations cocategorized with s. The coarse thinker weighs the informativeness of the message in
situation s by the likelihood of that situation in the category given that the message is m:
p(s|m). This would, for example, be the updating rule of a frequentist who receives data
from both situations but ignores which situation generated the data6.
The coarse thinker’s updating rule implies that, upon observing message m, his
revised expectation of quality is:
EC (q | m, s) = EB (q | m, s = 0) p(s = 0 | m) + EB (q | m, s = 1) p(s = 1 | m)
=

EB (q | m, s = 1) p(s = 1 | m)

(4)

p(m = g | s = 1)
⎧ B
⎪⎪ E (q | m = g, s = 1) p(m = g) p(s = 1) if m = g
= ⎨
p(m = g | s = 1)
⎪− EB (q | m = g, s = 1)
p(s = 1) if m = b
⎪⎩
p(m = b)

In expression (4), the second to last equality takes into account the fact that
EB(q|m, s = 0) = 0 for all m. Coarseness implies that updating happens as if the person
cannot distinguish the various situations in a category. When individuals form categories
that include only one situation, their inference is identical to that of a Bayesian.

6

Our results also go through if the coarse thinker is even more naïve (or coarse), and does not condition the
weights of different situations on the message; i.e, if he uses p(s=0) and p(s=1) as weights.

10

This model produces empirically plausible patterns of under- and over-reaction.
By comparing the updating rules, we can see which messages are under- or overresponded to by a coarse thinker relative to a Bayesian. To do this, recall that
E C (q | m, s ) = E B (q | m, s = 0) p ( s = 0 | m) + E B (q | m, s = 1) p ( s = 1 | m)

(5)

Comparing this to the Bayesian’s response EB(q|m,s) suggests two distortions.
First, since p( s | m) ≤ 1, the response of the coarse thinker only mutedly depends on how

informative that message m is for situation s itself, as measured by EB(q|m,s). This effect
can lead to an under-reaction to news. Take, for example, the case where EB(q|m,s)>0
and EB(q|m,s’) = 0 for s’. We see here that EC(q|m,s) ≤ EB(q|m,s). Coarse thinking leads
to an under-response to news relative to the Bayesian. The uninformativeness of the
message in other situations dilutes its impact in situation s, precisely because the current
situation is under-weighted in the update rule.
Second, the response of the coarse thinker also depends on a term that the
Bayesian’s response does not depend on: the informativeness of the message in the other
situation s’ in the same category. This implies that the coarse thinker could react to noninformation or over-react to information. Take the case, for example, where EB(q|m,s) =
0, so the message is uninformative in situation s, but is informative in the other cocategorized situation (EB(q|m,s’) > 0). Then, EC(q|m,s) ≥ EB(q|m,s). The coarse thinker
is now reacting to a piece of data uninformative in situation s because it is informative in
other situations in the same category. His use of the same model to interpret messages in
all situations leads him to over-react to non-informative data. This, we suggest, is what a
person responding to Schwarzenegger’s characterization of trade, or to Karl Malden’s
endorsement of travelers’ checks, is doing. This transference of information across

11

situations drives our results below. Indeed, the strategy of persuasion is to trigger such
transference: successful persuasion in our model takes advantage of over-reaction.
The perspective on over-reaction used in this model is similar to that used in some
recent research in finance, which discusses stock price movements in response to noninformation. Daniel and Titman (2006) suggest that over-pricing of some growth stocks
is best understood as an over-reaction to non-fundamental “intangible” information,
which is subsequently reversed. Analytically, our view of over-reaction as an unjustified
response to news about items within the same category is distinct from the interpretation
of over-reaction in Mullainathan (2000) and Mullainathan-Shleifer (2002), who look at it
in terms of category change.

The perspective here is much closer to the finance

perspective, which talks about stock price moves unjustified by fundamental news.
As this discussion makes clear, our results rely crucially on assumptions regarding
which situations belong together in a category. This raises a question: what determines
categories? We take categorizations to be exogenous and fixed. People already bear in
mind that judges and grandmothers are trustworthy. Indeed, the perspective that people
already have systems of mental categories and associations that the advertiser needs to
tap into is not unusual (see, e.g., Zaltman 1997, Rapaille 2006).
More generally, a situation can be part of several categories, and these categories
may change over time and place. Depending on which product attribute the persuader
wants to stress, he could rely on a different categorization. Mullainathan and Shleifer
(2006) suggest along these lines that individuals co-categorize investing with other
activities that make you free to do things when stock prices are rising rapidly, but with
protection and activities that keep you free from adversity in more normal circumstances.

12

Advertisers of mutual funds accordingly use images of wealth when stock prices are
rising, and of security when they are falling. Moreover, some members of categories are
more central (prototypical) than others, so agents who reason categorically do not treat
them symmetrically.
international trade.

Football is a more prototypical example of a contest than
Last but not least, persuasion itself can create or shape categories.

For decades, the Avis car rental company advertised as “We are number two (to Hertz).
We try harder.”

The campaign relied on the general category of underdogs, but

suggested in the area where it was probably not used previously7. All these issues of
category determination are extremely important, but are not considered in the model.

Persuasion (face value)
The persuader in situation s = 0 maximizes the individual’s expected quality, net
of persuasion costs. Presumably, the higher the expected quality, the greater the support
the persuader receives, whether through sales, votes, or membership in his organization.8
The persuader can alter messages. Specifically we assume that the persuader observes
the signal m that the individual would see absent intervention (for example, if the
shampoo appears on a store shelf without advertising). He can then either intervene prior
to the individual’s observing m and create an altered message m’ ∈ {g, b} not equal to m
at cost c, or simply report m’ = m at zero cost. The individual then observes m’ and
never sees the original m. We assume that the persuader in situation s = 0 can create an
altered message since m is uninformative in s = 0.
7

Along these lines, Aragones et al (2005) study persuasion as re-organization of available data. In our
model, if messages create categories then the set of co-categorized situations becomes C(s,m) rather than
C(s), and the analysis becomes correspondingly more complex.
8
In a Bayesian framework, Holden and Kamenica (2006) examine persuasion where the objective is to
change the consumer’s decision rather than his beliefs about the state of the world.

13

The persuader’s strategy is determined by how individuals respond to the
messages. In this subsection, we make the face value assumption: individuals, including
both Bayesians and coarse thinkers, take the message m’ they see and update as if it were
the original message. They do not make the extra inference that seeing m’ tells them that
the original message might have been a different m. In the next subsection, we allow for
strategic inference by the individual, and show that the results presented in this section
are largely robust. The persuader maximizes his payoff, given by:

E(q | m',s) − c if m'≠ m
E(q | m',s) if m'= m

(6)

The persuader’s payoff when individuals are face value coarse thinkers is
mathematically equivalent to his payoff in an alternative setup where individuals are face
value Bayesians, but the persuader observes the situation s while his audience does not.
However, the two setups have very different interpretations. In the coarse thinking setup,
individuals observe the situation they are in, but use the same model to interpret
messages in co-categorized situations. In the asymmetric information setup, individuals
have distinct models for the two situations, but do not observe which situation they are in.

Proposition 1:

Suppose individuals are face value Bayesians and messages are

uninformative in situation s = 0. Then the optimal strategy of the persuader in situation s
= 0 is to always report m and to never pay the cost to replace m with another message.
Proof: For an audience of face value Bayesians, the persuader never pays the cost to

create an uninformative signal and simply reports the truth. To understand why, first note

14

that the persuader would never optimally choose to alter the message m = g since it is the
most positive message available. Additionally, he would never pay the cost to alter the
message m = b and replace it with m’ = g for face value Bayesians since the payoff if he
reports m = b is EB(q|m’ = b, s = 0) = 0 which is greater than the payoff if he replaces m
= b with m’ = g: EB(q|m’ = g, s = 0) – c = – c < 0. ♦
The face value coarse thinker, on the other hand, is vulnerable to persuasion:

Proposition 2: Suppose individuals are face value coarse thinkers and messages are

uninformative in situation s = 0. Then the optimal strategy of the persuader in situation s
= 0 may involve creation of a message. Specifically, the persuader’s optimal strategy
dictates replacing m = b with m’ = g if
⎞
⎛
1
⎟⎟
c < E B (q | m = g , s = 1) p (m = g | s = 1) p ( s = 1)⎜⎜
⎝ p ( m = b) p ( m = g ) ⎠
≡

(7)

c *.

Proof: To understand this result, note that if the persuader reports m = b to a face value

coarse thinker, his payoff is: EC (q | m = b, s) = −E B (q | m = g, s = 1)

p(m = g | s = 1)
p(s = 1) . If he
p(m = b)

replaces m = b with m = g, his payoff is
EC (q | m = g, s) − c = E B (q | m = g, s = 1)

p(m = g | s = 1)
p(s = 1) − c . Subtracting the first payoff from
p(m = g)

the second, we find that the persuader replaces the message if this difference is positive
or, equivalently, if c < c*. ♦
Condition (7) yields a corollary:

15

Corollary 1: Suppose individuals are face value coarse thinkers and let c* be the upper

bound on the cost of fabrication for which it is optimal for the persuader in situation s=0
to replace m = b with m’ = g. Then, c* is increasing in (i) the probability of situation 1,
p(s = 1) and (ii) the informativeness of message g in s = 1, E B (q | m = g , s = 1) .

According to Proposition 1, persuaders never manufacture messages for facevalue Bayesians. Because messages in situation s = 0 are assumed to be uninformative,
Bayesians – unlike coarse thinkers – do not update their beliefs from them. Persuaders
may, however, manufacture messages for coarse thinkers. Their decision depends on
whether the gap (in terms of the improved assessment of quality) between the best
possible message and the true message is big enough to offset the cost of persuasion.
Corollary 1 highlights the fact that, with two co-categorized situations, persuaders
are more likely to manufacture a message in situation s if it has a lower probability within
its category.

Since the benefit for manufacturing messages is the transference of

informational content from other situations in a category to the current one, a higher
probability of these other situations increases transference and therefore this benefit.
This point may shed light on what advertisers refer to as consumer involvement, a
notion closely related to but not identical to that of “stakes.” A high involvement product
occupies a huge probability space in its category (p(s = 0) is high), so the transference
from other situations is small, and hence so is the benefit of non-informative advertising.
Our model predicts, as the marketing research recommends, that advertising in these
instances should be informative (Sutherland and Sylvester 2000).

In contrast, low

involvement products are mixed up in consumers’ minds with many similar situations

16

and hence there is greater scope for persuasion, exactly as the marketing literature
suggests. American Express travelers’ checks and Schwarzenegger’s defense of free
trade are both consistent with this point.

Voting may be another low involvement

activity, which encourages non-informative advertising. Our point is not that people are
incapable of rational high involvement thinking, but rather that in many instances they do
not engage in such thinking, perhaps because it is not worth it. It is precisely in those
instances of coarse thinking that persuasion pays.

Persuasion (sophisticated)
So far we have assumed that individuals take information at face value.
Sophisticated individuals, however, make inferences from the observed message about
what the underlying information of the persuader must have been, recognizing that he is a
rational payoff maximizer.

We now ask how the recognition of strategic behavior

influences inference about the true state of affairs.
Suppose that the persuader operates according to a strategy that dictates replacing
the message m with message m’ with probability φ (m, m’). We assume that individuals
know

this

strategy

Define pφ (m | s, m' ) =

and

update

their

expectations

of

quality

accordingly.

p (m | s)φ (m, m' )
to be the probability that the
p (m | s)φ (m, m' ) + p (m' | s )φ (m' , m' )

true message is m when the audience observes message m’ and the persuader’s strategy is

φ (m, m’). A Bayesian in this case updates his assessment of quality according to:
p SB (q | m',s) = pφ (g | m',s) p(q | g,s) + pφ (b | m',s) p(q | b,s)

(8)

implying that his revised expectation of quality is:
E SB (q | m',s) = pφ (g | m',s)E B (q | g,s) + pφ (b | m',s)E B (q | b,s)

17

(9)

The coarse thinker has a more complicated updating rule. He makes inferences
about quality based on the strategies of persuaders in the whole category, rather than
based solely on the strategy of the persuader in the particular situation9. Define pφ (s | m)
to be the probability the coarse thinker assigns to being in situation s given that he
observes message m. He then updates his assessment of quality according to:
p SC φ (q | m' , s) = p SB (q | m' , s = 0) pφ ( s = 0 | m' ) + p SB (q | m' , s = 1) pφ ( s = 1 | m' )

(10)

implying that his revised expectation of quality is:
E SC (q | m',s) = E SB (q | m',s = 0) pφ (s = 0 | m') + E SB (q | m',s = 1) pφ (s = 1 | m')

(11)

As before, we assume that the persuader maximizes (6). The equilibrium concept we
use is sequential equilibrium (Kreps and Wilson 1982).10 Our next results describe the
effectiveness of persuasion against sophisticated Bayesians and coarse thinkers.

Proposition 3: Suppose that individuals are sophisticated Bayesians and that messages

are uninformative in situation s = 0. Then, in the unique equilibrium, the optimal
strategy of the persuader in situation s = 0 is to always report m and to never pay the cost
to replace m with m’.
Proof: See appendix. ♦

Proposition 4: Suppose individuals are sophisticated coarse thinkers, that messages are

uninformative in situation s =0, and that the persuader in situation s = 1 always tells the
truth. Then, whenever c < c*, it cannot be optimal for the persuader in situation s = 0 to
9

We assume that the sophisticated coarse thinker updates as a sophisticated Bayesian who differentiates
between persuaders’ strategies across co-categorized situations but does not observe the situation he is in.
10
Technically the equilibrium concept we use is not exactly sequential equilibrium since we assume that
individuals do not always update rationally. We use the natural analog of sequential equilibrium given our
assumptions regarding how individuals update beliefs.

18

always tell the truth: in any equilibrium, the persuader replaces m = b with m’ = g with
some positive probability, but this probability might be less than one.

When c > c*,

there is an equilibrium in which the persuader always tells the truth.
Proof: See appendix. ♦

Proposition 4 shows that sophistication does not eliminate the advantage of
uninformative persuasion for coarse thinkers. The cost threshold c* is the same as in the
face-value case11. In contrast to the face value case, however, when condition (7) holds,
the equilibrium probability that the persuader replaces m = b with m’ = g may be less
than one. While sophistication, as opposed to belief in the face value of the message,
might render persuasion less effective and therefore less likely to be used at a given level
of cost, it does not eliminate the incentive to manufacture uninformative data.
Proposition 4 shows that persuasion is primarily a consequence of coarse thinking and
not of the failure to understand the strategic motive of the persuader. The face value
assumption simplifies our results, but it is not critical.

3. Informative Messages

Face Value
In Section 2, we considered the case where messages are uninformative in
situation 0 and informative in situation 1. This assumption enabled us to examine when
uninformative messages might be created by the persuader. It is also interesting to ask

11

Unlike in the face value case, however, for some parameter values there exist equilibria in which the
persuader replaces m = b with m’ = g even when c > c*.

19

when informative messages, such as mutual fund fees, can be dropped12. This question is
most naturally considered in a situation where persuaders cannot fabricate messages, as
they did in Section 2, perhaps because such deception (e.g., about fees) is illegal.
To examine this question, we consider the case where messages are informative in
both situations, i.e., p(q|m, s = 0) = p(q|m, s = 1) for all q, m, where p(q|m, s = 1) is as
specified in Section 2. In addition, we expand the set of possible messages to include the
empty message, Ø, and assume that the empty message is in general uninformative:

p(q | ∅,s) = p (q | s)

(12)

for all q and s = 0, 113.
To get clear results, we make two strong assumptions. First, we assume that the
empty message occurs naturally in situation s = 1, but not in s = 0. In other words, p(Ø|s
= 0) =0 and p(Ø|s = 1) ≠ 0. Second, to capture the idea that persuaders cannot lie about
easily verifiable facts without consequence, we assume that, since messages are
informative, the persuader can never change a message in situation s = 0, but only drop
it, i.e., costlessly replace it with the empty message, Ø. An advertiser of athletic shoes
can omit the information about their price from the ads, but he cannot lie about it.
Consider the optimal strategy of the persuader when individuals take messages at
face value, be they Bayesian or coarse thinkers.
Proposition 5:

Suppose individuals are face value Bayesians or face value coarse

thinkers and messages are informative in situation s = 0. Then the optimal strategy of the
persuader in situation s = 0 is to replace m = b with m = Ø, and report m = g truthfully.
12

Gabaix and Laibson (2006) show that firms might choose to suppress information (such as the cost of
add-ons) in the presence of naïve consumers. See also the discussion in Ellison (2005). Eyster and Rabin
(2005) show that when individuals do not fully appreciate how much other peoples’ actions are correlated
with their types, people may successfully hide negative information in equilibrium.
13
We assume that p(q| Ø,s) = p(q|s) even when p(m= Ø|s)=0.

20

Proof: The persuader has only two options when facing message m∈{g, b}: report m or

replace m with Ø at zero cost. In making his decision, the persuader compares his payoff
from reporting m, E(q|m, s), with the payoff from dropping m, E(q|m = Ø, s) = 0. When
individuals are face value Bayesians, the persuader in situation s = 0 chooses to drop m
whenever m = b since EB(q|m = b, s = 0) < 0 = EB(q|m = Ø, s = 0). Likewise, when
individuals are face value coarse thinkers, the persuader in situation s = 0 chooses to drop
m whenever m = b since EC(q|m = b, s = 0) < 0 = EC(q|m = Ø, s = 0). On the other
hand, the persuader chooses to report m = g in either case since this message is positive.♦

Sophistication
Now we examine the effects of sophistication. To simplify the analysis, we
assume that, when the persuader is indifferent between dropping and not dropping a
message, he chooses to not drop it.

Again, the equilibrium concept we utilize is

sequential equilibrium. The following propositions summarize the results:

Proposition 6: Suppose that individuals are sophisticated Bayesians, that messages are

informative in situation s = 0, and that p(Ø|s = 0) =0. Then, in the unique equilibrium,
the persuader does not drop any messages.14
Proof: See appendix. ♦

14

The uniqueness of the equilibrium hinges on our assumption that, when indifferent between dropping and
not dropping a message, the persuader chooses not to drop it. When this assumption is relaxed, there are
also equilibria under which the persuader drops the bad message with positive probability (and always
truthfully reports the good message). In these equilibria, the persuader is indifferent between dropping and
not dropping the bad message since the audience updates in the same way when viewing the empty
message as when viewing the bad one.

21

Proposition 7: Suppose that individuals are sophisticated coarse thinkers, that messages

are informative in situation s = 0, that the persuader in situation s = 1 is telling the truth,
and that p(Ø|s = 0) =0 but p(Ø|s = 1) ≠ 0. Then, in the unique equilibrium, the persuader
drops message m = b with probability 1.15
Proof: See appendix. ♦

Proposition 6 illustrates the traditional analysis of persuasion with sophisticated
Bayesian consumers. In this case, when messages are informative and the only possible
explanation for a missing message is that the persuader dropped it, firms face only one
avenue for persuasion: full provision of all available information; they cannot use noninformation to persuade. Our result replicates the standard Grossman/Hart (1980) –
Grossman (1981) – Milgrom (1981) result that, with sophisticated Bayesian thinkers it
does not pay the persuader to drop messages when the probability of the empty message
is zero since, when messages are absent, the audience assumes the worst. 16
On the other hand, Proposition 7 highlights the fact that, even when the
probability of the empty message is zero in a situation, there may still be room for
selective dropping of information when the audience consists of sophisticated coarse
thinkers. In particular, Proposition 7 demonstrates that when the probability of the empty
message is non-zero in a co-categorized situation, it pays for the persuader to drop

15

The result that the persuader always drops bad messages with probability one when individuals are
sophisticated coarse thinkers is an artifact of the assumptions that there is no cost to dropping messages and
that there is only one negative message. When there is a positive cost to dropping messages or when there
are several different negative messages (some less negative than others), then the persuader may drop some
of the negative messages with probability less than one in equilibrium. However, unlike when individuals
are sophisticated Bayesians, the empty message will always be viewed as a less negative signal than the
most negative message when individuals are sophisticated coarse thinkers.
16
Of course, when the empty message occurs naturally with positive probability, the unraveling result no
longer holds (see Example 3 in Okuno-Fujiwara, Postlewaite, and Suzumura, 1990).

22

negative messages. Unlike the sophisticated Bayesian, the sophisticated coarse thinker
places some weight on the message being naturally absent.

4. Application: Product Branding

One of the major challenges for the fields of Industrial Organization and
Marketing is to understand product branding. Consumers buy many branded products,
often repeatedly, at higher prices than identical or nearly identical “generic” products
(Tirole 1988). According to Peter and Olson (2005, p. 97), 71% of cigarette buyers, 65%
of mayonnaise buyers, 61% of toothpaste buyers, and 53% of bath soap buyers are loyal
to their brands. Although some brands are physically different from generic products,
others, such as Clorox bleach, are identical. In this section, we show how firms may be
able to differentiate their products and create brands through uninformative advertising.
To fix ideas, consider the case of California Burgundy. Burgundy is a French
region that produces high quality and expensive wines from the pinot noir grape.
California also produces expensive wines from the pinot noir grape. In California, they
are called pinot noir, not burgundy. About 40 years ago, California wine producers
started making inexpensive red wines called California Burgundy. These wines contain
no pinot noir grape, only cheaper varietals. Even so, a check on the internet showed that
Peter Vella sells a 5-liter jug of California Burgundy for $11.99, compared to $10.99 for
Delicious Red. California Burgundy is a brand that commands a price premium even
though its physical characteristics have nothing to do with burgundy wine.
Consider a consumer facing one of two similar situations: buying a bottle of
American red wine (s = US) and buying a bottle of French red wine (s = FR). Each

23

bottle is either labeled Table (m = Table) or Burgundy (m = Burgundy). We assume that
neither message is informative in evaluating the quality of American wine, but that the
label Burgundy is a positive signal of quality of French wine. Specifically17

E B (q | m = Burgundy , s = FR ) > E B (q | m = Table, s = FR ) = 0
E B (q | m = Burgundy , s = US ) = E B (q | m = Table, s = US ) = 0.

(13)

Fraction β of consumers is coarse thinkers who co-categorize buying a bottle of
American wine with buying a bottle of French wine. Fraction 1 - β is Bayesians who
differentiate the two situations. For coarse thinkers (fraction β of the population):

E C (q | m = Burgundy,s = US) > E C (q | m = Table,s = US)

(14)

For Bayesians (fraction 1 - β of the population):

E B (q | m = Burgundy,s = US) = E B (q | m = Table,s = US).

(15)

All consumers are assumed to take messages at face value.
There are two competing homogeneous red wine producers f = 1, 2 in the United
States. Each producer can at zero cost label the wine Table or pay an advertising cost c >
0 to label the wine Burgundy.18 The marginal cost of production is normalized to 0.
Consumers buy at most one bottle from one of the two American wine producers.
Decision utility from purchasing a bottle from firm f is given by:

U( f ) = q f − p f ,
17

Unlike in the other sections, we are normalizing the expected quality given the neutral message to be
zero in the informative situation.
18
We assume that m = Burgundy is not a naturally occurring message for American wine. That is,
p(m = Burgundy | s = US) = 0 .

24

where q f denotes the quality and p f the price of firm f’s wine. Utility from not buying
wine is normalized to zero. Consumers maximize the expected (decision) utility.
Consider a game with three periods. In the first period, each firm simultaneously
decides whether or not to pay the cost c to label its wine Burgundy. In the second, each
firm simultaneously chooses the price of its wine. In the third period, consumers decide
which wine (if any) to buy. As before, we consider sequential equilibria. We define:

c ≡ βE C (q | m = Burgundy,s = US)

(17)

We restrict attention to pure strategy equilibria in which both firms sell to a positive
fraction of the population on the equilibrium path. We then have the following results:
Proposition 8: Suppose all individuals are face value Bayesians and there are two

competing homogeneous wine producers in the U.S.

Then, in equilibrium, neither

producer pays to label its wine Burgundy, and both producers charge the same price.
Proof: See appendix. ♦

Proposition 9: Suppose fraction β of consumers are face value coarse thinkers who co-

categorize buying U.S and French wine. Suppose there are two competing homogeneous
wine producers in the U.S. If c < c , product differentiation through uninformative
advertising emerges: in the unique equilibrium, one producer replaces m = Table with m’
= Burgundy and charges c / β for its wine and the other producer reports m’ = Table and
charges zero. The producer charging the higher price sells to the coarse thinkers. If c >

c , then both firms report m’ = Table and charge zero for their respective wines.
Proof: See appendix. ♦

25

Proposition 9 shows how product branding can emerge as a market equilibrium.
In this equilibrium, the producer of a branded good charges a higher price and earns a
profit, whereas the producer of a generic good charges a lower price and does not earn a
profit. The reason that this is possible in equilibrium is that the producer of a branded
good successfully convinces its coarse-thinking customers that its product is superior by
suggesting that it is analogous to something else that they believe is superior. This
rendition of branding seems broadly consistent with the standard discussions in the
marketing literature (Peter and Olson 2005, Sutherland and Sylvester 2000).

5. Application: Product Attributes

In the analysis so far, persuaders take advantage of coarse thinking by creating
messages that influence the audience’s assessment of the product, be it a consumer good,
a newspaper article, or a public policy. A persuader can also take advantage of coarse
thinking by changing actual product attributes.

Journalists omit relevant data, or

embellish the facts, to tell a story all of whose elements support their narrative (see
Mullainathan and Shleifer 2002, 2005). Makers of unhealthy sugar cereals add vitamins
to them, and advertise them as being good-for-you. The marketing guru Clotaire Rapaille
advised Chrysler to put round rather than square headlights on the Jeep Wrangler to make
it look more like a horse. Customers, he figured, analogize driving an open truck to
horseback riding, so making a truck look like a horse leads them to expect it to ride like
one. This small change in attributes evidently improved sales (Rapaille 2006).
To motivate our analysis more precisely, consider the advertising slogan for the
Alberto Culver Natural Silk Shampoo: “We put silk in the bottle.” The shampoo actually

26

contained some silk.

Nonetheless, during the campaign, the company spokesman

conceded that “silk doesn’t really do anything for hair” (Carpenter, Glazer and Nakamoto
1994).

The audience of the ad was obviously intended to transfer the message that

adding silk is good from situations where it is valid, such as fabric, to shampoo19.
Our model provides a way of thinking about why Culver has changed product
attributes, i.e., “put silk in the bottle.” An individual faces one of two similar situations:
buying a bottle of shampoo (s = Shampoo) and buying a tie (s = Tie). Suppose both
shampoo and ties can be described by a single attribute a ∈ {0, 1}, where 0 stands for no
silk and 1 stands for some silk. The objective relationship between the underlying quality
of the object in situation s and the amount of silk it contains is given by

q ( a, s ) = α s a + ε ,

(18)

where α s denotes the weight that should objectively be placed on the attribute a in
judging the quality of the product in situation s and ε is a shock with the property
that E(ε | a) = 0 . This model is a version of Rosen’s (1974) hedonic approach, and can be
easily extended to multiple dimensions. Marketing research discusses the selection of
product attributes in a very similar way (Peter and Olson 2005).
Since the amount of silk is objectively uninformative in the case of shampoo but
informative in the case of ties, we assume that α Shampoo = 0 and α Tie = 1. If the amount of
silk is observable, the Bayesian expectation of quality is

E B (q | a,s = Shampoo) = α Shampoo a + E B (ε | a) = 0

(19)

in the case of shampoo and
19

A recent reincarnation of this marketing idea, discovered by inspecting products in a drugstore, is Pure
Cashmere Softsoap, which includes “cashmere extract.” Cashmere, of course, adds quality to a sweater.

27

E B (q | a,s = Tie) = α Tie a + E B (ε | a)
⎧ 1 if a = 1
=
⎨
⎩0 if a = 0

(20)

in the case of ties. Bayesian consumers expect a bottle of shampoo to be of the same
quality whether or not it contains silk, but a tie that contains silk to be of higher quality.
On the other hand, if individuals are coarse thinkers and co-categorize buying a
bottle of shampoo with buying a tie then:

E C (α s | a)a + E C (ε | a)
⎧ α Shampoo p(s = Shampoo | a) + α Tie p(s = Tie | a) if a = 1
= ⎨
if a = 0
⎩0
⎧ p(s = Tie | a) if a = 1
=
⎨
if a = 0
⎩0

E C (q | a,s) =

(21)

Coarse thinkers expect shampoo that contains silk to be of higher quality.
Suppose that there is a unit mass of identical consumers who can buy at most one
bottle of shampoo. Decision utility from purchasing a bottle of shampoo is given by q –
p, where p is the price of shampoo. Utility from not buying the good is normalized to
zero. Consumers maximize expected utility conditional on the observed attributes and
are assumed to buy the good when indifferent between buying and not buying.
Consider a monopolist shampoo seller simultaneously deciding on price and
whether or not to pay a cost c > 0 to “put silk in the bottle” prior to consumers making
purchase decisions. The marginal cost of production is constant and normalized to zero.
Then, as in Section 2, the company’s problem of whether or not to pay the cost to alter
the product reduces to solving

28

max{E(q | a = 1,s = Shampoo) − c, E (q | a = 0,s = Shampoo)}.

(22)

Following the logic of Propositions 1 and 2, we have the following results:

Proposition 10: Suppose individuals are Bayesians. Then the shampoo maker does not

pay the cost c > 0 to “put silk in the bottle.”
Proof: See appendix. ♦

Proposition 11: Suppose individuals are coarse thinkers who co-categorize buying a

bottle of shampoo with buying a tie. Then the shampoo company pays the cost to “put
silk in the bottle” so long as c < E C (q | a = 1, s) = p( s = Tie | a = 1) ≡ c* .
Proof: See appendix. ♦

The silk in the bottle example illustrates how producers might change product
attributes to take advantage of coarse thinking, but it is a bit extreme in that silk literally
yields no benefit. A more typical example might be that of producers putting vitamins
into sugar cereal so as to give coarse thinkers the impression that sugar cereal is good for
you. Such a strategy takes advantage of coarse thinkers’ view that all members of the
category “foods with vitamins” are healthy. Another implication of this analysis, which
we do not pursue, is that attribute change might lead to competitive imitation. When one
producer adds vitamins to a sugar cereal and succeeds in persuading his customers that
the product is healthy, his competitors come under pressure to do likewise.
consequence might be a whole industry selling sugar cereals full of vitamins.

29

The

6. Application: Mutual Funds

The mutual fund industry presents a major challenge to financial economics. It is
enormous, supervising around $7 trillion of investor assets. It includes thousands of
competitors, who nonetheless charge high fees and remain highly profitable.

Perhaps

most strikingly, it appears to provide no economic value to investors, with virtually all
mutual funds underperforming by a significant margin passive investment strategies
offered by low-fee index funds (Swensen 2005). How can an industry be so successful
while adding so little value and charging so much?

Part of the answer is surely

successful persuasion.
Our model may help understand mutual fund advertising, and perhaps by
implication the success of the industry. Most investors cannot manage their money on
their own, and rely on professional advisors, such as mutual funds, for help. Suppose that
coarse thinking individuals do not sufficiently differentiate between choosing a mutual
fund and selecting other professional advisors, such as doctors or lawyers. Specifically,
individuals face two types of situations in selecting professional help: choosing a mutual
fund and choosing another professional service.
The different types of messages that an individual might see are as follows. First,
he might see information about past performance. For a mutual fund, this could be the
return on the fund in the previous year. For another professional service, this could be
the history of success of a particular surgery or type of lawsuit. Past performance is hard
information that cannot be altered, only dropped. Crucially, we suppose that, for other
services, past performance information is sometimes simply unavailable. Second, the
individual might see information about the fee for the service. For mutual funds, this is a

30

composite of loads and all fees charged by the fund. For another professional service,
this information is its price. Like past performance, fees are hard information, which
cannot be altered, only dropped.

Again, we suppose that, in some instances, fee

information is unavailable for other services. Third, the individual might see qualitative
information about the service provider’s expertise. For a mutual fund, this would be the
“soft” data contained in the ads, such as the number of professionals the money
management firm employs or a write-up in a magazine (Reuter and Zitzewitz 2006). For
a professional service, this information might include testimonials of past customers.
To apply the results from the previous sections, we assume that only fees are
relevant for the evaluation of the quality of a mutual fund (see Carhart 1997, Chevalier
and Ellison 1997, Sirri and Tufano 1998, Swensen 2005). In contrast, past performance,
fees, and expertise are all relevant for the evaluation of the quality of other services.
If the potential investors in mutual funds are coarse thinkers who co-categorize
investment with other professional services, the analysis of the previous sections yields
the following predictions. First, mutual funds will report fees when they are low, and
drop them when they are high. Second, mutual funds will report past performance when
it is good, and drop performance data when it is bad. Third, mutual funds will report data
on their expertise (so long as the cost of doing so is low enough), even when these data
are objectively uninformative.

Note that, in deriving these predictions, we used both the

results on dropping informative messages and the results on creating uninformative ones.
These predictions are broadly consistent with the evidence on mutual fund
advertising.

First, financial ads only rarely include information about fees (Cronqvist

2005). Only the funds with low fees, such as Vanguard, typically talk about them.

31

Second, as demonstrated by Mullainathan and Shleifer (2006), there is evidence
that financial advertisements are more likely to include information on past returns when
such information is favorable. The authors study financial advertising in Money and
Business Week magazines during 1994-2003, roughly the full course of the internet
bubble.

The authors collect all the consumer-oriented financial ads from these

magazines, classify them by content, and aggregate them in the quarterly series. One of
the variables they consider is the share of ads that contain own past returns (absolute or
relative) in all stock mutual fund ads. Figure 1 presents the relationship between this
variable and the rolling one quarter lagged Standard and Poor’s 500 Index return. As
Figure 1 shows, on average only about 60 percent of the mutual fund ads present any data
about own past returns, and the correlation between the inclusion of these data in the ads
and past market returns is over .7 for both Money and Business Week. Indeed, Figure 1
makes clear that, after the market crash, past returns disappear from the advertisements.
This finding is broadly consistent with the prediction of our model.
Third, again as shown by Mullainathan and Shleifer (2006), much of the
information contained in financial advertisements is soft (e.g., describing the alleged
expertise and experience of the advertiser). Figure 2 classifies the ads by T. Rowe Price,
a mutual fund complex and the most frequent advertiser in the sample, into those for
growth funds, other mutual funds, and everything else, which tend to be softer ads about
expertise. After the market crashes in 2001, growth fund ads disappear and are replaced,
in the first instance, by the softer ads.

The post-crash judges and crossing guards

campaign from Charles Schwab is representative of a broader phenomenon.

32

Although one can rationalize all these findings in a number of ways, the
perspective of this paper, in which financial advertisers free ride on their audience’s
broader experience – and hence co-categorization -- with choosing experts, appears to
explain all three aspects of the data most simply.

By implication, to the extent that the

mutual fund industry has succeeded in co-categorizing itself with other suppliers of
expertise, we can understand its economic success despite its failure to deliver value.

7. Conclusion

This paper has supplied a simple formal model of associative thinking reflecting
ideas about inference and persuasion from such diverse fields as linguistics, psychology,
philosophy, politics, and advertising.

The main building blocks of the model are

categorization and transference: people group diverse situations into categories and use
information useful for evaluating one member of a category to evaluate another, even if
the information is objectively useless in the latter case. The model includes full Bayesian
rationality as a special case, in which each situation is evaluated as if in its own category.
The model sheds light on a number of phenomena. Most importantly, it explains
how uninformative persuasion can be effective, especially in low involvement situations,
such as evaluating cheap goods or political candidates. The model also helps understand
the pervasive phenomenon of persuaders’ omitting bad payoff-relevant news from their
messages. Both uninformative persuasion and omission of data are possible in our model
even if the audience takes into account the strategy of the persuader.
An important prediction of this model is that, for a message to be persuasive, its
content must take advantage of available mental categories. Karl Malden would be an

33

effective spokesman for American Express Traveller’s Checks, but probably not men’s
underwear. Angelina Jolie might effectively endorse fragrance, but maybe not mutual
funds. In contrast to the view that “sex sells everything,” our model suggests that
persuasive messages often need to connect with much narrower mental representations.
The model helps in thinking about several otherwise hard-to-understand
persuasive messages, but also clarifies some puzzling aspects of marketing.

These

include product branding, the introduction of useless product attributes, and the content
of financial advertising, such as the omission of data about fees and returns (when such
data are negative), as well as the preponderance of “soft” messages which, at least in the
standard financial model, should be of little interest to investors.
At the methodological level, our model suggests that key to understanding a range
of empirically observed manifestations of “bounded rationality” is not either the violation
of Bayes' rule, or even the failure of strategic thinking on the part of the decision maker.
Rather, the failure seems to lie in the decision maker’s use of wrong models, in the very
specific sense of co-categorizing distinct situations. Even when coarse thinkers apply
Bayes' rule and think strategically, their inference is flawed and they are vulnerable to
objectively uninformative persuasion.
As a final point, we reiterate that our paper is just a first step in the analysis of
coarse thinking and persuasion. We have not asked how much of persuasion of coarse
thinkers is misleading, and how much is a short-cut way to convey useful data (American
Express Travelers’ Checks may indeed keep you safe). We have treated categories as
rigid and exogenously fixed. But, as Lakoff (1987) shows, categories are both multiple
and fluid, so the selection of categories becomes a key problem for a persuader. Perhaps

34

most importantly, we have focused on associative thinking rather than associative feeling.
Capturing the latter with the tools of economics may significantly advance our
understanding of persuasion, and much else as well.

References

Akerlof, George (1970), “The Market for Lemons,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84,
488-500.
Aragones, Enriqueta, Itzhak Gilboa, Andrew Postlewaite and David Schmeidler (2005),
“Fact-Free Learning,” American Economic Review 95, 1355-1368.
Becker, Gary (2001), “Rational Indoctrination and Persuasion,” University of Chicago
Mimeo.
Becker, Gary, and Kevin Murphy (1993), “A Simple Theory of Advertising as a Good or
Bad,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 941-964.
Becker, Gary, and George Stigler (1977), “De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum,”
American Economic Review 67, 76-90.
Bertrand, Marianne, et al. (2006), “What’s Psychology Worth? A Field Experiment in
Consumer Credit Markets,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Carhart, Mark (1997), “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance
52, 57-82.
Carpenter, Gregory, Rashi Glazer, and Kent Nakamoto (1994), “Meaningful Brands from
Meaningless Differentiation: The Dependence on Irrelevant Attributes,” Journal
of Marketing Research 31, 339-350.

35

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison (1997), “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a
Response to Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167-1200.
Cronqvist, Henrik (2005), “Advertising and Portfolio Choice,” University of Chicago
Mimeo.
Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman (2006), “Market Reactions to Tangible and Intangible
Information,” Journal of Finance 61, 1605-1644.
Dewatripont, Mathias, and Jean Tirole (1999), “Advocates,” Journal of Political
Economy 107, 1-39.
Downs, Anthony (1957), An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York, NY: Harper
and Row.
Edelman, Gerald (1992), Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind, New
York, NY: BasicBooks.
Ellison, Glenn (2005), “A Model of Add-On Pricing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
120, 585-638.
Ettinger, David, and Philippe Jehiel (2006), “Toward a Theory of Deception,” Mimeo.
Eyster, Erik, and Matthew Rabin (2005), “Cursed Equilibrium,” Econometrica 73, 1623
-1672.
Fryer, Roland, and Matthew Jackson (2004), “A Categorical Model of Cognition and
Biased Decision-Making,” Working Paper.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson (2006), “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia,
and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121, 505-540.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse Shapiro (2006), “Media Bias and Reputation,” Journal of

36

Political Economy 114, 280-316.
Gilboa, Itzhak, and David Schmeidler (1995), “Case-Based Decision Theory,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 110, 605-639.
Glaeser, Edward (2005), “The Political Economy of Hatred,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 120, 45-86.
Glaeser, Edward, Giacomo Ponzetto, and Jesse Shapiro (2005), “Strategic Extremism:
Why

Republicans and Democrats Divide on Religious Values,” Quarterly

Journal of Economics 120, 1283-1330.
Glazer, Jacob, and Ariel Rubinstein (2001), “Debates and Decisions: On a Rationale of
Argument Rules,” Games and Economic Behavior 36, 158-173.
Glazer, Jacob, and Ariel Rubinstein (2004), “On Optimal Rules of Persuasion,”
Econometrica 72, 1715-1736.
Grossman, Sanford (1981), “The Informational Role of Warranties and Private
Disclosure about Product Quality,” Journal of Law and Economics 24, 461-483.
Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart (1980), “Disclosure Laws and Takeover Bids,”
Journal of Finance 35, 323-334.
Holden, Richard, and Emir Kamenica (2006), “How to Persuade a Bayesian,” Mimeo.
Jehiel, Philippe (2005), “Analogy-Based Expectation Equilibrium,” Journal of Economic
Theory 123, 81-104.
Jehiel, Philippe, and Frederic Koessler (2006), “Revisiting Games of Incomplete
Information with Analogy-Based Expectations,” Mimeo, UCL.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky (1982), Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics
and Biases, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

37

Kreps, David, and Robert Wilson (1982), “Sequential Equilibria,” Econometrica 50, 863
-894.
Lakoff, George (1987), Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things, Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press.
Luntz, Frank (2006), Frank Luntz Strategy Report, Frank Luntz Research Companies.
McCloskey, Donald, and Arjo Klamer (1995), “One Quarter of GDP is Persuasion,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 85, 191-195.
Milgrom, Paul (1981), “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and
Applications,” Bell Journal of Economics 12, 380-391.
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts (1986), “Relying on the Information of Interested
Parties,” Rand Journal of Economics 17, 18-32.
Mullainathan, Sendhil (2000), “Thinking through Categories,” MIT Mimeo.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer (2002), “Media Bias,” NBER WP no. 9295.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer (2005), “The Market for News,” American
Economic Review 95, 1031-1053.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer (2006), “Persuasion in Finance,” NBER
Working Paper no. 11838.
Murphy, Kevin, and Andrei Shleifer (2004), “Persuasion in Politics,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 435-439.
Nelson, Philip (1974), “Advertising as Information,” Journal of Political Economy 82,
729-754.
Okuno-Fujiwara, Masahiro, Andrew Postlewaite, and Kotaro Suzumura (1990),
“Strategic Information Revelation,” Review of Economic Studies 57, 25-47.

38

Peski, Marcin (2006), “Categorization,” University of Chicago working paper.
Peter, Paul, and Jerry Olson (2005), Consumer Behavior and Marketing Strategy, New
York: McGraw Hill.
Rapaille, Clotaire (2006), The Culture Code, New York, NY: Broadway Books.
Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz (2006), “Do Ads Influence Editors? Advertising
and Bias in the Financial Media,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 197-228.
Rosen, Sherwin (1974), “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets,” Journal of Political
Economy 82, 34-55.
Shapiro, Jesse (2006), “Fooling Some of the People Some of the Time: Advertising and
Limited Memory,” Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano (1998), “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of
Finance 53, 1589-1622.
Stigler, George (1961), “The Economics of Information,” Journal of Political Economy
69, 213-225.
Stigler, George (1987), The Theory of Price, 4th ed., New York, NY: MacMillan
Publishing.
Sutherland, Max, and Alice Sylvester (2000), Advertising and the Mind of the Consumer,
2nd ed., St. Leonards, Australia: Allen & Unwin.
Swensen, David (2005), Unconventional Success: A Fundamental Approach to Personal
Investment, New York: Free Press.
Tirole, Jean (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zaltman, Gerald (1997), “Rethinking Market Research: Putting People Back In,” Journal
of Marketing Research 34, 424-437.

39

Appendix: Proofs of Propositions
Proof of Proposition 3: The persuader in situation s = 0 cannot choose to replace

message m with message m’ ≠ m in equilibrium. No matter the strategy of the persuader,
the payoff if he replaces m with m’ is:

E SB (q | m',s = 0) − c =

pφ (g | m',s = 0)E B (q | g,s = 0) + pφ (b | m',s = 0)E B (q | b,s = 0) − c

=
=

pφ (g | m',s = 0) * 0 + pφ (b | m',s = 0) * 0 − c
−c,

whereas the payoff if he reports m is:
E SB (q | m,s = 0) =

0

>
−c
SB
= E (q | m',s = 0) − c.

Hence, the persuader would be better off deviating from any strategy that places positive
probability on replacing message m with message m’≠ m, so such a strategy cannot be
consistent with equilibrium.♦
Proof of Proposition 4: Suppose that c < c* and that the strategy of the persuader is to

always tell the truth. This cannot be consistent with equilibrium since the persuader is
better off deviating from this strategy when facing message m = b and replacing m = b
with m’ = g. In particular, given this strategy, the payoff from deviating is
E SC (q | m'= g,s = 0) − c = E SB (q | m'= g,s = 0) pφ (s = 0 | m'= g) + E SB (q | m'= g,s = 1) pφ (s = 1 | m'= g) − c
=

E B (q | m'= g,s = 0) p(s = 0 | m'= g) + E B (q | m'= g,s = 1) p(s = 1 | m'= g) − c

=
>

E C (q | m'= g,s) − c
E C (q | m'= b,s),

the payoff from reporting m = b. The final inequality comes from the fact that c <c*.

40

Unlike in the face value case, the equilibrium probability that the persuader
replaces m = b with m’ = g when c < c* may be less than one. The reason is that, for
certain parameter values, the benefit of replacing m = b with m = g:

⎡
⎤
p (m = g | s = 1)
E SC (q | m' = g , s ) − E SC (q | m' = b, s ) = E B (q | m = g , s = 1) ⎢ pφ ( s = 1 | m' = g ) +
pφ ( s = 1 | m' = b)⎥
p
(
m
=
b
|
s
=
1
)
⎣
⎦

is lower when φ (b, g) = 1 than when φ (b, g) = 0 (note that the net effect of increasing

φ (b, g) on the benefit from fabrication is in general unclear since pφ (s = 1 | m'= g)
decreases but pφ ( s = 1 | m'= b) increases). For example, let p(m = g|s = 1) = p(m = g|s =
0) = ¼ and p(s = 0) = ½. In this case, c* =2/3 E B (q | m = g , s = 1) and c** = 8/15
E B (q | m = g , s = 1) ,

where c ** ≡ E SC (q | m'= g, s) − E SC (q | m'= b, s) for φ (b, g) = 1. Thus,

since E SC (q | m'= g,s) − E SC (q | m'= b,s) is continuous in φ (b, g), there is a mixed
strategy equilibrium where the persuader replaces m = b with probability less than 1
whenever c** < c < c*.
Suppose c > c*. Then there is an equilibrium in which the persuader always tells
the truth. To see this, suppose that the strategy of the persuader is to always tell the truth.
He obviously does not want to deviate from this strategy when he faces m = g. He also
does not want to deviate when m = b since, given his strategy, the payoff from telling the
truth is
E SC (q | m'= b,s = 0) = E SB (q | m'= b,s = 0) pφ (s = 0 | m'= b) + E SB (q | m'= b,s = 1) pφ (s = 1 | m'= b)
=

E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) p(s = 0 | m'= b) + E B (q | m'= b,s = 1) p(s = 1 | m'= b)

=
>

E C (q | m'= b,s)
E C (q | m'= g,s) − c,

41

his payoff from deviating. The last inequality comes from c > c*.♦
Proof of Proposition 6: Note first that the persuader will not drop message m = g with

positive probability in equilibrium. To see this, consider the two possible cases where the
persuader drops m = g with positive probability in equilibrium: (i) the persuader drops
message m = g with positive probability and drops message m = b with zero probability
in equilibrium and (ii) the persuader drops message m = g with positive probability and
message m = b with positive probability in equilibrium. To rule out (i), note that, if the
persuader used this strategy, the payoff from dropping a message equals:
E SB (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) =
=

pφ (g | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= g,s = 0) + pφ (b | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) + pφ (∅ | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= ∅,s = 0)
E B (q | m'= g,s = 0)
E SB (q | m'= b,s = 0),

>

the payoff from reporting m = b. Thus, the persuader would deviate from this strategy
and drop message m = b. To rule out (ii), note that, if the persuader behaved according to
this strategy, the payoff from dropping a message equals:

E SB (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) =

pφ (g | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= g,s = 0) + pφ (b | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) + pφ (∅ | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= ∅,s = 0)

=
<

pφ (g | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= g,s = 0) + pφ (b | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= b,s = 0)
E B (q | m'= g,s = 0)

=

E SB (q | m'= g,s = 0).

Thus, the persuader is better off deviating by always reporting message m = g.
Hence, in equilibrium, the set of messages that the persuader drops with positive
probability can at most equal { b}. Suppose that the persuader drops m = b with positive
probability in equilibrium and drops m = g with zero probability. Then, the equilibrium
payoff from dropping a message equals

42

E SB (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) =
=

pφ (g | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= g,s = 0) + pφ (b | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) + pφ (∅ | m'= ∅,s = 0)E B (q | m'= ∅,s = 0)
E B (q | m'= b,s = 0)
E SB (q | m'= b,s = 0),

=

and the persuader is indifferent between dropping and not dropping message m = b. But
this contradicts our assumption that, when indifferent, the persuader chooses not to drop
the message.

Hence, there does not exist a sequential equilibrium satisfying our

assumptions in which the persuader drops any messages with positive probability.
It is easy to show that there is, in fact, a sequential equilibrium where the
persuader always reports m = g and m = b. ♦
Proof of Proposition 7: There is an equilibrium where the persuader drops message m =

b with probability one. To see this, let the persuader’s strategy be described by φ (g, g) =
1 and φ (b, g) = 1. It is clear that the persuader would not wish to deviate from this
strategy by dropping m = g. He also would not wish to deviate from this strategy by
reporting m = b since the payoff from dropping m = b is greater:
E SC (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) = E SB (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) pφ (s = 0 | m'= ∅) + E SB (q | m'= ∅,s = 1) pφ (s = 1 | m'= ∅)
= E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) pφ (s = 0 | m'= ∅) + E B (q | m'= ∅,s = 1) pφ (s = 1 | m'= ∅)

The

=

E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) pφ (s = 0 | m'= ∅)

>
=

E B (q | m'= b,s = 0)
E SC (q | m'= b,s).

final

p(m'= ∅ | s = 1) > 0 .

strict

inequality

follows

from

pφ ( s = 0 | m'= ∅) < 1

since

Since E SC (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) > E SC (q | m'= b,s = 0) this equilibrium

does not violate our assumption that, when indifferent, the persuader does not drop
messages.

43

In addition, there cannot be an equilibrium where the persuader drops message m
= b with probability less than one. The reason is that, no matter the persuader’s strategy,

φ ’, he would strictly prefer dropping message m = b over reporting the message:

E SC (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) = E SB (q | m'= ∅,s = 0) pφ ' (s = 0 | m'= ∅) + E SB (q | m'= ∅,s = 1) pφ ' (s = 1 | m'= ∅)
≥ E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) pφ ' (s = 0 | m'= ∅) + E B (q | m'= ∅,s = 1) pφ ' (s = 1 | m'= ∅)
=

E B (q | m'= b,s = 0) pφ ' (s = 0 | m'= ∅)

>
=

E B (q | m'= b,s = 0)
E SC (q | m'= b,s).

Again, the final inequality follows from pφ ' (s = 0 | m'= ∅) < 1.
Thus, in equilibrium, it must be the case that φ (b, g) = 1. It is easy to see that it
must also be the case that φ (g, g) = 1 so there is a unique equilibrium. ♦
Proof of Proposition 8:

Since individuals are face value Bayesians they expect the quality of a firm’s
good to equal zero no matter the message sent. It can then be individually rational for a
consumer to buy from firm f on the equilibrium path if and only if:

pf

≤ min{p f ' ,0}.

Hence, for both firms to receive positive market shares in equilibrium it must be the case
that p1 = p2 ≤ 0 on the equililbrium path.
Since, no matter the message sent by firm f, consumers will not pay any positive
price for its good, firm f will not pay a cost to create the uninformative message in
equilibrium. It is also clear that f will not set a negative price in equilibrium. Thus, in

44

any equilibrium satisfying our assumptions, neither firm pays the cost to create the
uninformative message and p1 = p 2 = 0 .
It is left to show that such an equilibrium exists. To this end, suppose that both
firms have the same strategy, which is to not send the uninformative message and to set pf
= 0 no matter mf, mf’. Further suppose that ½ of consumers follow the strategy to buy
from firm f if p f = 0 < p f ' or p f < min{0, p f ' }, to buy from firm f = 1 if p1 = p2 ≤ 0 , and
to buy from neither firm if p1, p2 > 0 . Finally, suppose that the other 1/2 of consumers
follow the strategy to buy from firm f if p f = 0 < p f ' or p f < min{0, p f ' }, to buy from

firm f = 2 if p1 = p2 ≤ 0 , and to buy from neither firm if p1, p2 > 0 . It is easy to see that
this strategy profile combined with beliefs specified by the face value assumption (both
on and off the equilibrium path) constitutes an equilibrium with the desired properties. ♦
Proof of Proposition 9:

We solve the game backwards. In the third period, it can be consistent with
equilibrium for a coarse thinker to buy from firm f if and only if

E C (q f | m f ,s = US) − p f ≥ max{E C (q f ' | m f ' ,s = US) − p f ' ,0}
and it can be consistent with equilibrium for a Bayesian to buy from firm f if and only if

p f ≤ min{0, p f ' }.
Now we solve for the equilibrium of the continuation game starting at the second
period. Denote the equilibrium payoff to firm f in the continuation game following firm 1
choosing m1 and firm 2 choosing m2 by π f ( m1, m2 ) ( π f ( m1, m2 ) is a function since, as will
be shown, equilibrium payoffs are unique for any message profile). Suppose that firms
45

sent the same message in period 1. Then both coarse thinkers and Bayesians expect the
quality of the product produced by firm f to be the same as the quality of the product
produced by f’. That is,

E J (q f | m f ,s = US) = E J (q f ' | m f ' ,s = US)
for J = B, C. Thus, this is standard Bertrand competition and the unique pure strategy
equilibrium of the continuation game involves both firms setting price equal to marginal
cost (pf = pf’ = 0) assuming that both firms sell to a positive fraction of consumers.20
Hence, the equilibrium payoff to firm f in the continuation game following both firms
choosing the same choosing the same message m’ is21

π f (m' , m' ) = 0.
Now consider the continuation game following one firm paying the cost to create
the uninformative message and the other firm not paying that cost. In other words, the
continuation game following f choosing mf = Burgundy and f’ choosing mf’ = Table.
Without loss of generality, let f = 1 and f’ = 2. Then, in any equilibrium satisfying our
assumptions, it is clear that firm 1 charges E C (q1 | m1 = Burgundy, s = US ) and sells to all
of the coarse consumers and firm 2 charges 0 and sells to at least some Bayesians.

20

The assumption that both firms sell to a positive fraction of consumers is important in the continuation
game following neither firm paying the cost to create the uninformative message. In this game, there is a
pure strategy equilibrium where one firm charges pf = 0, the other firm charges pf’ > 0, firm f sells to a
positive fraction of consumers, and f’ sells to nobody. This is an equilibrium since neither firm wishes to
deviate: payoffs are zero for each firm and payoffs are less than or equal to zero for any other possible
price profile.
21
The continuation payoff does not include any cost incurred in the first period.

46

To see that an equilibrium of the continuation game exists, let firm 1 charge
E C (q1 | m1 = Burgundy, s = US ) ; let firm 2 charge 0; let each coarse consumer’s strategy

be to buy from firm 1 if
E C (q1 | m1 = Burgundy,s = US) − p1 ≥ max{E C (q2 | m2 = Table,s = US) − p2,0}
=
max{− p2 ,0},

to buy from firm 2 if − p2 > max{E C (q1 | m1 = Burgundy,s = US) − p1,0}, and to buy from
neither firm otherwise; and let each Bayesian’s strategy be to buy from firm 2 if

E B (q2 | m2 = Table,s = US) − p2 ≥ max{E B (q1 | m1 = Burgundy,s = US) − p1,0} ⇔
− p2
≥
max{− p1,0},

to buy from firm 1 if − p1 > max{− p2 ,0}, and to buy from neither firm otherwise. It is
easy to see that this strategy profile constitutes an equilibrium of the continuation game.
Thus the payoffs to firms f, f’ in the continuation game following firm f creating
the uninformative message mf = Burgundy and firm f’ reporting mf’ = Table are given by

π f (m f = Burgundy,m f ' = Table) = βE C (q f | m f = Burgundy,s = US),
π f ' (m f = Burgundy,m f ' = Table) =
0.

Now we will solve for equilibria of the entire game given c and our assumptions.
First suppose that c < c ≡ βE C (q | m = Burgundy, s = US) . There cannot be a pure strategy
equilibrium in which neither firm pays the cost to create the uninformative message.
Otherwise firm 1 would wish to deviate and create m1 = Burgundy since the payoff from
deviating is greater than the payoff from conforming:

47

π1(m1 = Burgundy,m2 = Table) − c = c − c
>

0.

Also, there cannot be a pure strategy equilibrium in which both firms pay the cost
to create the uninformative message. Otherwise firm 1 would wish to deviate and report
m1 = Table since the payoff from deviating is greater than the payoff from conforming:

π1(m1 = Table,m2 = Burgundy) =

0

>

−c

= π1 (m1 = Burgundy,m2 = Burgundy) − c.
Thus, any pure strategy equilibrium must involve one firm paying the cost to
create the uninformative message m’ = Burgundy and the other firm reporting m’ =
Table. To see that there is such an equilibrium suppose, without loss of generality, that
firm 1 pays c to create m1 = Burgundy and firm 2 reports m2 = Table. Firm 1 does not
wish to deviate since its payoff from deviating, 0, is less than its payoff from conforming,
c − c . Likewise, firm 2 does not wish to deviate since its payoff from deviating, -c, is

less than its payoff from conforming, 0.
Now suppose that c > c . Then there cannot be a pure strategy equilibrium in
which either firm pays the cost to create the uninformative message m’ = Burgundy.
Otherwise, a firm paying that cost would wish to deviate since its payoff from deviating
is greater than its payoff from conforming: its payoff from deviating is 0 and its greatest
possible payoff from conforming is c − c < 0.

To see that there is a pure strategy

equilibrium in which both firms report m’ = Table, note that neither firm wishes to
deviate since its payoff from deviating, c − c , is less than its payoff from conforming, 0.
♦

48

Proof of Proposition 10:

When individuals are Bayesians their expectation of quality is

E B (q | a, s = Shampoo) = 0
no matter the value of a. Thus individuals will not buy the good if its price is positive
and the payoff to the monopolist cannot exceed –c < 0 if it pays the cost to alter the
product. Since its payoff is 0 if it does not alter the product and charges a price of 0, the
monopolist will optimally not alter the product.

♦

Proof of Proposition 11:

When individuals are coarse thinkers, their expectation of quality is

⎧ p ( s = Tie | a ) if a = 1
E C ( q | a, s ) = ⎨
if a = 0
⎩0
so they will pay at most p( s = Tie | a) for the product if it is altered and at most 0 if it is
not. Thus, the maximum payoff to the monopolist is p( s = Tie | a) − c if it alters the
product (achieved by setting price equal to p( s = Tie | a ) ) and is 0 if it does not (achieved
by setting price equal to 0). Hence, the monopolist will optimally alter the product if

p ( s = Tie | a) − c > 0 ⇔ c < p ( s = Tie | a ) . ♦

49

Figure 1

Stock mutual fund ads with returns / Total stock mutual fund ads
50%

120%

40%
100%
30%
20%

80%

10%
60%
0%
-10%

40%

-20%
20%
-30%
0%

-40%
1

2

3

1994

4

1

2

3

1995

4

1

2

3

4

1996

2

3

4

1997

Money

Correlations:
Money / S&P : 71.0%
BW / S&P:
74.3%

1

1

2

3

4

1

1998
BW

2

3

1999

4

1

2

3

2000

4

1

2

2001

1 quarter lagged rolling S&P returns

Means:
Money: 62.4%
BW:
59.0%

3

4

1

2

3

2002

4

1

2

3

2003

4

Figure 2

T.RowePrice Ad Composition (Money Magazine)
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
1995

1996

1997

1998

Mutual funds (excluding growth funds)

1999

2000

2001

Mutual funds (growth funds)

2002

Everything else

2003

