                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      GLOBAL PATTERNS OF INCOME AND HEALTH:
                       FACTS, INTERPRETATIONS, AND POLICIES

                                            Angus Deaton

                                        Working Paper 12735
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12735


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




WIDER Annual Lecture, Helsinki, September 29th, 2006. I am grateful to John Broome, Anne Case,
James Foster, Tony Shorrocks, Gopal Sreenivasan and Daniel Wikler for helpful discussions and comments
during the preparation of this paper. I also acknowledge financial support from the Fogarty International
Center and the National Institute on Aging through Grant No.R01 AG20275-01 to Princeton and Grant
No. P01 AG05842-14 through the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Angus Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Global Patterns of Income and Health: Facts, Interpretations, and Policies
Angus Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 12735
December 2006
JEL No. I1,O1,O15

                                               ABSTRACT

People in poor countries live shorter lives than people in rich countries so that, if we scale income
by some index of health, there is more inequality in the world than if we consider income alone. Such
international inequalities in life expectancy decreased for many years after 1945, and the strong correlation
between income and life-expectancy might lead us to hope that economic growth will improve people's
health as well as their material living conditions. I argue that the apparent convergence in life expectancies
is not as beneficial as might appear, and that, while economic growth is the key to poverty reduction,
there is no evidence that it will deliver automatic health improvements in the absence of appropriate
conditions. The strong negative correlation between economic growth on the one hand and the proportionate
rate of decline of infant and child mortality on the other vanishes altogether if we look at the relationship
between growth and the absolute rate of decline in infant and child mortality. In effect, the correlation
is between the level of infant mortality and the growth of real incomes, most likely reflecting the importance
of factors such as education and the quality of institutions that affect both health and growth.

Angus Deaton
328 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu
1. Introduction: Inequalities in income and inequalities in health

Global inequality takes many dimensions. Not only is there great inequality across the

peoples of the world in material standards of living, but there are also dramatic

inequalities in health. The inhabitants of poor countries not only have lower real incomes,

but they are also more often sick, and they live shorter lives. These international

correlations between income and health should affect the way that we think about the

level and distribution of global wellbeing. They also need to be understood if we are to be

effective in reducing global deprivation in either income or health.

   This paper assembles basic facts about global patterns of health and income, about the

correlations between them, and the possible interpretations of those correlations. I argue

that the convergence in international life-expectancies that was so pronounced between

1950 and 1990 should not be interpreted as demonstrating any similar global convergence

in broader measures of living standards that take health and income together, if only

because the mortality reductions that underpinned the convergence took place at different

age groups in poor and rich countries. Life expectancy is a summary measure of

population health that is not suitable for making comparisons of health changes between

countries at different income levels and at different points in the epidemiological

transition. More generally, looking for convergence or divergence in various health

measures is not informative about the welfare consequences of changes in global health.

   I also argue that poor health in poor countries is not because of lack of medical or

scientific knowledge about effective treatment, because the means of treatment are

known, often long known. Low incomes are a more plausible explanation for poor health.

Indeed, as first documented by Samuel Preston (1975), income and various measures of




                                             1
health are strongly correlated across countries, and there is a widespread popular and

professional belief that the diseases of poor countries are indeed diseases that are caused

by poverty. Yet there are several well-known examples—Cuba, Sri Lanka, Costa Rica,

Kerala—of poor or relatively poor populations with excellent health outcomes.

Moreover, I show that international correlations between economic growth on the one

hand and reductions in child and infant mortality on the other are difficult to reconcile

with the view that economic growth, as well as being beneficial in its own right, is doubly

blessed because it automatically yields an improvement in population health. The

historical record for India and China is also inconsistent with any close relationship

between economic growth and the rate of health improvement. Instead, the most

important correlate of economic growth is the level of infant or child mortality, not its

rate of change, suggesting that the determinants of population health overlap with the

determinants of economic growth. Factors such as good governance and education,

particularly women’s education, are likely candidates for further investigation.



2. Income and health: some facts

Preston’s (1975) analysis of the changing relationship between income and health is a

good starting point for any discussion of global health inequalities. Preston plotted life

expectancy against per capita income for a cross-section of countries to show an

increasing and concave relationship, with the relationship itself moving upwards over

time, albeit at different rates in different periods. Figure 1 shows a version of the Preston

curve for the year 2000. The vertical axis is life expectancy, the horizontal axis is GDP

per capita in 2000 purchasing power dollars, and each country is represented by a circle,




                                              2
whose diameter is proportional to the country’s population. The line shows an estimate of

average longevity at each level of per capita income.

   The current Preston curve has the same general shape as the original, although there

are differences in detail. On the left of the graph, among the poorest countries, small

changes in income are associated with large increases in life expectancy. These are the

countries that are yet to experience the “epidemiological transition,” during which

infectious diseases, which mostly kill children, give way to chronic diseases, such as

cancers and heart diseases, which mostly kill elderly people. Among the rich countries,

on the right of the graph and which are beyond the transition, increases in income are

associated with smaller, but still positive, increases in life expectancy. The United States,

which has poor health relative to other countries that are nearly as rich, is populous

enough to pull down the regression line at the top of the world distribution of income.

   A recent feature of the Preston curve is the flattening, almost a dip, around the point

of the epidemiological transition, just above China, and before we come to Brazil or

Russia. This shows the adverse effects on life expectancy of HIV/AIDS, particularly

although not exclusively in African countries—note in particular the position of South

Africa—as well as the less catastrophic but still significant decline in life expectancy in

some of the formerly socialist countries of Eastern Europe and Central Asia. As we shall

see, these two events, particularly HIV/AIDS, have wrought major changes in

international patterns of health and income over the last ten to twenty years.

   If we were to follow Preston and draw the curves for a range of years, we would find,

as he did, that the curves move up over time, so that the majority of countries have

improved their life expectancies by more than would have been predicted by the growth




                                              3
of their incomes and their position on the previous curve. There are many forces for

better health that do not depend on growth of incomes. That this is the case is well

illustrated by the fates of countries in sub-Saharan Africa through successive curves.

From the early post-war years until around 1990, most countries had substantial

improvements in life-expectancy, even when there was no or negative growth in income.

Applications of the germ theory of disease, such as vector control, immunization, and

clean water were often effective in improving population health irrespective of economic

conditions.

   South Africa is something of a special case. It has always been located well below the

curve, as in Figure 1, a result which is predicted by the curve itself. Because of its

extreme income inequality, and its unique position as a combination of a rich, healthy,

minority white population, with a poor, relatively unhealthy, majority black population,

and because the curve is concave, average population health in South Africa has always

been worse than would be predicted by the curve for a country with its average income.

Yet if we follow South Africa from 1960, decade by decade, it follows the curve

upwards, moving closer to it as the health of the majority population improved. But this

process was brought to an abrupt end by HIV/AIDS when South Africa, along with many

of its neighbors, fell back to its present position. Much the same story, although without

the peculiar features of apartheid, can be told about several other sub-Saharan countries,

such as Kenya or Botswana.




                                              4
3. Income and health: poverty and inequality

The facts of the Preston curve have implications for the way that we think about poverty

and justice around the world. Income poverty and health poverty are positively

correlated, and those who suffer from material deprivations are also those who suffer

from health deprivations. Those with high living standards generally live longer and

better than those with low living standards. We can turn this into statement about

international inequality if we are prepared to combine income and health into a single

measure of well-being, for example, by scaling down incomes for those in poorer than

average health, and scaling them up for those in better than average health. The simplest

way to do this is to multiply per capita income by life expectancy. For such scaled

measures, the correlation between health and income implies that inequality in the

composite measure of wellbeing is larger than the separate inequalities in either health or

in income. If we think that global income inequalities are too high, and that global health

inequalities are too high, we will find the inequality in their combination worse than

either.

    That people who are desperately lacking material resources are also at greater risk of

death is a powerful enhancement to humanitarian arguments for helping the world’s poor.

Some also regard the gross combined inequalities to be an injustice, which would require

remedy even if everyone had minimally acceptable standards of health and of income.

Although there is wide acceptance of the humanitarian argument, the argument through

justice is more controversial, see Thomas Nagel (2001). Though in the world as it is, with

its depths of health and income poverty, the humanitarian argument is likely to be enough

for policy.




                                             5
   It should also be noted that income and health are not the only components of

wellbeing that are positively correlated across countries. Education, political and civil

rights, and democracy are other components of freedom which, with many exceptions,

are positively correlated with income and longevity. Those who suffer from one

deprivation are also likely to suffer from others, Amartya Sen (1999). While it often

makes little sense to try to combine the components of wellbeing into the sort of measure

that could support statements about inequality, the general point remains, that the gaps

between the worst off and the best off are gaps in many dimensions, and that gaps in

income are neither the only nor necessarily the most important.



4. Changes over time: patterns of convergence and divergence

Although broad measures of wellbeing are more unequally distributed than narrowly

defined measures based on one component, inequalities may be shrinking over time so

that we can perhaps look forward to a more equal world. Certainly, patterns of income

and longevity have changed in the past. The global divergence in life expectancy dates

from around the same time as the global divergence in per capita incomes, around the

middle of the 18th century, when the countries of northwestern Europe began to pull away

from the rest of the world in both income and health, Francois Bourguignon and Christian

Morrisson (2002), Lant Pritchett (1997). The original cross-country expansion in income

inequality has never been reversed, but the improvement in health spread from northwest

Europe and north America, first to eastern and southern Europe at the beginning of the

20th century, and then, with much greater rapidity, to the now developing world after

World War II, Davidson Gwatkin (1980). The post-war improvement in life expectancy




                                              6
in the poorest countries of the world, and the narrowing of the gap with already long-

lived countries, can perhaps be thought of as offsetting to an extent the continuing

inequality in incomes between countries.

   One version of this argument has been put by Gary Becker, Tomas Philipson, and

Ricardo Soares (2005), who use a combined health and income indicator that is a more

sophisticated version of the measure obtained by multiplying per capita income by life

expectancy. They note the standard empirical finding from the literature on economic

growth that there is little convergence in average per capita income levels across

countries, but argue that when income and life-expectancy are taken together, there has

been convergence in their measure, with the poor countries catching up with the rich. If

we are not much concerned with income itself, but only with the more comprehensive,

broader concept, we should also not be concerned by the failure of international

inequality of incomes to shrink, since inequality in the comprehensive measure, although

wider, is diminishing over time.

   Table 1 shows measures of the dispersion of various measures of income and health.

These are all calculated on a country by country basis, so that China and Tanzania, for

example, get the same weight. To do otherwise would be to reproduce mostly the

experiences of China and India, to which I will return at the end of the paper. Even in

principle, it is of interest to think of each country as a unit whose mortality and income

experience provides one example from the universe of all possible such histories.

   The first column of the table shows the standard deviations of the logarithm of per

capita GDP in purchasing power dollars, taken from version 6.2 of the Penn World Table.

It reproduces the familiar finding that there is no convergence in log GDP around the




                                             7
world; indeed, the standard deviation of logarithms rises from 0.98 in 1960 to 1.18 in

2000 and, based on a smaller sample of countries, to 1.23 in 2004, currently the latest

available year. A similar pattern is displayed by the differently-calculated PPP series for

GDP that is calculated by the World Bank and published in their World Development

Indicators (not shown here). The standard deviation of life-expectancy shows a different

pattern. From 1960 through to 1990, this measure of dispersion decreased, as countries

with low life expectancy caught up with the long-lived countries, whose life expectancies

were themselves increasing, albeit at a slower rate. After 1990, with the collapse of the

Soviet Union and the deterioration in life expectancy in several ex-socialist countries, and

above all, with the onset of HIV/AIDS, convergence turned to divergence. While there is

a great deal of uncertainty about the measurement of life expectancy in sub-Saharan

Africa, and the precise extent to which it has fallen, there is no doubt about the

phenomenon itself, or the widening in international health inequalities that it has

wrought.

   Across these countries, the logarithm of the product of life-expectancy and per capita

income shows growing disparity, because the convergence in life-expectancies up to

1990 is not sufficient to overcome the divergence in the logarithms of GDP. Even so,

dispersion increased from 1960 to 1980, and then fell through the decade, rising only in

the 1990s. But the general point remains that, at least for some of the post-war period,

narrowing of differentials in life-expectancy can be thought of as offsetting the widening

differentials in national income per head.

   The cross-country standard deviation of infant and child mortality rates has fallen

since 1960. The mortality associated with HIV/AIDS is mostly among adults, and




                                              8
although there have been negative consequences for children, who may be born HIV-

positive, or whose healthcare may deteriorate in the face of the epidemic, mortality

among infants and children has continued to decline in even the poorest countries of the

world, and its international dispersion has continued its fall. Yet if we move to the

logarithms of infant and child mortality, shown in the last two columns, standard

deviations have increased throughout the last half-century, so that by 2004, the standard

deviations were around 50 percent higher than they were in 1960.

   Whether there is divergence or convergence in infant and child mortality depends on

whether we work in ratios or in levels; which of these measures, if any, is most useful is

an issue I will address in the next section. But the factual reason for the difference is that

infant and child mortality rates have continued to decline in the low mortality rich

countries of the north and, because the initial levels of mortality were so low, even small

absolute reductions are proportionately large. In Sweden, for example, infant mortality

fell from 11 per thousand in 1970 to 3.2 in 2000, while in Mali, it fell from 225 to 124

per thousand. The numbers of lives saved in Sweden is small relative to the number in

Mali, but the proportional decline is much larger. This is, of course, a general problem in

the literature on health inequalities, which tends to focus on ratios of mortality rates

which, in this case, show a worsening of health inequality between Sweden and Mali,

from a ratio of 20.5 to 38.8, in spite of the fact that many more Malian than Swedish lives

have been saved.




                                              9
5. The welfare consequences of international mortality patterns

Consider a period, such as that between 1950 and 1990, during which life expectancies

were converging across the countries of the world. Although this convergence ceased

after 1990, we might hope this is a temporary reversal, associated with unusual political

and economic events and with the sort of plague that comes only a few times in each

millennium, such as the Black Death, cholera, and HIV/AIDS. If so, and if it is normal

for differentials in life-expectancy to decline, what are the implications for international

well-being? Does it make sense to say that health inequalities are narrowing? The

following argument, taken from my earlier 2004 paper, suggests that life expectancy, by

itself, can be seriously misleading.

   One immediate problem with comparing trends in life expectancy across countries is

that the patterns of mortality that underlie the differences in longevity are different

between poor, high mortality countries on the one hand, and rich, low mortality countries

on the other. In particular, in high mortality countries, a large fraction of deaths are

deaths of children, while in low mortality countries, most deaths are deaths of the elderly,

see the bottom panel of Table 2. Over the post-war period, trends have also been different

across the two groups, with most mortality reduction in poor countries coming from

reductions in infant and child mortality whereas, in the rich countries, there have been

reductions among both young and old. The elimination of childhood mortality from

infectious disease was far from complete in 1945, even in the rich countries, and in more

recent years, there have been substantial proportional reductions in mortality rates among

infants, albeit from already very low rates. Perhaps the most important and rapid declines

in mortality in rich countries have been among adults aged 50 and older, and have been




                                              10
caused by some combination of three main factors: improvements in the medical

treatment of cardiovascular disease, declines in smoking especially among men, and

nutritional improvements in the early 20th century. Historical improvements in nutrition

arguably contributed to the temporary upsurge and subsequent decline in heart disease

which peaked in most rich countries in the late 1970s and early 1980s.

    It is far from clear how to compare the value of saving the life of a child with saving

the life of someone in middle-age. Yet this is exactly what we must do when if we are to

evaluate and compare progress in health between rich and poor countries. Taking life

expectancy as the metric provides one solution, but it is one that gives more weight to

saving the life of the infant or, more generally, to saving younger people over older

people.

    Consider a simple example. Suppose that, in the initial state, 50 percent of infants die

immediately after they are born, and the rest survive, living to age 60. Life expectancy at

birth is 30 years (a half times zero plus a half times 60). Suppose too that each woman

bears six children, so that three survive into adulthood. A new preventative technique

(clean water or vaccination) is introduced that reduces the infant mortality rate from a

half to a third. Life expectancy rises to 40 (a third times zero plus two-thirds times 60). If

per capita income were to remain the same (which is a big if, although in fact, per capita

incomes grew at faster than normal rates in poor countries during the relevant period), the

compound measure of well-being, income times life expectancy, increases by a third. Yet

this is not likely to be the end of the story. After the innovation, if fertility is unchanged,

women have four surviving children, rather than 3. If women care only about the number

of surviving children, and do not wish to go through more births than necessary, they will




                                               11
then reduce their fertility rate to an average of 4.5. This is not the only thing that could

happen, and I am not claiming it is optimal, but some compensating reduction in fertility

is likely, and this reduction provides a convenient example. With an infant mortality rate

of one third, they will lose 1.5 children on average, and have 3 surviving children, as was

the case before the health improvement.

   Note that, once this new situation stabilizes (which will take many years in practice)

the age structure of the population will be exactly the same as before. Each woman has 3

surviving children who live to age 60. What has changed is that each woman bears only

4.5 children as opposed to 6, and that the 1.5 children per woman who used to die

immediately after being born are, in effect, never born at all. One can think of this as a

change from 1.5 children ceasing to exist just after they are born to 1.5 children ceasing

to exist just before they are born. So that it is hard to maintain that this change involves

any great increase in wellbeing for the children. See John Broome’s (2003) Weighing

Lives for a similar argument.

   While this kind of adjustment of infant mortality and fertility is going on in poor

countries, rich countries are experiencing reductions in mortality among the middle-aged

and elderly, which increases their wellbeing (with no argument), so that taking both

together, it is unclear that there is any narrowing of inequality because of the more rapid

increase in life expectancy in the poorer countries. I say “unclear,” because it is certainly

possible to argue that saving the lives of children is more valuable than saving the lives of

adults, and that it is inappropriate to give any weight to the unlived lives of those who are

never born, let alone to use them as an offset to the lives of the newly born who are newly

saved.




                                              12
    One important matter that is neglected by focusing on infants is that women are

clearly better off through reductions in infant mortality and fertility; they bear fewer

children, which reduces the risk to their own lives, and they are spared the agony of

watching so many of their children die. But these gains are not captured in the increases

in life expectancy measures associated with the reduction in infant mortality. A weak

version of this argument would be that life expectancy is not necessarily a good measure

of health wellbeing, particularly when that life expectancy is used to compare places or

times with very different age patterns of mortality. A stronger version is that the

narrowing of international inequality in life expectancy overstates the reduction in

international health inequality in the post-war period.



6. Convergence, or not, and why should we care?

The fundamental problem with making international comparisons of wellbeing is that

there is no natural metric for health, a situation that is in sharp contrast to the

measurement of income. In such cases, information on cross-country convergence of

various health measures is not likely to be useful. As we have already seen in Table 1,

life expectancies were converging until 1990, infant mortality rates converge throughout

the period, but the logarithms of infant mortality rates have been continuously diverging.

This contradictory situation is not some bizarre contemporary happenstance, but can be

expected in a wide range of circumstances.

    Consider, one again, the example in the previous section where people either die at

birth or live to age 60. Suppose too that infant mortality rates are different from country

to country, but are declining at the same proportional rate. The ratio of infant mortality




                                               13
rates between any two countries is then constant over time, and the logarithm of infant

mortality rates has a constant variance across countries. (This is contrary to the facts in

Table 1, but will illustrate the point.) The constant proportional reduction in infant

mortality rates will eventually make them arbitrary small, and life expectancy will

converge to 60 years. In this situation, there is convergence in life-expectancy, but no

convergence in the logarithms of infant mortality rates. Put another way, while the ratios

of infant mortality rates for any two countries remain constant over time, the ratios of

survival rates are getting smaller, as survival rates converge. This is the famous problem

of whether to count the living or the dead, see Mindel Sheps (1958) quoted in Preston and

Paul Taubman (1994) who were concerned, as I am, with the ill-defined nature of

measures of health inequality. We cannot measure inequality over arbitrary selected

measures of health, without more assumptions, and without a clearer idea of what it is

that we are trying to do.

   Actual life expectancy measures have another serious problem in that they are poorly

measured, particularly in the poorest countries, and particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.

The accurate estimation of adult mortality rates depend on having a complete vital

registration system through which all births and deaths are reported to a government

agency. Vital registration became complete in the United States as a whole only in the

1930s, and is still incomplete for most of the world’s population. In practice, adult

mortality rates are estimated from information on infant and child mortality rates, which

are high enough in poor countries to make them amenable to measurement using

household surveys, such as the system of Demographic and Health Surveys. Today, life

expectancy is calculated from predictive equations with infant and child mortality as




                                             14
arguments, see for example Alan Lopez et al (2000), Ian Timæus (2001), or Kenneth Hill

(2003). After mortality from AIDS became important, these formulas needed to be

adjusted, based on sometimes quite speculative estimates of AIDS mortality.

    Figure 2 shows the international relationship between estimated life expectancy and

infant mortality rates using data from the United Nations population division. The left-

hand panel shows the relationship for the years 1970 to 1975 (the UN provides estimates

for five year intervals) and the right-panel the relationship for 1995 to 2000. As there

should be, there is a strong negative relationship between life expectancy and infant

mortality. The disturbing feature of these data is that, among the high mortality countries,

the data points in the left-hand panel lie along visible straight lines that show, not reality,

but how the data were created. In the 1970s, life expectancy was calculated using a series

of model life tables, one for each of several regions of the world, which gave life

expectancy as a function of infant mortality. These lines have vanished in the right hand

panel, not because the data are more accurate—although that is undoubtedly the case in

some countries—but because the AIDS epidemic requires a country by country

adjustment for the affected countries. Given the uncertainty about AIDS mortality, there

is little reason to suppose that the right hand panel is any more accurate than the left.

    The models that are used to predict life expectancy from infant mortality rates are

likely to give a reasonably accurate picture of the international patterns of life

expectancy, so that, for example, the Preston curve in Figure 1 would probably not

change very much if the world were to have a complete vital registration system. But the

same is unlikely to be true for changes over time. Particularly difficult are changes in

adult mortality or adult life expectancy in sub-Saharan Africa. Given the urgency of




                                              15
improving health in Africa, this gap in our knowledge seriously impairs our ability to

monitor progress or to evaluate initiatives for improvement. It is also another good reason

for being careful about making comparisons of changes in health between rich and poor

countries when the measurement of those changes rests on numbers that are projected and

interpolated, not measured.



7. Is growth good for health?

So far, I have been concerned with the facts of global health and income, and how those

facts might condition our thinking about health and income inequality across nations. But

the strong relationship between health and income also holds out another possibility, that

growth in incomes improves population health. If so, there is a double benefit from

economic growth; not only does it reduce income poverty—the direct effect—but it also

reduces health poverty—the indirect effect. That this might be the case was of course the

main point of Preston’s original analysis, which challenged the then conventional wisdom

that health interventions, usually from the outside, had been essentially the only factor in

reducing mortality in poor countries. Even so, Preston credited income with only a

relative small role compared with public health; in later work, he attributed nearly half of

health improvements to the combined effects of improvements in income, literacy, and

the supply of calories, Preston (1980).

   That some combination of the social and economic environment is important for

health is almost certainly correct, if only by elimination. While it is possible to argue that

the reason so many people die of cancer is because we know so little about the disease,

and lack preventative or curative measures, the same cannot be said about most deaths




                                              16
around the world. Table 2, adapted from David Cutler, Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-

Muney (2006), shows the pattern of mortality across the world. The bottom panel shows

the sharp differences in the age structure of deaths between rich and poor. In the World

Bank’s “high income” countries, less than 1 percent of all deaths are deaths of children

before their fifth birthday. In the “low income” countries, more than 30 percent of all

deaths are deaths of children. The top half of the panel shows the causes of those deaths

and that the vast majority of them are preventable or treatable given current knowledge.

For example, more than a million people, mostly children, die from diseases that can be

eliminated using vaccines, and which have been so eliminated in the rich countries. Each

year nearly 4 million people, again mostly children, die from respiratory infections

(mostly pneumonia); of these nearly 3 million live in low income countries, and the third

of a million who die in the rich countries are elderly people, among whom deaths from

pneumonia are not uncommon. Deaths from HIV/AIDS are now mostly in low income

countries, and are treatable although not curable using anti-retroviral drugs. While these

drugs are expensive, mostly under patent protection, and difficult to use effectively, the

same is not true of the treatments for the other diseases which are generally cheap, off

patent, and relatively easy to use in the right circumstances. Whatever is causing people

in poor countries to die, and people in rich countries to live, it is not the unavailability of

drugs, treatment, or knowledge about the diseases from which poor people die.

Something else is standing in the way.

    Poverty, the lack of income, is at the least one obvious candidate for explaining

mortality in low income countries. On this, data on individual people are qualitatively

consistent with the macro data of the Preston curve. For example, Adam Wagstaff (2000)




                                              17
shows that child mortality is higher among households with lower total household per

capita expenditure in nine developing countries. Kath Moser, David Leon, and Gwatkin

(2005), using an index of durable goods ownership based on Deon Filmer and Lant

Pritchett (2001) widely interpreted as a measure of wealth or of income, show that this

measure of wealth is negatively correlated with infant and child mortality in 44

Demographic and Health Surveys from 22 countries. There is also a substantial and long-

established literature on nutritional Engel curves, which generally, if not invariably, finds

that better-off households are better nourished. Indicators of child malnutrition, such as

wasting and stunting, are also lower among higher expenditure or higher asset-index

households, Wagstaff and Naoko Watanabe (2003), At the national level, child

malnutrition is less prevalent at higher incomes though, as with the Preston curve,

malnutrition decreases even in the absence of income growth, see Lawrence Haddad et al.

(2003). These authors also examine both micro and macro data and find quantitatively

compatible results in both. The consistent links between income or income-like measures

on the one hand and mortality, nutrition, and anthropometrics, on the other, should be

contrasted with the inconsistent and often insignificant results from attempts to link the

proximity of health clinics to health outcomes. Peter Svedberg (2006, 4) goes so far as to

state that “In all investigations of the determinants of inter-country differences in child

stunting (and underweight) based on regression analysis, per capita real income has been

identified as the crucial variable.”

   The recent macroeconomic evidence on health and income has taken a much less

shaded position than that originally proposed by Preston. Perhaps best known is the paper

“Wealthier is healthier,” by Pritchett and Lawrence Summers (1996), which argues for a




                                             18
strong and consistent relationship between growth in per capita incomes and reductions in

child mortality rates. Filmer and Pritchett (1999) extended and replicated this work, and

in addition found little or no evidence of beneficial effects of government spending on

health, a conclusion that contradicted, using a different sample of countries, the earlier

work by Sudhir Anand and Martin Ravallion (1998). But even in this (unresolved)

debate, both sides agreed on the importance of income growth for health, directly in the

Filmer and Pritchett regressions, and indirectly, through poverty reduction, in Anand and

Ravallion. It should, of course, be noted, that these studies can be challenged on their

own terms; for example, all use more or less incredible instrumental variables to separate

the effects of health on income from the effects of income on health. Nor is it clear, in the

absence of a story about why health expenditures are what they are, and why they are so

differentially efficient across countries, whether we should expect to find any

relationship between health expenditures and health outcomes in a cross-country

regression, or indeed, in the micro level regressions discussed in the previous paragraph.

   The World Health Organization’s Commission on Macroeconomics and Health

(2001) makes the case for the reverse causality, that many of the poorest countries in the

world are poor because they are sick, and that additional public expenditures on health

are the preconditions for poverty reduction, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. While it is

obvious enough that individuals who are sick are likely to earn less, it is far from clear

that nations with high prevalence of disease should be less able to grow than countries

that are less unfortunate. Indeed, the historical record in the now rich countries shows no

acceleration in growth in spite of enormous improvements in health, see Pritchett (2001)

who notes that health cannot cause growth, because one is trending upwards and the




                                             19
other is stationary. Recent work by Daron Acemoglu and Simon Johnson (2005) makes a

convincing case that most improvements in health were, in the long run, driven by

innovations in preventative and curative methods, and that these improvements, in and of

themselves, tended to reduce the rate of growth of GDP per head because they reduced

infant and child mortality rates and thus increased the number of heads with no

corresponding increase in output in the short run. Although the Commission’s arguments

are hardly convincing, any causality that does indeed run from health to income would

strengthen the case for a positive correlation between per capita income and population

health, at least in the longer term.



8. Growth and health: another look at the evidence

Figure 3 shows the relationship between infant mortality and economic growth over all

ten year periods from 1960 to 2000; note that each country can appear up to four times

depending on data availability. The vertical axis shows the annual proportional change in

the infant mortality rate so that, for example, a reduction from 60 per thousand to 54 per

thousand over a ten year period would show as minus one per cent a year. The horizontal

axis shows the annualized rate of growth of real per capita GDP in purchasing power

dollars from the Penn World Table. As expected, there is a strong and significant

negative relationship with a slope of around −0.25, so that for every percentage point of

economic growth, the proportional rate of infant mortality reduction falls by a quarter of

a percentage point. This evidence, albeit in more fully specified regressions, lies beneath

the results in Pritchett and Summers (1996) and Filmer and Pritchett (1999.)




                                            20
   Figure 4 shows the same information, but I have now superimposed the scatter-plot

between per capita GDP growth and the absolute reduction in the infant mortality rate per

thousand live births. By this, the reduction from 60 to 54 per thousand would be recorded

as −0.6 per annum. The proportional changes are labeled on the right-hand axis, the

absolute changes on the left-hand axis. Remarkably, the significant negative relationship

between growth and infant mortality decline has now vanished. While the new line has a

negative slope, it is less pronounced, and its t-value is only −1.91, as opposed to −7.85

for the proportional regression.

   It is possible that ten year periods might be too short for the relationship to be

apparent in all forms and, indeed, many of the mechanisms through which income might

affect health (or health affect income) are likely to work more strongly over longer time

periods. Figure 5, which shows the same two relationships for the forty year interval from

1960 to 2000, shows that this argument is not the reason behind the contradiction

between the proportionate and absolute relationships. Although there are fewer points

here, largely because each country can appear (at most) once, the slopes are now of

opposite sign, although, once again, the positive slope for the absolute changes in infant

mortality is not significantly different from zero.

   The reason for the difference in the two regressions is the same as the reason for the

divergence in the logarithms of infant mortality rates discussed in Section 6 above. Over

all the ten year sub-periods from 1960 to 2000, rich countries have had both higher rates

of economic growth and higher proportionate reductions in infant mortality. For countries

whose real GDP at the start of the period was less than $5,000, infant mortality fell by 2.2

percent a year in the subsequent decade, and economic growth averaged only 1.0 percent




                                             21
a year. For countries whose per capita GDP was above $5,000, the rate of proportionate

decline of the infant mortality rate was 4.0 percent a year, and economic growth was 2.6

percent a year. By these measures infant mortality and real GDP per head were separately

diverging.

   There is another way of looking at these data. If y is the infant mortality rate, and the

(negative) change Δy is uncorrelated with the rate of growth of per capita GDP, Δ ln x ,

while at the same time, Δ ln y = Δy / y is negatively correlated with Δ ln x , then it must

be the case that Δ ln x is negatively correlated with y, so that economic growth is higher

in places where infant mortality is lower. This correlation is shown in Figure 6, while

Figure 7 shows what, given Figure 2, is essentially the same correlation in a perhaps

more familiar form in which growth is positively correlated with life expectancy. In the

macro and growth literature, it is often claimed that having a longer time to live is a

stimulus to saving and investment, Peter Lorentzen, John McMillan, and Romain

Wacziarg (2005), David Bloom, David Canning and Jaypee Sevilla (2004), Bloom,

Canning, and Bryan Graham (2006), and the Commission on Macroeconomics and

Health (2001). I do not need to challenge that contention—although such accounts need

to reconcile the incentives for savings and investment with the fact that international

variations in life expectancy as measured are dominated by variations in under-5

mortality so that, at the ages where savings and investment decisions are taken, most

mortality uncertainty is already resolved, and international differences in mortality are

much attenuated. Instead, my main point is that if it were true that income is the main

causal factor for health, we would expect changes in income to be linked with changes in

infant mortality rates, and that is not the case. Instead, low levels of mortality are



                                              22
associated with successful economic growth, which suggests an explanation in which

there are common third factors that are good both for growth and for health.

   An investigation of the mutual determinants of growth and health is beyond the scope

of this paper. But a number of candidates are identified in both literatures. The level of

education, particularly women’s education, is a leading possibility that has been

repeatedly identified as a crucial factor in child malnutrition, infant and child mortality,

and in lowering fertility rates, Drèze and Mamta Murthi (2001), John Hobcraft (1993).

Many of the institutions that are identified in the growth literature, particularly those

relating to governance, are also identified in the recent literature on the delivery of public

health services and of healthcare, which emphasizes failures to regulate, failures of

absenteeism, and failures of information as among the most important barriers between

knowledge about how to prevent and cure disease, and its delivery to the poor of the

world, Nazmul Chaudhury et al. (2006), Das and Hammer (2004. 2005a, b).

   Finally, a word of caution. Lack of correlation does not imply lack of causation, any

more than the correlation implies causation. If it were true that faster growth caused

better health, then other mechanisms might obscure or attenuate that correlation.

Consider, for example, the following simplified model. Improvements in health are

caused by growth and by innovations in health technology, so that

                                ΔH = α 0 + α1Δ ln x + α 2 I + u1                             (1)

where I measures health innovations, and both coefficients are positive. The growth in

per capita income is also affected by health, according to

                                   Δ ln x = β 0 + β1ΔH + u2                                  (2)




                                              23
According to Acemoglu and Johnson’s findings, who use I to instrument ΔH in (2), the

causal effect of health improvements on growth, the parameter β1 , is negative, essentially

because of the traditional negative effects of population growth on income per head,

especially when the population growth comes through additional children. In this model,

other determinants of economic growth, such as investment, better education, or

globalization, work through the term u2 , increasing growth and improving health through

(1) and the positive parameter α1 . The effect through (1) works against the negative

effect of health innovations on growth through (2), and over any particular period, could

annihilate or even reverse the negative correlation between health improvements and

growth. By the same token, the positive effect of growth on health, the coefficient α1 ,

will not necessarily show up in the correlation between health improvements and

economic growth. Indeed, if Acemoglu and Johnson’s results hold for the periods and

countries considered here—and their main focus is on an earlier period, and their data do

not include any African countries—then there must be a positive causal effect of growth

on health to explain the zero correlation in the data.



9. India and China

In all of the analysis so far, each country has been treated as an equally important and

informative observation, a procedure that gives no recognition to the importance of India

and China in the global population. So it is useful to look at the record of growth and

mortality in those two countries, to see whether the pattern is different from what we

have seen elsewhere.




                                             24
    An excellent discussion of the relative progress in India and China is given by Drèze

and Sen (2002, Chapter 3), and Figures 8 and 9 follow their lead using the data used in

this paper. Figure 8 shows income and child mortality, Figure 9 shows income and infant

mortality; in both cases, income is shown on a logarithmic scale. The solid lines are for

India, the broken lines for China; descending lines are infant or child mortality, and

ascending lines are GDP per capita.

    These graphs show exactly what Sen and Drèze found, that the rate of economic

growth and the rate of reduction of infant or child mortality, are negatively related. In

China, almost all of the improvement in health was prior to the acceleration of economic

growth after the reforms and, in the case of infant mortality using the UN data, there has

been essentially no improvement since the mid-1970s. While it possible that there are

diminishing returns as mortality rates approach the minimum that is feasible, an infant

mortality rate of 50 per 1,000 is still high relative to what has been achieved by many

countries, and there is certainly no absolute floor at 50. In India, the picture is less

extreme than in China, but the Figures show that, during the 1990s, after the economic

reforms, when growth was more rapid than previously, the infant and child mortality

rates fell less rapidly than was the case in the previous decades, see also Deaton and

Drèze (2001). This slowdown, and part of the slowdown in China, almost certainly

reflects a worldwide slowdown in the rate of decline of infant and child mortality in

nearly all countries of the developing world.




                                              25
10. Conclusions

The poorest people in the world are poor, not only in material living standards, but also in

health and longevity. Global income inequalities reinforce global health inequalities,

adding (literal) injury to (material) insult. Simple measures of wellbeing that combine

health and income, such as life expectancy multiplied by annual per capita income, are

more unequally distributed across the world than is income or health taken alone. For

much of the last half century, there was a reduction in the contribution to compound

inequality from the life expectancy component while life expectancies in the low life-

expectancy countries grew closer to life expectancies in the high life-expectancy

countries. But these gaps in longevity have opened up again in the last fifteen years,

largely because of the effects of HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa.

    But convergence of life expectancies, even should it resume, is not a useful indicator

of reduced inequalities in health. Gains in longevity among the already long-lived

inhabitants of the world come from reductions in mortality among the middle-aged and

the elderly, while the more rapid longevity gains in low life expectancy countries have

come from saving the lives of children. The use of life expectancy at birth as an overall

measure of benefit is not easily justifiable because its relatively heavy weighting for

mortality reductions early in life is arbitrary. There is no clear justification for such

weighting that would support the use of life expectancy as a measure of wellbeing for

which reductions in international inequality would be desirable. Indeed, it is possible to

argue, as I have done above, that recent reductions in mortality in rich countries have

widened international health inequalities, not narrowed them.




                                              26
   I have also argued that it dangerous to focus on convergence of health measures, if

only because some measures, such as child mortality rates, can be diverging while others,

such as life expectancy, are converging, even when variation in life expectancies are

entirely due to variations in child mortality. We do not have the kind of axiomatic

structure for measuring health that we have for income. In consequence, measures of

health inequality, or of health convergence and divergence, are arbitrary. Different

measures will lead into a morass of confusion and contradiction, without any well-

supported links to national or international wellbeing.

   Conceptual difficulties in the measures of health are compounded by practical

difficulties. In many of the poorest countries of the world, and particularly in sub-Saharan

Africa, measures of adult mortality are little more than projection and conjecture. While

the broad international picture is unlikely to be seriously misleading, we have no good

measures of change over time, a dire gap in a world where the evaluation of programs for

health improvement is a matter of the greatest urgency.

   The positive cross-country correlation between health and income can be interpreted

(and has been interpreted) as showing that economic growth is the surest remedy for

deprivation in health. Others have argued that poor health and difficult disease

environments are the most important causes of material deprivation. Yet, as noted earlier,

some poor countries have achieved remarkably good health outcomes. More surprisingly,

there is no cross-country correlation between reductions in infant and child mortality and

rates of economic growth. This is true over ten year periods from 1960 to 2000, and also

for the whole 40 year period. Some countries achieved major improvements in mortality

without economic growth, while others who grew very rapidly, most notably China after




                                            27
1980 and India after 1990, showed little improvement in health or slower improvements

than in earlier periods of slower economic growth. These results make it very hard to

believe that improvements in health are the engines of economic growth. They also

present some difficulties for the “wealthier is healthier” view, though if reductions in

child mortality reduce economic growth, while sympathetic increases in investment or

other growth-inducing factors increase economic growth, which itself improves health, it

is conceivable that a zero or inconsistent correlation between health and income

improvements might be the result. As of now, we do not know.

    Even so, my best guess is that health improvements in poor countries are not

primarily driven by income, nor even by improvements in health knowledge and

technology. Knowledge has certainly been important in the long run. But over periods as

long as decades, it is the social factors that make for effective delivery of health that are

vital, particularly levels of education, and the development of population health as a

political priority, which itself depends on better education and on the widespread idea

that better health is both a possibility and a right.



List of works cited:

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, 2005, “Disease and development: the effect of

  life expectancy on economic growth,” Unpublished manuscript, Department of

  Economics, MIT, July 2005.

Anand, Sudhir, and Martin Ravallion, 1993, “Human development in poor countries: the

  role of private incomes and public services,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(1),

  133–50.




                                               28
Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares, 2005, “The quantity and

  quality of life and the evolution of world inequality,” American Economic Review,

  95(1), 277–91.

Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Bryan Graham, 2003, “Longevity and life-cycle

  savings,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 105(3), 319–38.

Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla, 2004, “The effect of health on

  economic growth: a production function approach,” World Development, 32(1), 1–13.

Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrisson, 2002, “Inequality among world

  citizens: 1820–1992,”American Economic Review, 92(4), 727–44.

Broome, John, 2004, Weighing lives, Oxford. Oxford University Press.

Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and F.

  Halsey Rogers, 2006, “Missing in action: teacher and health worker absence in

  developing countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(1), 91–116

Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, 2001, Macroeconomics and health:

  investing in health for economic development, Geneva: World Health Organization.

Cutler, David M., Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, 2006, “The determinants of

  mortality,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3), 97–120.

Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer, 2004, “Strained mercy: the quality of medical care in

  Delhi,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3228, (March), Washington,

  DC.

Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer, 2005a, “Which doctor? Combining vignettes and item

  response to measure clinical competence,” Journal of Development Economics, 78,

  348–83.




                                          29
Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer, 2005b, “Money for nothing: the dire straits of medical

  practice in Delhi, India,” World Bank Policy Research Paper No. 3669, (July),

  Washington, DC.

Deaton, Angus, 2004, “Health in an age of globalization,” Brookings Trade Forum 2004,

  83–130.

Deaton, Angus and Jean Drèze, 2002, “Poverty and inequality in India: a reexamination,”

  Economic and Political Weekly, 37(36), 3729–48.

Drèze, Jean and Mamta Murthi, 2001, “Fertility, education, and development: evidence

  from rural India,” Population and Development Review, 27, 33–63.

Drèze, Jean and Amartya Sen, 2002, India: development and participation, Delhi: Oxford

  University Press.

Filmer, Deon, and Lant Pritchett, 1999, “The impact of public spending on health: does

  money matter,” Social Science and Medicine, 49(10), 1309–23.

Filmer, Deon, and Lant Pritchett, 2001, “Estimating wealth effects without expenditure

  data, or tears: an application to educational enrolments in states of India,”

  Demography, 38(1), 115–32.

Gwatkin, Davidson, 1980. “Indications of change in developing country mortality trends:

  the end of an era,” Population and Development Review, 6(4), 615–44.

Haddad, Lawrence, Harold Alderman, Simon Appleton, Lina Song, and Yisehac

  Yohannes, 2003, “Reducing child malnutrition: how far does income growth take us?”

  World Bank Economic Review, 17(1), 107–31.

Hobcraft, John, 1993, “Women’s education, child welfare, and child survival: a review of

  the evidence,” Health Transition Review, 3(2), 159–75




                                            30
Hill, Kenneth, 2003, “Adult mortality in the developing world: what we know and how

  we know it,” Population Division, New York: United Nations.

Lopez, Alan D., Joshua A. Salomon, Omar Ahmad, Christopher J. Murray, and Doris

  Mafat, 2000, “Life tables for 191 countries: data, methods, and results,” GPE

  Discussion Paper Series No. 9, Geneva: World Health Organization.

Lorentzen, Peter, John McMillan, and Romain Wacziarg, 2005, “Death and

  development,” NBER Working Paper No. 11620 (September), Cambridge, MA.

Moser, Kath A., David A. Leon, and Davidson R. Gwatkin, 2005, “How does progress

  toward the child mortality millennium development goal affect inequalities between

  the poorest and the least poor? Analysis of Demographic and Health Survey data,”

  British Medical Journal, 331 (November 19), 1180–3.

Nagel, Thomas, 2005, “The problem of global justice,” Philosophy and Public Affairs,

  33(2), 113–47.

Preston, Samuel H., 1975, “The changing relation between mortality and level of

  development,” Population Studies, 29(2), 239–48.

Preston, Samuel H., 1980, Causes and consequences of mortality decline in less-

  developed countries during the twentieth century,” in Richard A. Easterlin, ed.,

  Population and economic change in developing countries, Chicago. University of

  Chicago Press, 289-360.

Preston, Samuel H., and Paul Taubman, 1994, “Socioeconomic differences in adult

  mortality and health status,” in Linda G. Martin and Samuel H. Preston, eds.,

  Demography of Aging, Washington, D.C. National Academies Press, 279–318.




                                           31
Pritchett, Lant, 1997, “Divergence, big time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(3),

  3–17.

Pritchett, Lant, 2001, “Health and development: three big questions, many small

  answers,” Unpublished manuscript for lunch talk to Global Development Network,

  Rio de Janeiro, December 14th.

Pritchett, Lant, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1986, “Wealthier is healthier,” Journal of

  Human Resources, 31(4), 841–68.

Sen, Amartya, 1999, Development as freedom, New York. Knopf.

Sheps, Mindel C., 1958,”Shall we count the living or the dead?” New England Journal of

  Medicine, 259(25), 1210–4.

Svedberg, Peter, 2006, “Declining child malnutrition: a reassessment,” International

  Journal of Epidemiology,

Timæus, Ian M., 2001, “Adult mortality in the less developed world,” in N. J. Smelser

  and P. B, Baltes, eds., International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral

  Sciences, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 142–7

Wagstaff, Adam, 2000, “Socioeconomic inequalities in child mortality: comparisons

  across nine developing countries,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 78(1),

  19–29.

Wagstaff, Adam and Naoko Watanabe, 2003, “What difference does the choice of SES

  make in health inequality measurement?” Health Economics, 12, 885–90.




                                           32
Table 1: Convergence and divergence
Standard deviations of measures of health and income, 1960 to 2004

                lnGDP           Life             Infant          Child            Ln IMR          Ln CMR
                                Expectancy       mortality       mortality

1960            0.98            12.0             60.9            105.7            0.72            0.83
1970            1.09            11.2             50.1            94.3             0.80            0.91
1980            1.13            10.5             48.0            80.6             0.89            1.00
1990            1.14            10.5             43.4            71.8             0.98            1.08
2000            1.18            11.7             40.1            67.0             1.11            1.18

2004            1.23            12.4             39.6            65.8             1.15            1.26

Notes: All figures are standard deviations of the series noted in the heading. GDP is real chained gross
domestic product per capita in constant 2000 international PPP dollars and is taken from the Penn World
Table version 6.2; all other series are from the 2006 World Development Indicators. The GDP series covers
97 countries in 1960, rising to 185 in 2000, but only 79 in 2004. Child and infant mortality rates come from
151 countries in 1960 rising to 186 by 2004. In all calculations, each country is taken as a unit, and there is
no weighting by population.


Table 2: Death and poverty around the world


Millions of deaths per           Treatments                         World           Low              High
year                             Prevention                                         income           income
Respiratory infections           Antibiotics                        3.96            2.90             0.34
HIV/AIDS                         HAART                              2.78            2.14             0.02
Perinatal deaths                 Pre & post-natal care              2.46            1.83             0.03
Diarrheal disease                Oral rehydration therapy           1.80            1.50             0.00
Tuberculosis                     Public health: DOTS                1.57            1.09             0.01
Malaria                          Partially treatable                1.27            1.24             0.00
DPT/Measles/Polio                Vaccinations                       1.12            1.07             0.00
Percent of deaths
Ages 0 to 4                                                         18.4            30.2             0.9
Ages 60 and above                                                   50.8            34.2             75.9

Notes: HAART stands for Highly-active anti-retroviral therapy, perinatal deaths are deaths in the first
seven days of life, and are typically associated with low birthweight, DOTS stands for directly-observed
treatment short course, and is treatment combined with community monitoring to ensure full compliance,
and DPT stands for diphtheria, pertussis (whooping cough) and tetanus. Low income and high income are
World Bank designations and correspond (approximately) to below $5,000 and above $10,000 PPP in
Figure 1. Note that the middle-income countries are not shown, so that the world figures are not the sum of
the low income and high income figures. Figures are for 2002, are based on WHO data, and are subject to
substantial margins of error.




                                                      33
Figure 1: The Preston Curve in 2000
(Reproduced from Deaton, 2004.)
                        80




                                                            1970-1975                                                                        1995-2000
                                                                                                      80
                                     70




                                                                                      Life Expectancy at birth (years)
    Life Expectancy at birth (years)




                                                                                                                  70
                   60




                                                                                                   60
    50




                                                                                     50
                       40




                                                                                                       40




                                          0   50           100          150   200                                        0   50           100          150   200
                                                   infant mortality rate                                                          infant mortality rate




Figure 2: Life expectancy and infant mortality


                                                                                    34
                                                 .05
 Proportional change in Infant Mortality Rate
                                                 0
                                                 -.05
                                                 -.1




                                                          -.1         -.05               0                 .05              .1
                                                                      Annualized rate of growth in real per capita GDP


Figure 3: Proportional changes in infant mortality and per capita economic growth
(10 year intervals, 1960-2000, Source World Development Indicators.)




                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                     2




                                                                 Filled points
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                             Proportional change in IMR
                                                                                                                                      0
                                     Change in IMR
                                                     -2




                                                                                                                                      -.05
                                                     -4
                                                     -6




                                                                                                                    Hollow points
                                                                                                                                      -.1




                                                           -.1          -.05                 0               .05                 .1

                                                                         Annualized rate of growth in real per capita GDP

Figure 4: Proportional and absolute changes in infant mortality and per capita
economic growth


                                                                                                 35
                                                                                                            0
                  0




                                                                                                            -.02
                 -1




                                                                                                                   Proportional change in IMR
Change in IMR




                                                                                                            -.04
     -2




                                  Filled points




                                                                                                            -.06
                 -3




                                                                                           Hollow points




                                                                                                            -.08
                 -4




                        -.02                      0               .02                .04              .06
                                              Annualized rate of growth in real per capita GDP

Figure 5: Proportional and absolute changes in infant mortality and per capita
economic growth, 1960-2000
                      250
                      200
   IMR per thousand
                      150
                      100
                      50
                      0




                            -.1               -.05                0                 .05              .1

                                                      Growth of per capita income


Figure 6: Infant mortality rates and economic growth


                                                                        36
                                               .1
  Average annual growth in subsequent decade
                                               .05
                                               0
                                               -.05
                                               -.1




                                                             40                50             60            70             80

                                                                    Life expectancy at the beginning of the decade


Figure 7: Economic growth and life expectancy




                                                                                                                                4000
                                               250




                                                                  Child mortality, India           GDP per capita,
                                                                                                                                3000
 Mortality rate, under 5, per 1,000




                                                                                                   China
                                                                                                                                       Real per capita GDP: PPP
                           200




                                                                                                                                2000
                150




                                                                                                              GDP per capita,
                                                                       Child mortality,
                                                                                                              India
                                                                       China
  100




                                                                                                                                1000
                                               50




                                                      1960           1970              1980            1990             2000
Figure 8: Income and child mortality in India and China
(World Bank data)


                                                                                           37
                         200




                                                                                               3000
                                   Infant mortality,              GDP per capita,
                                   India                          China




                                                                                               1500 2000
 infant mortality rate
                         150




                                                                                                           Real per capita GDP: PPP
                                                                           GDP per capita,
                                         Infant mortality,                 India
                                         China




                                                                                               1000
                         100




                                                                                               500
                         50




                           1950   1960           1970        1980          1990         2000
Figure 9: Income and infant mortality, India and China
(UN data)




                                                             38
