                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INTERNATIONAL RESERVES MANAGEMENT AND THE CURRENT ACCOUNT

                                          Joshua Aizenman

                                        Working Paper 12734
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12734


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




Prepared for the 10th Annual Conference Proceedings Volume, Current Account and External Financing,
Santiago, the Central Bank of Chile, November 2006, organized by Kevin Cowan, Sebastian Edwards
and Rodrigo Valdes. I would like to thank Romain Ranciere for his insightful discussion of the earlier
version; for the very useful suggestions of Jose De Gregorio and the conference participants; and Daniel
Riera-Crichton for his excellent research assistance. Any errors are mine. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
International Reserves Management and the Current Account
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 12734
December 2006
JEL No. F15,F32,F36,F4

                                           ABSTRACT

The paper assesses the costs and benefits of active international reserve management (IRM), shedding
light on the question of how intense should IRM be for an emerging market. In principle, an active
IRM strategy could lower real exchange rate volatility induced by terms of trade shocks; provide self
insurance against sudden stops; reduce the speed of adjustment of the current account; and even allow
for higher growth if it fosters exports ("mercantilist" motive). The message of the report is mixed --
management of reserves is not a panacea. The mercantilist case for hoarding international reserves,
as an ingredient of an export led growth strategy, is dubious. Done properly, IRM augments macro
economic management in turbulent times, mitigating the impact of external adverse shocks and allowing
for a smoother current account adjustment. These benefits are especially important for commodity
exporting countries, and countries with limited financial development.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics ; E2
1156 High St.
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@cats.ucsc.edu
                                                 1


    “Several factors, apart from the exchange rate regime, influence the comfort level in regard
    to reserves. Illustratively, they would include vulnerability to the real sector shocks,
    strength of the fiscal and financial sectors, current account balance, the changing
    composition of capital flows, a medium-term view of growth prospects encompassing
    business cycles, etc. In a sense, official reserves have to reflect the balancing and
    comforting factors relative to external assets and liabilities in the context of a rational
    balance sheet approach.”

        Dr. YV Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India / Mumbai Sep 20, 2006

     “…following the Asian crisis of the late 1990s it was likely that countries might choose
    to build up large foreign exchange reserves in order to be able to act as a “do it yourself”
    lender of last resort in US dollars.”
A speech by Mervyn King, Governor of The Bank of England, New Delhi, 20 February
2006

        This paper assesses the costs and benefits of active international reserve
management (IRM). The first part outlines and appraises various channels where IRM
may enhance economic performance, focusing on two important channels: i) IRM lowers
real exchange rate volatility induced by terms of trade shocks; ii) IRM provides self
insurance against sudden stops and fiscal shocks, reducing the downside risk associated
with adverse shocks. There is weaker evidence regarding other channels, including iii) A
mercantilist motive, where IRM is alleged to lead to higher growth induced by fostering
export; and iv) A greater capacity to smooth overtime adjustment to shocks, thereby
reducing the speed of adjustment of the current account.
        Our analysis of international reserve management supplements the insights of
earlier literature, which focused on using international reserves as a buffer stock, as part
of the management of an adjustable-peg or managed-floating exchange-rate regime.1
While valid, the buffer stock approach fitted better a world with limited financial
integration, where trade openness determined countries’ vulnerabilities to external


1
  Accordingly, optimal reserves balance the macroeconomic adjustment costs incurred in
the absence of reserves with the opportunity cost of holding reserves (see Frenkel and
Jovanovic, 1981). The buffer stock model predicts that average reserves depend
negatively on adjustment costs, on the opportunity cost of reserves, and on exchange rate
flexibility; and positively on GDP and on reserve volatility driven frequently by the
underlying volatility of international trade. Overall, the literature of the 1980s supported
these predictions; see Frenkel (1983), Edwards (1983), and Flood and Marion (2002) for
a recent review.
                                             2

shocks. In the absence of reserves, balance of payments deficits would have to be
corrected via a reduction in aggregate expenditures, imposing adjustment costs. As
greater trade openness increases the exposure to trade shocks, minimizing adjustment
costs requires higher reserve holdings. The rapid financial integration of developing
countries, and the financial crises of the 1990s focused attention on the growing exposure
to sudden stops and on reversals in flows of capital.2 In such a world, financial markets
may force an adjustment well before flows of commercial trade would adjust, shifting the
focus to exposure to financial shocks, and to costs associated with disintermediations
triggered by adverse liquidity shocks.
       Section 1 evaluates empirically the impact of international reserves on real
exchange rate volatility in the presence of terms of trade shocks. The evidence suggests
that international reserves play a role in the mitigation of terms of trade (TOT) shocks in
Developing countries, but not in the OECD. Economic structure matters greatly – exports
of natural resources double both the impact of terms of trade shocks on the real exchange
rate, and that of the mitigation associated with IRM on the real exchange rate. These
results are consistent with the notion that the limited development of capital markets in
developing countries hampers their ability to mitigate the volatility associated with
shocks. Section 2 models such a mechanism, explaining possible effects of IRM in the
presence of costly financial intermediation of long term investment. Section 3 overviews
the debate about international reserves management and mercantilist motives, outlining
the empirical and the theoretical limitations of the mercantilist approach. The
mercantilist case for hoarding international reserves, as an ingredient of an export led
growth strategy, is lacking empirical evidence. In addition, hoarding international
reserves motivated by short-run competitiveness concerns of one country may trigger
other countries into adopting a similar policy, to preempt any competitive advantage
gained by the first country. These circumstances may lead to competitive hoarding of
reserves, which in turn would dissipate any competitiveness gains. Section 4 evaluates
the impact of international reserves on current account persistence. The results support
the notion that a higher build up of reserves allows countries to be better buffered against

2
  See Calvo (1998), Calvo et. al. (2003) and Edwards (2004), and the references therein
for assessment of sudden stops in developing countries.
                                              3

shocks, thereby reducing the speed of adjustment of the current account. This outcome is
consistent with the importance of current account adjustments in allowing for smoother
consumption, in the presence of limited financial integration and sudden stops. Section 5
concludes with a discussion of the limitations of international reserves management.


1. Real exchange rate volatility, terms of trade and international reserves.

       In this section we focus on some of the challenges facing a developing country
with limited development of its internal capital market, a growing integration with the
global financial system, and a large exposure of the current account to terms of trade
effects. This description applies especially to commodity exporting countries, subject to
large terms of trade shocks. While favorable terms of trade shocks tend to induce real
appreciation and capital inflows, the downturns associated with adverse shocks impose
daunting challenges. To put this topic in a broader context, note that the literature of the
1990s identified large adverse effects of exogenous volatility on the GDP and on
economic growth in developing countries.3 Fundamentally, this issue hinges on the
nature of non-linearties affecting the economy, where strong enough concavity may
generate first order adverse effects of volatility on the GDP and on growth. An important
channel that may explain such negative level and growth effects of volatility are
imperfect capital markets.
       A recent contribution illustrating these considerations is Aghion, Bacchetta,
Ranciere and Rogoff (2006), who found that real exchange rate volatility reduces growth
for countries with relatively low levels of financial development. These studies suggest
that factors mitigating real exchange rate volatility may be associated with superior
economic performance. The large hoarding of international reserves by developing
countries in recent years raises the question to what extent have these reserves affected
the volatility of the REER. For most countries, terms of trade shocks are the most
important source of exogenous volatility, frequently leading to real exchange rate


3
 See Ramey and Ramey (1995) and the references in Aizenman and Pinto for the
association between macro volatility and growth. See IDB (1995) and Calderón and
Schmidt-Hebbel (2003) for the impact of terms of trade shocks and of other foreign
shocks on growth in Latin America and in developing countries.
                                                 4

volatility, potentially magnifying business cycle volatility. This issue is pertinent for
developing countries, as they are exposed to TOT volatility, the standard deviation of
which is 3 times the volatility of industrial countries. Shallow domestic financial systems
of relatively small size, and the lack of sectoral diversification in most developing
countries limit their ability to mitigate TOT shocks by internal adjustment. Sovereign
risk and the lack of proper financial instruments inhibit the ability to hedge against these
shocks by relying on the global financial system [see Caballero (2003) and Caballero and
Panageas (2003)]. Developing countries may be left with self insurance as a last resort
option for dealing with TOT shocks.
       In Aizenman and Riera-Crichton (2006) we confirm this possibility. We start by
applying a rudimentary panel regression methodology, and show that the main result is
robust to adding controls and to a more sophisticated estimation method. Specifically,
the benchmark regression is


       (1)      ln( REERit ) = a1,i + α1 (TO *ln(TOT ))it + α 2 (TO *ln(TOT ) * RES )it + ε it


where the independent variable is the log of the real effective exchange rate (REER),
defined so that a higher REER indicates real appreciation. The term a1,i represents

                                                                    IM + EXP
country fixed effects, TOT is the terms of trade, TO = ln[1 + (              )] is the trade
                                                                      2GDP
                                         International Reserves
openness measure, and RES = ln[1 +                              ] is a proxy for the
                                                  GDP
International reserves/GDP.
                                                                             n is a first
       The specification of regression (1) follows the observation that TO * TOT
order approximation of the income effect associated with terms of trade improvement rate
   n , where the income effect is defined as the GDP rate of change induced by a TOT
of TOT
                                  n as the effective terms of trade shock. By design,
shock. Henceforth I refer to TO * TOT
                                                5

(1) implies that the elasticity of the real exchange rate with respect to effective terms of
trade change is4


                    ∂ ln( REER)
       (2)                         = α1 + α 2 * RES
                   TO * ∂ ln(TOT )


       Hence, regression (1) provides information about the degree to which hoarding
international reserves may impact REER dynamics induced by terms of trade shocks.
Table 1 reports the regression results for 1970-2004. Column (1) presents the baseline
regression pooling all countries, subject to data availability. The elasticity of the REER
with respect to the effective terms of trade shock is well above one: a one percent
improvement of the effective terms of trade induces a REER appreciation of about 1.8
percent. International reserves hoarding lessens the elasticity of the REER with respect to
the TOT by more than twice the International reserves/GDP (i.e., column (1) implies that
∂ ln( REER) /[TO * ∂ ln(TOT )] ≅ 1.8[1 − 2* RES ] ).
       Equation (2) is the elasticity of the REER with respect to the effective TOT,
implying that the elasticity of the REER exchange rate with respect to the TOT is
∂ ln( REER) / ∂ ln(TOT ) = TO * [α 1 − α 2 * RES ] ≅ TO * 1.8[1 − 2 * RES ] . Hence, for a
country with trade openness of 0.25, and IR/GDP ratio of 0.1, the elasticity of the REER
with respect to the TOT is .25*1.8(1-2*0.1) = 0.36, in line with De Gregorio and Wolf
(1994), who found that the elasticity of the REER with respect to TOT, unconditional of
the RES position, is about 0.4.
       Aggregation matters -- columns (2) and (3) show that this result applies to
developing, but not to Industrial countries. This is consistent with the notion that limited
development of the capital market in developing countries hampers their ability to
mitigate the volatility associated with shocks. Economic structure matters greatly –
exports of natural resources magnify the impact of the effective terms of trade shocks and
the mitigation associated with international reserves by a factor exceeding 2.
Interestingly, the international reserve effect is insignificant for that group, yet we will

4
  Throughout our discussion we presume that trade openness and International
reserves/GDP are characterized by low volatility relative to TOT volatility.
                                                 6

show later that it’s significant for the lagged TOT shock. In contrast, these interactions
are insignificant for manufacturing intense countries. The last two columns focus
specifically on Latin America and Asia; TOT shocks induce large effects in both blocks.
International reserves induce a powerful mitigation of the TOT shock in Asian countries,
but not in LATAM.
       Table 2 verifies the robustness of prior results, redoing the base regression of the
case where we evaluate the adjustment to the one year lagged terms of trade shock on the
contemporaneous REER:5


       (1’)    ln( REERit ) = a1,i + α1 (TO *ln(TOT ))it −1 + α 2 (TO *ln(TOT ) * RES )it −1 + ε it


       The signs are identical to Table 1, the main difference being that shocks are
apparently absorbed faster in LATAM and Asia, where most of the coefficients on the
lagged shocks are insignificant for these blocks.
       Table 3 reports country specific results for several Latin American countries. The
last two columns of the Individual country table represent the total effect of terms of trade
changes (amplified by trade openness) into the real exchange rate; taking into account the
mitigation offered by international reserves:

                                        ∂ ln( REER)
       (3)     Total Effect 1990-99 =                 = [α1 + (α 2 * RES1990−99 ) ] ,
                                      ∂[TO *ln(TOT )]
                                        ∂ ln( REER)
       (4)     Total Effect 2000-04 =                 = [α1 + (α 2 * RES 2000−04 ) ]
                                      ∂[TO *ln(TOT )]

Overall, the results suggest that reserves play a role in the mitigation of TOT shocks only
in Developing countries. While this role widely differ across countries, the mitigation
role of international reserves is important, especially in countries abundant with natural
resources, like Argentina, Chile, Ecuador and Mexico.


5
  We rejected the unit root hypothesis for the REER. We applied a Levin-Lin-Chu panel
unit root test. The test assumes that each individual unit in the panel shares the same
AR(1) coefficient, but allows for individual effects, time effects and possibly a time
trend. We found high persistence: the autoregressive coefficient of about 0.84, but well
below 1.
                                             7

       The results reported above focus on the association between the level of the terms
of trade, International reserves/GDP and the real exchange rate. We also verified that a
higher International reserves/GDP is associated with a lower REER volatility. This
result is consistent with Hviding, Nowak and Ricci (2004), who focused on the
association of International reserves/GDP and the volatility of the real exchange rate,
controlling for exchange rate regimes. Aizenman and Riera-Crichton (2006) also
confirmed that the mitigation effects identified in (2) continue to hold when we control
for exchange rate regimes, and for the composition of capital flows [see Broda and Tille
(2003) for the role of exchange rate flexibility in accommodating the adjustment to terms
of trade shocks].
       Appendix A outlines a case study of Chile. Applying OLS and a VAR analysis,
we find that an improvement in Chile’s terms of trade is associated with a drop of the
lending and deposit rates, and an improvement of Chile’s external risk evaluation. We
turn now to an elaborate model of costly financial intermediation, explaining possible self
insurance aspects of ex-ante hoarding of international reserves.


2. The model -- financial intermediation, self insurance and the real exchange rate


       A growing literature has identified financial intermediation, in the presence of
collateral constraints, as a mechanism explaining the hazard associated with credit cycles
induces by shocks. The prominent role of bank financing in developing countries
suggests that capital flights, induced by adverse terms of trade shocks or contagion,
impose adverse liquidity shocks. This section outlines a model describing conditions
under which ex-ante hoarding of international reserves may provide a self insurance
mechanism that would mitigate the real effects of liquidity shocks, ultimately reducing
the adverse effects of terms of trade volatility on the GDP. For simplicity, we focus on an
ex-ante/ex post model dealing with the determination of the GDP level and the real
exchange rate during one investment cycle. Applying the logic of endogenous growth,
one may extend the model to deal with the impact of terms of trade shocks on growth.
       As our focus is on developing countries, we assume that all financial
intermediation is done by banks, relying on debt contracts. Specifically, we consider the
                                              8

case where investment in a long-term project should be undertaken prior to the realization
of liquidity shocks. Hence, shocks may force costly liquidation of earlier investments,
thereby reducing output. We solve the optimal demand for deposits and international
reserves by a bank that finances investment in long-term projects. The bank’s financing is
done using callable deposits, exposing the bank to liquidity risk. Macro liquidity shocks,
stemming from sudden stops and capital flights, cannot be diversified away. In these
circumstances, hoarding reserves saves liquidation costs, potentially leading to large
welfare gains; gains that hold even if all agents are risk neutral. In this framework,
deposits and reserves tend to be complements – higher volatility of liquidity shocks will
increase both the demand for reserves and deposits. This is another example of hoarding
international reserves as a self-insurance against non-diversifiable liquidity shocks.6
         We model the financial intermediation and the real exchange rate by combining
Diamond and Dybvig’s (1995) insight with Aghion, Bacchetta and Banerjee’s (2003)
modeling of market imperfections in a collateral dependent small open economy.7 We
construct a minimal model to explain the self insurance offered by international reserves,
in mitigating the output effects of liquidity shocks with endogenous real exchange rate
determination. Investment in a long term project should be undertaken prior to the
realization of liquidity shocks. Hence, the liquidity shock may force costly liquidation of
the earlier investment, reducing second period output. We simplify further by assuming
that there is no separation between the bank and the entrepreneur – the entrepreneur is the
bank owner, using it to finance the investment.
         We consider a small open economy, where a traded good is produced with capital
and a country specific non-traded factor. In addition, the traded sector includes exports of
commodities, generating revenue which is determined by the realization of terms of trade
shocks [= the relative price of the exported commodities to other traded goods]. The
traded good is the numeraire. The relative price of the non-traded factor is denoted by p,



6
  See Ben-Bassat and Gottlieb (1992), Aizenman and Marion (2003), Garcia and Soto
(2004), Aizenman and Lee (2005), Jeanne and Ranciere (2005), and Rodrik (2006) for
studies dealing with various aspects of self insurance and international reserves.
7
    The model extends the one sector framework outlined in Aizenman and Lee (2005).
                                                 9

and is referred to as the real exchange rate There is a continuum of lenders and
borrowers and their number is normalized to 1.
        We focus now of the evolution of the economy throughout one investment cycle,
where gestation lags imply that capital should be installed well before hiring specific non-
traded input. To simplify, the supply of the specific factor is inelastic, at a level Z. The
lenders in the economy cannot invest directly, but lend their saving at the international
interest rate. Depositors are entitled to a real return of rf on the loan that remains

deposited for the duration of investment. The safe return reflects a risk free investment
opportunity, either in the form of a foreign bond, or as storage technology. The
borrowers are entrepreneurs who have investment opportunity, but are credit constrained.
The actual investment should be undertaken prior to the realization of liquidity shocks.
The production function is a Cobb Douglas CRS technology:


                        1 β 1− β
        (5)      y2 =     K1 z ,
                        a


where K1 is the non-liquidated capital invested at period 1, z is the level of country-
specific input, hired at a relative price of p1 . Premature liquidation of capital is costly,
and is associated with a proportionate adjustment cost of θ . Specifically, reducing the
capital stock by one dollar yields a net liquidity of 1 /(1 + θ ) .
        The time line associated with financial intermediation is summarized in Figure 1.
At the beginning of period 1, the entrepreneur with initial wealth H 1 , borrows μH 1 .8 The
combined liquidity of (1 + μ ) H1 finances planned investment K1 , and setting aside liquid
reserves R1 :


        (6)      (1 + μ )H1 = K1 + R1 .




8
 Collateral constraints can be shown to arise due to capital market imperfections in the
presence of moral hazard and costly monitoring [see Holmstrom and Tirole (1996) and
Aghion, Banerjee and Piketty (1999)].
                                               10


       Next, a liquidity shock δ realizes. A positive shock is inconsequential, because
banks can accommodate positive liquidity shocks by purchasing a risk free bond, or
investing in the risk free low yield storage technology. Hence, we focus our attention on
adverse liquidity shocks, reducing desirable deposits form μH 1 to μH 1 (1 + lδ ) ,
δ < 0, l > 0. Our model focuses on the impact of adverse liquidity shocks on optimal
investment and liquidity, refraining from modeling the reasons for the shock. Such a
shock may reflect external developments, like a higher foreign interest rate, contagion, or
a reaction to a signal revealing the future TOT. For example, suppose that the public
learns of a signal δ , determining the second period foreign currency earnings from
commodity exports. A negative TOT shock may induce anticipation of an economic
slowdown, triggering capital flights, and reducing deposits from μH1 to μ H1 (1 + lδ ) .
Independently of the exact source of the adverse liquidity shock, gestation lags associated
with tangible investment and costly liquidation, expose the bank to the downside risk
associated with abrupt adjustment.
       The bank uses reserves to meet the liquid shock and to purchase the non-traded
input. In case of need, the liquidly shock may be met by costly liquidation of capital.
Consequently, the ultimate capital is:


                     ⎧ K1 − (1 + θ ) MAX {(−δ )l μ H1 + p1 z − R1 , 0} if δ < 0
                     ⎪
       (7)      K1 = ⎨                                                          .
                     ⎪ K if δ ≥ 0
                     ⎩ 1


We assume that the liquidity constraint is binding, and that the marginal productivity of
the non traded input exceeds the return on liquid reserves. The producer’s surplus is
                                                         11

(8)
                                    1− β
   ⎧1 β        ⎡ (1 + μ ) H1 − K1 ⎤
   ⎪ K1        ⎢                  ⎥        − (1 + rf ) μ H1                                           if δ ≥ 0
   ⎪a          ⎣         p1       ⎦
   ⎪
 Π=⎨
   ⎪                                                              1− β
   ⎪1 β        ⎡ {1 + μ (1 + lδ )}H1 − K1 + ( K1 − K1 ) /(1 + θ ) ⎤
   ⎪ a K1      ⎢                                                  ⎥      − (1 + rf ) μ H1 (1 + lδ )   if δ < 0
   ⎩           ⎣                       p1                         ⎦
,
where p1 may depend on δ.


         To gain further insight, it is useful to focus on the simplest discrete example,
where with probability half an adverse liquidity shock of δ = −ε ( 0 ≤ ε < 1 ) would take
place, and with probability half there would be no liquidity interruption. The value of ε
corresponds to the volatility of the liquidity shock, δ. The asymmetric nature of tangible
investment implies that only negative liquidity shocks may require real adjustment. In
these circumstances, the expected profits are:

(9)
               ⎧ 1 β ⎡ (1 + μ ) H − K ⎤1− β ⎫    ⎧ 1 β ⎡ {1 + μ (1 − lε )}H − K + ( K − K ) /(1 + θ ) ⎤1− β ⎫
               ⎪ K                 1 1
                                       ⎥ ⎪ + 0.5 ⎪ K1 ⎢
                                                                            1  1     1   1
                                                                                                      ⎥ ⎪
 E [ Π ] = 0.5 ⎨ a 1 ⎢⎣         p1     ⎦ ⎬       ⎨a      ⎣                    p1                      ⎦ ⎬
               ⎪                            ⎪    ⎪                                                          ⎪
               ⎩−(1 + rf ) μ H1             ⎭    ⎩−(1 + rf ) μ H1 (1 − lε )                                 ⎭
,
where K1 ≥ K1
Applying the above, the equilibrium is characterized by the following:


      Claim:
  I.     If no liquidation would take place in the bad state ( K1 = K1 ), optimal planned
         capital ( K1 ) is the solution to


               β            1− β        ⎡β             1− β            ⎤
      (10a)        −                   +⎢ −                            ⎥=0
              K1       (1 + μ ) H1 − K1 ⎣ K1 [1 + μ (1 − ε l )]H1 − K1 ⎦
                                                           12


       If liquidation would occur in the bad state ( K1 > K1 ), the optimal planned capital
          ( K1 ) is determined by
        (10b)
                 β
          ⎡ K1 ⎤ ⎡ β       1− β        ⎤     ⎡β2                    (1 − β ) 2              ⎤
          ⎢ ⎥ ⎢      −                 ⎥ − θ ⎢   +                                          ⎥ =0;
          ⎣ K1 ⎦ ⎣ K1 (1 + μ ) H1 − K1 ⎦     ⎣ K1 [1 + μ (1 − ε l )]H1 (1 + θ ) − θ K1 − K1 ⎦
       where


          (11)                  K1 = β [ (1 + μ (1 − ε l ) H1 (1 + θ ) − θ K1 ] .


  II.     The threshold volatility associated with partial liquidation in bad times, denoted
          by ε~ , is
                                         1 2θ 1 − β
          (12)                  ε~ = (1 + )                  .
                                         μ 1 + θ l (1 − θβ )
Hence, small enough leverage and a large enough adjustment cost implies ε~ > 1 -- the
liquidation option would not be exercised. In these circumstances, the optimal
investment and the ex-ante hoarding of international reserves are:

                        K1 = β (1 + μ ) H1 − 0.5β lεμ H1 ;
          (13)                                                   .
                        R1 = (1 − β )(1 + μ ) H1 + 0.5β lεμ H1
The adjustment to the adverse liquidity shock is facilitated by real exchange rate
depreciation:

                        (1 − β )(1 + μ ) H1 − ε (1 − 0.5) β l μ H1                  (1 − β )(1 + μ ) H1 + 0.5εβ l μ H1
(14)       p1|δ =−ε =                                              ;   p1|δ =0 =                                       .
                                            Z                                                        Z

 III.     If ε~ < 1 , the partial liquidation option would be exercised in bad times only if the
          volatility exceeds the threshold, ε~ < ε < 1 . For volatility below the threshold,
          ε < ε~ < 1 , no liquidation would take place, and the equilibrium is characterized by
          (13)-(14).
                                                 13

Proof:
- The characterization of the planned investment and of the ex-ante hoarding of reserves,
   (13), follows by solving K1 from (10a).
- The optimal stock of capital following partial liquidation, (11), is obtained by
   maximizing the profits in bad times with respect to K 1 [the second line of (8)], noting
   that K 1 has been preset at the beginning of the planning horizon.
- The volatility threshold inducing liquidation in bad times, ε~ , is obtained by noting that
   at ε = ε~ , K = K -- at the lowest volatility associated with liquidation in bad times,
                1     1


   the liquidation is zero. Solving (11) for the case where K 1 = K 1 , we infer
                  β (1 + θ )
   that K1|   ~ =            [1 + μ (1 − ε~l )]H1 . The actual level of ε~ is solved from (10b),
           ε =ε   1 + βθ
                                                β (1 + θ )
   after substituting both K 1 and K1 with                 [1 + μ (1 − ε~l )]H 1 .
                                                1 + βθ
Discussion:
- Smaller leverage and larger adjustment costs imply a higher threshold of volatility
associated with liquidation [see (12)]. In the no-liquidation range (ε > ε~ ) , (13) implies
that investment drops by half of the anticipated liquidity shock. This drop is financing an
equal increase in ex-ante hoarding of international reserves. This hoarding will mitigate
the effects of adverse liquidity shocks in bad times. The adverse liquidity shock would
                                εβ l μ H1
induce a real depreciation of               (see 14). The extra liquidity induced by hoarding
                                   Z
reserves, and the real deprecation in bad times allow the economy to adjust fully without
the need to liquidate tangible capital. Yet, this comes at the cost of a drop in planned
investment and output.


- If ε~ < 1 , we have a mixed regime: for large enough volatility above the threshold, the
regime is characterized by a partial liquidation of capital in bad times. For volatility
below the threshold, the liquidation option would not be exercised. Hence, high enough
volatility induces a regime switch from the non liquidation to the partial liquidation of
capital.
                                                  14

        An example of the two regimes is provided in Figure 2, tracing the optimal
planned investment K1 as a function of volatility. Recalling that R1 = (1 + μ ) H1 − K1 , the
patterns of reserves as a function of volatility, are the mirror image of the patterns of the
planned investment: dR1 / d ε = − dK1 / d ε . Panel A (B) corresponds to a relatively high
(low) adjustment cost, θ = 0.2 (θ = 0.02). For relatively low volatility, liquidation would
not be exercised, and higher volatility would reduce the planned investment, increasing
the level of reserves. These reserves will be used to meet adverse liquidity shocks, saving
the need to engage in a costly ex-post liquidation of productive investment. High enough
volatility implies that the liquidation option would supplement the defensive hoarding of
reserves. Note that liquidation mitigates the adverse impact of higher volatility on the
planned investment, as can be seen by comparing the slopes of the two lines below and
above the volatility threshold, ε~ . This mitigation, however, comes at a deadweight loss
associated with adjustment costs.
        Interestingly, at the regime switch to the partial liquidation regime, we observe a
discrete drop of the planned investment, and a matching discrete jump in the ex-ante
hoarding of reserves. This follows from the observation that the switch to the partial
liquidation regime increases the marginal valuation of liquid reserves. The intuition for
this is straightforward – in the partial liquidation regime, an extra unit of liquid reserves
saves the need to liquidate 1 + θ capital, saving the deadweight loss of θ . This marginal
benefit of liquidity is absent in the ‘no liquidation’ regime. Consequently, at the regime
switch, there is discontinuity where the ex-ante demand for liquidity jumps, inducing a
drop in planned investment. This drop increases with the adjustment costs, as is vividly
illustrated by the contrast between the two panels of Figure 1. This point can be
confirmed by comparing (11) and (13a) at the threshold volatility associated with regime
change. Denoting the no liquidation (liquidation) regime by NL (LQ), respectively, it can
be verified that at ε = ε
                                          β (1 − β )
        (15)    K1|NL − K1|LQ = θ 2                     (1 + μ ) H1
                                      (1 + θ )(1 − βθ )
        A key variable is the adjustment cost parameter, θ, measuring the flexibility of
capital market adjustment. Greater flexibility of the adjustment reduces the role of
                                             15

international reserves, and of the overall impact of volatility on investment and on the real
exchange rate.
       Hoarding reserves mitigates the volatility of the real exchange rate and of the
adverse effects of liquidity shocks on the GDP. To fully appreciate this observation, it’s
useful to evaluate the expected output in the absence of the precautionary adjustment of
international reserves. Using the parameters specified in Figure 2a, the planned capital
is K1 = 1 . The actual capital in the presence of liquidity shock and the absence of the IR

precautionary adjustment would have been K1 = 1 − μεlH1 (1 + θ ) . The solid line in
Figure 3 plots the expected output in this regime as a fraction of the output had the
liquidity shock been zero. The bold line is the expected normalized output for the case
where reserves are adjusted to prevent the need to liquidate capital, as is the case in
equation (13). The figure vividly illustrates the first order gain associated with the
precautionary adjustment of international reserves. It is easy to verify that the
precautionary adjustment of reserves also reduces the volatility and the REER.
       The present model is not detailed enough to identify who would hold the
international reserves – private banks, or the central bank. In the presence of capital
controls, like in China, the international reserves would be held by the central bank. With
full integration of capital markets and convertibility and an efficient market for excess
reserves that allows diversifying idiosyncratic shocks, the bulk of the international
reserves may be held by private banks. However, moral hazard considerations along the
line analyzed by Levy Yeyati (2005), or in the absence of an efficient market for
excessive reserves, international reserves would be held by the central bank.
       The model we described is stylistic – we do not derive the collateral constraint
endogenously, and we do not claim that the debt contract or the resolution of the liquidity
shock is the most efficient one. Taking the debt contract exogenously given, we
characterize the resultant role of international reserves.9 See Ranciere, Tornell and

9
  We also do not model the mechanism inducing capital flight in the presence of adverse
terms of trade shocks. This may reflect both contagion and the possibility of multiple
equilibrium, or fundamental forces. For further discussion on “fundamentals based
Crisis” see Allen and Gale (1998) and Goldfajn and Valdes (1997); for panic based see
Chang and Velasco (1999).
                                              16

Westermann (2003) for a discussion on the dynamic interaction between an unconstrained
traded sector and a constrained non-traded sector in the presence of liquidity pressure.
       The model suggests that adverse liquidity shocks triggered by terms of trade
deterioration are accommodated by higher reserves and real depreciation, adjustments
that limit the needed liquidation of capital. While our framework dealt with one
investment cycle, it can be extended into a dynamic set up, where the next cycle
resembles a similar sequence, subject to updating the entrepreneurs’ initial wealth by the
profits of the previous investment cycle and by any outside income. In the extended
setup, terms of trade improvements (deterioration) would tend to lead to a further real
exchange rate appreciation (depredation). This would be the case in circumstances where
the entrepreneurs’ outside income includes proceeds from the exported commodity,
implying that higher wealth would increase the future demand for non-traded input.
Alternatively, this would be the case if the non traded input has other uses, the demand of
which rises with the wealth of the economy.



3.     International reserves management and mercantilist motives

       The discussion in the previous section viewed international reserve management
in the context of reducing the costs of economic volatility, reflecting the desire for self-
insurance against exposure to future sudden stops. This view faces a well-known
contender in a modern incarnation of mercantilism: international reserves accumulation
triggered by concerns about export competitiveness. This explanation has been advanced
by Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003), especially in the context of China. This
issue is of more than academic importance: the precautionary approach links reserves
accumulation directly to exposure to sudden stops, capital flight and volatility, whereas
the mercantilist approach views reserves accumulation as a residual of an industrial
policy, a policy that may impose negative externalities on other trading partners. Dooley,
Folkerts-Landau and Garber have interpreted reserves accumulation as a by-product of
promoting exports, which are needed to create better jobs, thereby absorbing abundant
labor in traditional sectors, mostly in agriculture. Under this strategy, reserves
accumulation may facilitate export growth by preventing or slowing appreciation –
                                            17



     “we argued that a sensible development policy might involve creating a distortion in
    the real exchange rate in order to bias domestic investment toward export industries.
    Sensible here means that the resulting capital stock will be superior to that generated
    by a badly distorted domestic financial system and other relative price distortions
    typical of emerging market countries.” [Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2005)].

       To put this discussion in a boarder context, the mercantilist explanation for
hoarding international reserves presumes that a monetary policy affecting the level of the
exchange rate has permanent real effects. While the view that monetary instability has
long run adverse real consequences is well supported by empirical studies, there is no
comparable body of evidence that validates the long run real impact of setting the level of
the nominal exchange rate. Indeed, anecdotal evidence suggests that the neo-classical
adjustment mechanism works “even” in China – economic growth leads to real
appreciation independently of the exchange rate regime.
       The growing importance of foreign direct investment, and the observation that a
large hoarding of international reserves has occasionally occurred in countries
experiencing a large foreign direct investment inflow, put to the fore an extended version
of the “Revived Bretton Woods system,” where international reserves are viewed as a
collateral reducing the risk associated with FDI:


    “Delivering goods and services up front is a crude form of collateral. But there is no
   credible alternative. Market participants individually could pledge financial assets in
   the center country, but the only way that the aggregate of the periphery can acquire
   assets in the US is to run a current account surplus. In an important sense, the goods
   and services already delivered to the US support the stock of US claims on the
   periphery; it is the collateral that powers the entire development strategy.
   The nature of the social collateral is so obvious it is hard to see. If the center cannot
   seize goods or assets after a default, it has to import the goods and services before the
   default and create a net liability. If the periphery then defaults on its half of the
   implicit contract, the center can simply default on its gross liability and keep the
   collateral. The periphery’s current account surplus provides the collateral to support
   the financial intermediation that is at the heart of Asian development strategies. The
   interest paid on the net position is nothing more than the usual risk free interest paid
   on collateral.” [Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2005)].
                                               18

       The wide reaching implications of Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2005)
has propagated spirited debate that goes well beyond the scope of our paper.10 Some
view the modern mercantilist approach as a valid interpretation for most East Asian
countries, arguing that they follow similar development strategies. This interpretation is
intellectually intriguing, yet it remains debatable. Observers have pointed out that high
export growth is not the new kid on the block -- it is the story of East- Asia during the last
fifty years. Yet, the large increase in hoarding reserves has happened mostly after 1997.
Indeed, one may argue that the experience of Japan and Korea suggests that during the
phase of their rapid growth, the policy tool of choice was selective favorable financing
targeted sectors, and not hoarding international reserves.11 In both countries large
hoarding of international reserves happened after the end of the high growth phase.
       Aizenman and Lee (2005) test the importance of precautionary and mercantilist
motives in accounting for the hoarding of international reserves by developing countries.
While variables associated with the mercantilist motive (like lagged export growth and
deviation from Purchasing Power Parity) are statistically significant, their economic
importance in accounting for reserve hoarding is close to zero and is dwarfed by other
variables. Overall, the empirical results in Aizenman and Lee (2005) are in line with the
precautionary demand. The effects of financial crises have been localized, increasing
reserve hoarding in the aftermath of crises mostly in countries located in the affected
region, but not in other regions. A more liberal capital account regime is found to increase
the amount of international reserves, in line with the precautionary view. These results,
however, do not imply that the hoarding of reserves by countries is optimal or efficient.
Making inferences regarding efficiency would require having a detailed model and much
more information, including an assessment of the probability and output costs of sudden
stops, and the opportunity cost of reserves.




10
   See Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2006), Eichengreen (2006a), and the overview
in Glick and Spiegel (2005).
11
  Interestingly, during the period of rapid growth, both Korea and Japan were closed to
FDI. Hence, the view that FDI is the key for successful development in East Asia
remains debatable.
                                             19

       Aizenman and Lee (2006) proposes a new interpretation of the association
between mercantilism, economic growth and hoarding reserves by looking at the
development strategies of East Asian countries during the second half of the 20th Century.
The history of the region suggests the prevalence of export promotion by preferential
financing, which effectively subsidized investment in targeted sectors. This was achieved
in several ways, including direct subsidies funded by state banks; or by means of financial
repression where favored sectors enjoyed preferential access to cheaper external
borrowing; or via “moral suasion” where private banks were encouraged to provide
favorable financing. We refer to this policy as financial mercantilism, and contrast it
with monetary mercantilism, a policy that hinges on hoarding international reserves.
       The history of Japan and Korea suggests the (near) absence of monetary
mercantilism during the phase of fast growth. Evidence suggests that financial
mercantilism had been vigorously applied during the phase of rapid growth. In both
countries, the switch to large hoarding of international reserves happened at times of
collapsing growth. Thus, if monetary mercantilism played any significant role in these
countries, it was adopted in periods of disappointing growth. The legacy of financial
mercantilism led to deteriorating balance sheets of affected banks. Circumstances where
floundering growth leads to the switch from financial mercantilism to large hoarding of
reserves are associated with growing fragility of the banking system -- financial fragility
is more sustainable in times of rapid growth, but it may induce banking crises when
growth flounders.12 In these situations, precautionary motives may lead countries to
hoard international reserves in order to mitigate the possible transmission of banking
crisis to currency crisis. With limited data, such a response may be observationally
equivalent to the one predicted by monetary mercantilism. Having good data about
international reserves but spotty data on non performing loans, it is hard to disentangle

12
   The research triggered by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) points out that greater
financial fragility increases the odds of currency crisis. Hutchison & Noy (2005) report
that “… the onsets of 31% of banking crises were accompanied by currency turmoil.
Furthermore, there is a statistically significant correlation between lagged banking crises
and contemporaneous currency crises but not vice versa.” This observation is consistent
with the insight of models of financial fragility, exemplified by Chang and Velasco
(1999).
                                             20

the precautionary hoarding from the monetary mercantilism. Moreover, monetary
mercantilism and precautionary hoarding may be mutually complementary: the
competitiveness benefit may reduce the effective cost of hoarding reserves and induce
governments to prefer reserve-hoarding over alternative precautionary means.
       China’s hoarding of reserves picked up sharply after the Asian crisis. Unlike
Korea and Japan, China is accumulating reserves without having gone through a sharp
slow-down in economic growth. We conjecture that the recent history of Japan and
Korea provided evidence encouraging China to adopt a dual strategy of financial
mercantilism and rapid hoarding of international reserves. Arguably, as much as China is
growing even faster than Korea and Japan in their early years and is going through its
take-off process in the era of a highly integrated global financial market, China faces
much greater downside risk of social and political instability associated with a crisis than
the risk that confronted Korea or Japan. This greater downside risk of recession and
financial crisis may explain both the Chinese eagerness to push financial mercantilism,
and to buffer the downside risk of the growing financial fragility with aggressive reserve
hoarding.13 Given the sheer size of China and its reserve hoarding, however, other
countries in the region may be tempted to engage in competitive hoarding in order to
mitigate the competitiveness loss in third markets.
       Furthermore, monetary mercantilism is associated with negative externalities akin
to competitive devaluation. Hoarding international reserves motivated by short-run
competitiveness concerns of one country may trigger other countries into adopting a
similar policy, to preempt any competitive advantage gained by the first country. These
circumstances may lead to competitive hoarding of reserves, which in turn would
dissipate any competitiveness gains. We provide a simple framework illustrating the
welfare losses associated with competitive hoarding. These losses may provide a novel
argument in favor of regional funds, viewed as a mechanism to cope with regional


13
  In the case of China, the ratio of banks’ non performing loans/international reserves is
estimated to be in the range of about 20% (according to the Bank of China) to more than
90% (see Jim Peterson’s report at the International Herald Tribune, 9-11-2006). These
numbers indicate a large uncertainty associated with estimating the economy-wide burden
of financial weakness, which itself would add to the demand for precautionary hoarding.
                                               21

negative externalities. The greater importance of manufacturing in East Asia relative to
Latin America, and the deeper financial repression in some East Asian countries suggests
that the case for Asian fund is stronger than that for a similar regional fund among Latin
American countries.14


4.        Current account persistence and international reserves

          The purpose of this section is to ascertain the degree to which higher international
reserves/GDP ratios have been associated with greater capacity to smooth adjustment to
shocks overtime, allowing more persistent current account patterns. In contrast, a low
level of reserves may require a rigid and fast adjustment of the current account to shocks,
where deviations from a balanced current account position are hard to sustain. We
evaluate this possibility by applying the methodology of Taylor (2002), where the speed
of adjustment of the current account (CU) back towards its equilibrium or steady state
level, was captured by the value of β in the regression15
                          ⎛ CU ⎞     ⎛ CU ⎞
          (16)           Δ⎜     ⎟ = β⎜     ⎟ + εt .
                          ⎝ GDP ⎠ t  ⎝ GDP ⎠ t −1

                                        ⎛ CU ⎞            ⎛ CU ⎞
Noting the AR reinterpretation of (16), ⎜     ⎟ ≅ (1 + β )⎜     ⎟ + ε t , β close to
                                        ⎝ GDP ⎠ t         ⎝ GDP ⎠ t −1
minus one implies no persistence of the current account pattern, as would be the case if
the adjustment to a shock is contemporaneous. In contrast, β closer to zero implies

greater persistence of the current account, allowing a more protracted adjustment to
shocks.
          We start by fitting the following regression:
                   ⎛ CU ⎞                                              ⎛ CU ⎞
          (17)    Δ⎜     ⎟ = CountryEffectsi + TimeEffectst + β sample ⎜     ⎟ + eit ,
                   ⎝ GDP ⎠ it                                          ⎝ GDP ⎠ it −1

14
  The presumption is that the real exchange rate has greater consequences on the
competitiveness of manufacturing exporters than on countries specializing in exporting
commodities and raw materials [for further discussion on regional funds see Eichengreen
(2006b)].
15
  See Taylor (2002) for a discussion linking the above estimation to intertemporal long
run budget constraints.
                                             22


      ⎛ CU ⎞           ⎛ CurrentAccount ⎞
where ⎜     ⎟ = Ln(1 + ⎜                ⎟) , and both the current account balance and
      ⎝ GDP ⎠          ⎝ DomesticGDP ⎠
the domestic economy GDP are measured in current US$. Table 4 shows the coefficient
of adjustment and thus a measure of persistence for the current account balance for 1970-
2004, subject to data availability, and subsets of the data such as Developing countries,
Developed OECD countries, Manufacture exporters, Natural Resource Exporters, Latin
American and Asian emerging economies. Table 4 also reviews sub samples based on
1980-1992 and 1993-2004, Indebtedness and Income as classifications given by the
World Bank. Note that developing countries are characterized by a faster current account
adjustment than the OECD, LATAM adjust faster than Asian emerging economies, and
exporter of natural resource countries adjust faster than the exporters of manufacturing.




Cross-section study of the factors affecting the persistence of the current account
balance

       We turn now to a cross country study testing the impact of international reserves
on the speed of adjustment. On average, we expect that a higher build up of reserves
allows countries to be better buffered against shocks, thereby reducing the speed of
adjustment of the current account, resulting in a positive association between
international reserves and β. We apply a two step derivation of the relationship between
reserves (and other government assets) and current account persistence. In the first step
we derive a measure of current account persistence.
       We ran a time series regression for each available country in the form of:


                        ⎛ CU ⎞     ⎛ CU ⎞
       (18)            Δ⎜     ⎟ = β⎜     ⎟ + εt
                        ⎝ GDP ⎠ t  ⎝ GDP ⎠ t −1


This way we obtain one β coefficient per country. The countries, the number of
observations used in the autoregressive estimation of their β and the fitted values are
listed in Tables B1-B4, in Appendix B. Table 5 provides the estimates for several
LATAM countries.
                                              23

        The persistence proxy used in the next step is just the value for the pure
autoregressive process of the current account deflated by GDP:


                ⎛ CU ⎞     ⎛ CU ⎞
        (19)    ⎜     ⎟ = α⎜     ⎟ + ε t where α = β + 1 .
                ⎝ GDP ⎠ t  ⎝ GDP ⎠ t −1
In the second step we look at the cross section relationship between our measure of
persistence represented by α and a series of structural parameters for these economies,
and a measure of the stock of reserves deflated by the GDP. 16
        In the univariate regressions, we find that higher reserves, higher GDP growth and
a lower share of commodities are associated with a significant increase in the persistency
of the current account for non OECD countries [see Table 6]. International reserves
turned out insignificant for a sample inclusive of the OECD countries. In the multivariate
regressions we find that for developing countries higher persistence is positively
associated with a higher IR/GDP, lower inflation, greater flexibility of the exchange rate
[measured by the volatility of the nominal exchange rate], and a higher share of
manufacturing [see Table 7].
        The results reported above are consistent with the consumption smoothing role of
current account adjustments. To illustrate, consider a benchmark neo-classical economy
where consumption is determined the permanent income hypothesis (linear marginal
utility of consumption); the output follows an AR(1) process Yt − Y = ρ (Yt −1 − Y ) + Y ε t

( ρ < 1 , output reverting to the long run mean Y at a rate determined by 1 - ρ); and

where agents can borrow and lend at the real interest r, which also equals their subjective
rate of time preference. It can be shown that, around the long run equilibrium,17


16
   Out of 134 countries, there are 10 countries with negative alphas that would represent
extreme volatility in the current account. These countries are generally small economies
with very sensitive external sectors. In order to reduce noise in future regressions we
purge these countries from the data. See the countries in Italics, Table B4, Appendix B.
17
   This follows the observation that in such an economy, Ct = rBt + Y +
                                                                                r
                                                                            1+ r − ρ
                                                                                     {Yt − Y } .
                                1− ρ
Hence, CU t = rBt + Yt − Ct =
                              1+ r − ρ
                                       {Yt − Y } . Hence, in the vicinity of the long run
equilibrium,
                                               24



                 ⎛ CU ⎞    ⎛ CU ⎞      1− ρ
         (20)    ⎜    ⎟  ρ⎜    ⎟ +            εt .
                 ⎝ Y ⎠t    ⎝ Y ⎠t −1 1 + r − ρ


Hence, α  ρ . Suppose that we modify the above assumptions, adding the possibility of
sudden stops. Specifically, assume that the probability of a sudden stop, terminating the
ability to borrow externally, is Φ ; where Φ = Φ ( IR / Y ); Φ ' < 0 . In these circumstances,


         (21)    α  ρ (1 − Φ) .


This suggests that a negative association between sudden stops and hoarding reserves
may account for the impact of international reserves on the persistency of current account
adjustment.

5.       On the limitations of international reserves management

         We close the paper with a discussion of the limitations of international reserves
management. While useful, IRM is not a panacea, and is subject to serious limitations
outlined below.


     •   Moral hazard: as with any insurance, there is no way to avoid various layers of
         moral hazard.


         - Macro moral hazard: any deep pot of resources may be the target of
         opportunistic raiding by policy makers in regimes characterized by political
         instability and limited monitoring. Central bank independence helps and is
         desirable, but not sufficient to overcome this obstacle [see Aizenman and Marion
         (2004) for empirical results on the adverse effects of political instability on
         hoarding international reserves].

CU t    1 − ρ ρ (Yt −1 − Y ) + Y ε t    CU t −1 Yt −1   1− ρ Y        CU t −1    1− ρ
     =                               =ρ               +        εt  ρ         +          εt .
 Yt    1+ r − ρ         Yt               Yt −1 Yt 1 + r − ρ Yt         Yt −1    1+ r − ρ
                                                 25



    - Micro moral hazard: large stockpiles of reserves may subsidize risk taking,
    especially if it is viewed as a signal of a low probability of exchange rate changes
    [see Levy Yeyati (2005), advocating a combined scheme of decentralized reserves
    in the form of liquid asset requirements on individual banks to limit moral hazard,
    and an ex-ante suspension-of-convertibility clause to reduce self-insurance costs
    while limiting bank losses in the event of a run].


•   Fiscal costs: these costs include a direct opportunity cost (the marginal product of
    investment or the cost of external borrowing), and any marginal costs of
    sterilization [see Calvo (1991) for an early discussion on the quasi costs of
    sterilization]. Hauner (2005) estimated these costs for 100 countries during 1990–
    2004, concluding that while most countries made money on their reserves during
    1990–2001, most have been losing money during 2002–04. One should keep in
    mind, however, the difficulties in tracing the full benefits of hoarding reserves:


    “While assessing the fiscal cost of holding reserves, it would be worthwhile to set off the
    benefits that the country may have in holding reserves. In any country risk analysis by the
    rating agencies and other institutions, the level of reserves generally has high weights.
    Moreover, it is essential to keep in view some hidden benefits which could accrue to a country
    holding reserves, which may, inter alia, include: maintaining confidence in monetary and
    exchange rate policies; enhancing the capacity to intervene in foreign exchange markets;
    limiting external vulnerability so as to absorb shocks during times of crisis; providing
    confidence to the markets that external obligations can always be met; and reducing volatility
    in foreign exchange markets. It is true that beyond a point, when the credit rating reaches
    appropriate investment grade, addition to reserves may not lead to further improvement in the
    credit rating. It is necessary to recognize that, as in the case of costs, there are difficulties in
    computing the benefits too.”

             Dr. YV Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India / Mumbai Sep 20, 2006


•   Coordination issues: while our focus was on IRM as self insurance, IRM
    management may be part of a fiscal scheme dealing with augmenting social
    security and future pensions. This is especially relevant for countries exporting
    commodities, like Chile, Norway, etc. This suggests the need to delegate the
    management of these funds to two different agencies. One, like the central bank,
    should deal with IRM as part of prudent macroeconomoic management
                                            26

       throughout the business cycle. The second fund fits more the treasury, or the
       social security administration, as it deals with long term intergenerational transfer.
       For further discussion, see Davis et. al. (2001).

To conclude, this paper outlined several motives for hoarding international reserves in the
era of growing financial integration. The message of the report is mixed –management of
reserves is not a panacea. The mercantilist case for hoarding international reserves, as an
ingredient of an export led growth strategy, is dubious. Done properly, international
reserve management reduces the downside risk in turbulent times. These benefits are
especially important for commodity exporting countries; and countries with limited
financial development.
                                            27


                                     Appendix A
 Financial Transmission of Terms of Trade Shocks in Natural Resource
                          Economies – The case of Chile


Meta Data and Definitions
       -The frequency of the data is quarterly
       -Sources: IFS, DataStream, CEIC, WEO, ICRG
       -Gap Variables are obtained by detrending the variables. The trend is calculated
       using the Hodrick/Prescott filter with lambda set to 1600 (recommended value for
       quarterly data).
       -Log differences are use as proxy for percentage growth

Monetary Aggregates:
     -MB equals Monetary Base

       -M1 equals currency in circulation plus demand deposits in checking accounts of
       the nonfinancial private sector net of float, demand deposits other than those in
       checking accounts and demand savings deposits.

       -M2 encompasses M1 plus time deposits of the private sector, plus time saving
       deposits, plus mutual funds (FM) quotas in up to one-year instruments (non
       financial private sector) and plus deposits of Saving and Credit Cooperatives
       (CAC), less FM investments in M2 and less CAC investments in M2.

       -M3 corresponds to M2 plus foreign exchange deposits of the private sector, plus
       instruments of the Central Bank, plus Treasury bonds, plus credit bills, plus other
       Mutual Funds (FM) quotas, plus AFP voluntary saving quotas, less FM
       investments in M3 and less AFP investments in M3.
       -Private Credit: We define private credit as M3-M1
       -Reserves: Comprise special drawing rights, reserves of IMF members held by
       IMF, and holdings of foreign exchange under the control of monetary authorities


Interest Rates:
       -Deposit Rates: rates offered to resident customers for demand, time, or savings
       deposits.
       -Lending Rates: bank rate that usually meets the short- and medium-term
       financing needs of the private sector. This rate is normally differentiated
       according to creditworthiness of borrowers and objectives of financing.
       -Domestic Spread (DS): We define the Domestic Spread (DS) as the difference
       between the Lending Rate and the Deposit Rate.
                                           28

Terms of Trade: As usual, TOT is calculated as the ratio of export to import price
indexes.

Real Output:
      -Real Aggregate Demand
      -Real GDP




External Perception of Country Specific Risks:
      -Economic Risk: A means of assessing a country's current economic strengths
      and weaknesses. In general, where strengths outweigh weaknesses, a country will
      show low risk and where weaknesses outweigh strengths, the economic risk will
      be high. To ensure comparability between countries, risk components are based on
      accepted ratios between the measured data within the national economic/financial
      structure, and then the ratios are compared, not the data. Risk points are assessed
      for each of the component factors of GDP per head of population, real annual
      GDP growth, annual inflation rate, budget balance as a percentage of GDP, and
      current account balance as a percentage of GDP. Risk ratings range from a high of
      50 (least risk) to a low of 0 (highest risk), though lowest de facto ratings are
      generally near 15.
      -Financial Risk Rating: A means of assessing a country's ability to pay its way
      by financing its official, commercial and trade debt obligations. To ensure
      comparability between countries, risk components are based on accepted ratios
      between the measured data within the national economic/financial structure, and
      then the ratios are compared, not the data. Risk points are assessed for each of the
      component factors of foreign debt as a percentage of GDP, foreign debt service as
      a percentage of exports of goods and services (XGS), current account as a
      percentage of XGS, net liquidity as months of import cover, and exchange rate
      stability. Risk ratings range from a high of 50 (least risk) to a low of 0 (highest
      risk), though lowest de facto ratings are generally near 20.


Econometric Analysis

Single OLS Equation: Effects of TOT into Financial Variables

The OLS indicates that an improvement in the TOT is associated with:
          • A drop of the financial spread = [lending rates - deposit rates]
          • Improvement in Chile’s financial and economic risk assessment.
          • A positive gap between both the Real Output and the Real Demand and
             their long run trend.
          • Higher growth rate of M1.
          • Lower growth rate of private credit (M3-M1).
                                                                              29




               REAL       REAL                                                         DOMESTIC    DEPOSIT    LENDING    ECON      FINANCIAL   PRIVATE
               GDP       DEMAND      MB        M1        M2        M3       RESERVES    SPREAD      RATE       RATE      RISK         RISK     CREDIT
    TOT        0.012     0.042***   0.012      0.09     -0.041    -0.167     -0.054    -15.732**    -22.39    -24.001    0.258      0.353**    -0.256**
               [0.056]   [0.014]    [0.133]   [0.127]   [0.086]   [0.104]    [0.223]    [7.802]    [26.380]   [28.146]   [0.166]    [0.171]     [0.121]
  TOT L1        0.06     0.034**    0.054     0.255*    0.016     -0.141      0.024    -17.945**   -13.047     -16.99    0.258       0.197     -0.396***
               [0.075]   [0.013]    [0.129]   [0.141]   [0.085]   [0.108]    [0.254]    [7.331]    [23.559]   [25.365]   [0.189]    [0.179]     [0.118]
  TOT L2       0.135      0.015     0.094     0.268*    0.086     -0.095      0.041    -16.473**    7.781      7.639     0.124       0.041     -0.363***
               [0.081]   [0.012]    [0.134]   [0.157]   [0.091]   [0.117]    [0.287]    [7.477]    [27.996]   [29.899]   [0.194]    [0.146]     [0.115]
  TOT L3       0.151*     0.001     0.173     -0.137    0.123     0.038      -0.209     -0.523      45.655     52.223    0.055       -0.191     0.175
               [0.082]   [0.015]    [0.140]   [0.190]   [0.098]   [0.142]    [0.303]    [10.676]   [46.595]   [47.505]   [0.219]    [0.203]     [0.179]
  TOT L4       0.196**    0.003     0.183     0.123     0.144     -0.016     -0.037     -9.387      33.737     38.591    0.013       -0.081     -0.138
               [0.077]   [0.012]    [0.150]   [0.192]   [0.096]   [0.130]    [0.299]    [9.490]    [39.113]   [41.211]   [0.227]    [0.164]     [0.170]
Observations     80        81         81        81        81        81         81         81         81         81         81         81          81




Table A1: Single OLS Equation; Effects of TOT into Financial Variables
TOT, MB, M1, M2, M3, Econ Risk, and Financial Risk variables are represented in log differences proxy for the growth rates.
Real GDP and Real Demand represent the deviations from their long run trend.
TOT, MB, M1, M2, M3, Reserves, Econ Risk, and Financial Risk
Vector Autorregrission (VAR) Analysis

Π t = A + ∑ Bi Π t −i + E Where Π t = {Real Demand Gap, Lending Rate, Deposit Rate
          i =0
International Risk (proxy for foreign spread), Money Supply (M1), Domestic Credit (M3-M1),
TOT}

                     REAL
                               Lending       Deposit                 PRIVATE        ECON
                   DEMAND                                   M1                                 TOT
                                Rate          Rate                   CREDIT         RISK
                       GAP
TOT(-1)             2.206**    -0.775**      -0.761**       0.37*     -0.386*       0.76**    1.39***
                     -1.005     -0.359        -0.375       -0.213      -0.215       -0.336      -0.09
TOT(-2)              -3.7***     0.106         0.083        0.131      -0.091       -0.487   -0.819***
                     -1.126     -0.402         -0.42       -0.239       -0.24       -0.377     -0.101
C                   -0.112*      0.003         0.016       -0.011       0.005       -0.014      0.009
                      0.061      0.022         0.023        0.013       0.013        0.021      0.005
R-squared             0.966      0.816         0.845        0.454       0.377         0.29      0.858
Adj. R-squared        0.958      0.776         0.811        0.334       0.241        0.134      0.828
Sum sq. resids        1.085      0.138         0.151        0.049       0.049        0.121      0.009
S.E. equation          0.13      0.046         0.049        0.028       0.028        0.044      0.012
F-statistic         129.526     20.304        24.984        3.797       2.772        1.864      27.73
Log likelihood      57.273     138.707       135.245      179.779     179.279      143.795    248.153
AIC                   -1.07     -3.132        -3.044       -4.172      -4.159       -3.261     -5.903
Schwarz SC            -0.62     -2.682        -2.594       -3.722      -3.709       -2.811     -5.453

Table A2: VAR analysis on the effects of terms of trade shocks

Table 2 Reports the effects of terms of trade shocks (measured as changes in the TOT growth
rates) on the different key macro variables of the Chilean economy given by a second order
vector autoregressive equation (the remaining coefficients are not reported here).

We chose two lags for our VAR following the Schwarz and the Hannan-Quinn criterions

    Lag            LogL          LR              FPE                AIC            SC            HQ
     0           911.528          0           5.70E-20            -24.447        -24.229       -24.36
     1           1176.146      472.022        1.69E-22            -30.274        -28.531      -29.579
     2           1293.722      187.486        2.74E-23            -32.128       -28.858*     -30.823*
     3           1342.764      68.924         2.99E-23            -32.129        -27.334      -30.216
     4           1421.307      95.525*        1.61E-23            -32.927        -26.607      -30.406
     5           1482.338      62.681         1.60E-23            -33.252        -25.406      -30.122
     6           1556.53       62.161         1.38e-23*           -33.933        -24.561      -30.195
     7           1634.354       50.48         1.52E-23           -34.712*        -23.815      -30.365

Table A3: VAR lag order selection criteria
                                               31

The VAR analysis shows properties similar to the ones uncovered by the OLS approach; a
positive shock to the growth rate of TOT is associated with:
   • A drop in the same order of magnitude of both the lending and the deposit rate. The
        negative impact is slightly bigger in the lending rate which may help explain the negative
        coefficient of the domestic spread in the single OLS equation.
   • Improvement in Chile’s external risk evaluation.
   • Higher growth rate of M1, and lower growth rate of private credit (M3-M1).
   • Higher real aggregate demand. The initial positive effect is then quickly reversed after
        the first lag.

Table A4 reports the variance decomposition of the previous VAR. The analysis shows that
changes in the growth rate of TOT absorb a significant variance from variables like the real
aggregate demand, deposits and lending rates, money supply growth and private credit. For this
decomposition we assume TOT to be the most exogenous measure so we place this variable last
in the Cholesky order.
                                                      32

 Variance Decomposition of Real Demand:
                Period                      Real Demand    Deposit   Lending    M1     Priv Credit   Econ Risk   TOT
                   1                             100
                   2                           97.35         0.3       1.12    0.01       0.05         0.39       0.78
                   3                           95.63        0.17       2.28     0.3       0.03         0.43       1.16
                   4                           93.73        0.15       3.98    0.83       0.03         0.46       0.83
                   5                           90.81         0.2       5.88    1.45       0.08         0.57       1.01
                   6                              86        0.23       7.86    1.91       0.31          0.7       2.99
                   7                           79.93        0.21       9.63    2.06       0.78         0.81       6.59
                   8                           74.23        0.37      11.05    1.96       1.41         0.87      10.11
                   9                           70.06        0.94       12.1    1.87       1.95         0.92      12.16
                  10                           67.46        1.88      12.78    1.98       2.22         0.99      12.67
Variance Decomposition of Deposit Rates:
                   1                           4.95         95.05
                   2                           4.65         88.99     1.05     0.73       1.56         0.32      2.71
                   3                           4.62         81.44     1.53     1.02        3.6         0.57      7.21
                   4                           4.52         76.36     1.45     2.64       4.57         0.48      9.98
                   5                           4.81          72.4     2.57     3.46       5.12         0.44       11.2
                   6                           5.37         69.96     4.08      3.9        5.8          0.4      10.49
                   7                           5.86         67.68     5.71      4.2       6.59          0.4      9.56
                   8                           6.05         65.27     7.32      4.4       7.72         0.46      8.77
                   9                           5.95          63.1     8.56     4.71       8.96         0.55      8.18
                  10                           5.71         61.14     9.51     5.12       10.1         0.62       7.8
Variance Decomposition of Lending Rates:
                   1                           5.09         91.93      2.98
                   2                           4.59         87.58      2.49    0.79       1.77         0.54      2.23
                   3                           4.51         79.18      3.73    0.89       3.92          1.2      6.57
                   4                           4.47         74.26      3.58    2.32       5.25         1.04      9.09
                   5                           4.87         69.93      4.83    3.22       5.89         0.96      10.28
                   6                           5.66         67.01      6.48    3.72       6.62         0.88      9.63
                   7                           6.43         64.41      8.17    4.09       7.37         0.84       8.7
                   8                           6.86         61.76      9.83    4.34       8.41         0.88      7.92
                   9                           6.91         59.46     11.13    4.68       9.54         0.94      7.34
                  10                           6.7          57.46     12.14    5.13      10.59         1.01      6.98
Variance Decomposition of M1:
                   1                            9.8         48.04     1.27     40.88
                   2                           8.38         41.49     3.98     39.24      0.13         4.96       1.82
                   3                           7.42         37.18     3.49     37.09      0.18         8.67       5.96
                   4                           7.41          35.8     4.13      35.5      0.36          8.3       8.49
                   5                            7.3         35.64     4.06     33.96      1.54         8.26       9.23
                   6                            7.2         35.21     4.01     33.74      2.48         8.26        9.1
                   7                           7.12         34.57     3.95     33.63      3.06         8.12       9.55
                   8                           7.04         33.99     3.89     33.54      3.18         7.98      10.38
                   9                           6.96         33.81     3.93     33.42      3.19          7.9      10.79
                  10                           6.97           34       4.1     33.18       3.2         7.83      10.72
Variance Decomposition of Private Credit:
                   1                            9.4         56.17     1.62     24.23      8.58
                   2                           8.67         53.24     3.19     21.11      9.28         2.53       1.99
                   3                           7.75         47.48     3.11     19.09      9.23         6.53        6.8
                   4                           7.42         45.79     2.98     19.08      9.21         6.24       9.29
                   5                           7.26         44.71     3.05     19.38      8.99         6.42      10.19
                   6                            7.4         44.49     3.65     19.17      8.86         6.38      10.05
                   7                            7.6          44.4     4.12     18.76      8.69         6.25      10.18
                   8                           7.63         44.01     4.54     18.41      8.75         6.18      10.47
                   9                           7.56         43.72     4.76     18.22      9.05         6.19      10.51
                  10                           7.55         43.46     4.84     18.18      9.33          6.2      10.45
Variance Decomposition of Econ risk:
                   1                           0.43         0.86      2.38      5.76      0.87          89.7
                   2                           0.46         1.39       2.2      6.02       3.8         82.74     3.39
                   3                           0.84         4.47      2.01     10.12      3.62         75.13     3.82
                   4                           0.91         5.32      2.08     10.34      3.65         73.93     3.78
                   5                           0.91         5.48      2.07     10.32      3.68         73.76     3.78
                   6                           0.91         5.48      2.07     10.34      3.74         73.68     3.78
                   7                           0.93         5.48      2.07     10.39       3.8         73.56     3.78
                   8                           0.95         5.48      2.07     10.44      3.84         73.45     3.77
                   9                           0.99          5.5      2.08     10.45      3.86         73.35     3.77
                  10                           1.02         5.52      2.11     10.47      3.88         73.25     3.76
Table A4: VAR variance decomposition
                                                         33


                            Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.

          Response of REALDEMAND_GAP to DLTOT                        Response of DEPOSIT_SA/100 to DLTOT
     .2

                                                           .01
     .1


     .0                                                    .00



    -.1                                                   -.01


    -.2
                                                          -.02

    -.3
          1     2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9      10           1     2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9      10



              Response of LENDING_SA/100 to DLTOT                       Response of DLM1_SA to DLTOT
    .02                                                  .016

                                                         .012
    .01
                                                         .008

    .00
                                                         .004

                                                         .000
   -.01

                                                         -.004
   -.02
                                                         -.008

   -.03                                                  -.012
          1     2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9      10           1     2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9      10



          Response of DLPRIVATECREDIT to DLTOT                        Response of DLECONRISK to DLTOT
   .008                                                  .020


   .004                                                  .015

   .000                                                  .010

  -.004                                                  .005

  -.008                                                  .000

  -.012                                                  -.005

  -.016                                                  -.010
          1     2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9      10           1     2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9      10


Graph A1: Impulse Responses to one Standard Deviation innovation in the TOT growth rates
                                                                    34

                                                     Graphical Appendix

                                 DLMB_SA                                                            DLM1_SA
      .25                                                                .20

      .20                                                                .15


      .15                                                                .10

      .10                                                                .05


      .05                                                                .00

      .00                                                                -.05

      -.05                                                               -.10
             86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06               86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06



                                 DLM2_SA                                                            DLM3_SA
      .12                                                                .10

      .10
                                                                         .08
      .08
                                                                         .06
      .06

      .04                                                                .04

      .02
                                                                         .02
      .00
                                                                         .00
      -.02

      -.04                                                               -.02
             86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06               86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06



                            DLPRIVATECREDIT                                                     DLRESERVES
      .12                                                                .20
                                                                         .16
      .08
                                                                         .12

      .04                                                                .08
                                                                         .04
      .00
                                                                         .00
      -.04                                                               -.04
                                                                         -.08
      -.08
                                                                         -.12
      -.12                                                               -.16
             86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06               86   88   90   92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06


Graph A2: Growth rates of the monetary Aggregates
                                                35


                                                                               10


                                                                               8
              60
                                                                               6
              50

              40                                                               4
              30
                                                                               2
              20

              10

               0
                   86   88   90    92   94      96    98   00   02   04   06

                              DEPOSIT                LENDING         DS

Graph A3: Interests rates and domestic spread
                                                                               .10


                                                                               .05

            150
                                                                               .00
            140
            130
                                                                               -.05
            120
            110
            100
              90
                   86   88   90   92    94      96    98   00   02   04   06

                                        TOT            DLTOT

Left scale is the index number for TOT (Export Price Index/ Import Price Index. Seasonally
adjusted); right scale is the Growth rate of TOT (proxied by DLTOT).

Graph A4: Terms of Trade
                                   36


                                                                 2.0
  110
                                                                 1.5

  100                                                            1.0

                                                                 0.5
   90
                                                                 0.0
   80
                                                                 -0.5

   70                                                            -1.0

                                                                 -1.5
        86    88   90   92   94    96   98   00   02   04   06

REAL DEMAND TREND                 REAL DEMAND GAP            REAL DEMAND


12000                                                            600
11000                                                            500
10000                                                            400
 9000                                                            300
 8000                                                            200
 7000                                                            100
 6000                                                            0
 5000                                                            -100
 4000                                                            -200
 3000                                                            -300
        86   88    90   92   94    96   98   00   02   04   06

             Real GDP         RGDP GAP            RGDP TREND

    Graph A5: Real Aggregate Demand and Real Aggregate Output
                                              37




              90

              80

              70

              60

              50

              40

              30

              20
                   86   88   90   92   94     96   98   00   02   04   06

                         ECONOMIC_RISK                  POLITICAL_RISK
                         COMPOSITE_RISK                 FINANCIAL_RISK


Graph A6: External Measures of Country Risk
                                                         38


       Appendix B:         Data definitions and tables


 “Manufactures”:
Average of annual observations of the percentage of economic activity dedicated to the
production of manufactures (measured as percentage of the GDP), following the definition given
by the United Nations, Manufactures comprises pf the tabulation category D and divisions 15-
37 in the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities, Revision 3.
It is defined as the physical or chemical transformation of materials or components into new
products, whether the work is performed by power-driven machines or by hand, whether it is
done in a factory or in the worker's home, and whether the products are sold as wholesale or
retail. Included are assembly of component parts of manufactured products and recycling of
waste materials.

“Commodities”:
Average of annual observations of the percentage of economic activity dedicated to the
production of agricultural products, mining, hunting, and utilities.

“Reserves”:
Average of annual observations of the Stock of Reserves over GDP taken during the sample
period. The sample period depends on data availability.

“NE Volatility”:
Nominal exchange rate volatility is the average annual volatility. Each annual observation
corresponds to the percent standard deviation of the monthly nominal rate of the domestic
                                                     2
                                        ⎛ x − x− ⎞
currency against the U.S. dollar,   ∑ ⎜⎜⎜ − ⎟⎟⎟           ( n − 1) ) .
                                        ⎝ x ⎠

“Financial Integration”:

 Average of annual observations of Edward’s measure of financial integration (see Capital
 Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Countries Different? )
 “Inflation”
 Average of annual CPI inflation observations
 “Terms of Trade”:
 Average of annual observations of the terms of trade defined as the ratio of the export price
 index to the corresponding import price index, measured relative to the base year 2000.
                                            39

Table B1: Indebtedness Ranking
1 = Severely Indebted            2 = Moderately Indebted   3 = Less Indebted
Angola                           Benin                     Albania
Argentina                        Bolivia                   Algeria
Belize                           Burkina Faso              Armenia
Brazil                           Cambodia                  Azerbaijan
Bulgaria                         Cameroon                  Bangladesh
Burundi                          Cape Verde                Barbados
Central African Rep.             Chile                     Belarus
Chad                             Colombia                  Bosnia & Herzegovina
Comoros                          El Salvador               Botswana
Congo, Republic of               Ethiopia                  China
Côte d'Ivoire                    Honduras                  Costa Rica
Croatia                          Hungary                   Czech Republic
Dominica                         Jamaica                   Djibouti
Ecuador                          Kenya                     Dominican Republic
Eritrea                          Lithuania                 Egypt
Estonia                          Madagascar                Equatorial Guinea
Gabon                            Malaysia                  Fiji
Gambia, The                      Mauritania                Georgia
Grenada                          Mauritius                 Ghana
Guinea                           Moldova                   Guatemala
Guinea-Bissau                    Mongolia                  Haiti
Guyana                           Niger                     India
Indonesia                        Nigeria                   Iran, I.R. of
Jordan                           Pakistan                  Lesotho
Kazakhstan                       Papua New Guinea          Macedonia, FYR
Kyrgyz Republic                  Paraguay                  Maldives
Lao People's Dem.Rep             Philippines               Mali
Latvia                           Poland                    Mexico
Liberia                          Russia                    Morocco
Malawi                           Slovak Republic           Mozambique
Myanmar                          Solomon Islands           Namibia
Panama                           Sri Lanka                 Nicaragua
Peru                             St. Lucia                 Oman
Rwanda                           St. Vincent & Grens.      Romania
Samoa                            Tunisia                   Senegal
São Tomé & Príncipe              Turkmenistan              South Africa
Seychelles                       Uganda                    Swaziland
Sierra Leone                     Venezuela, Rep. Bol.      Tanzania
Somalia                                                    Thailand
St. Kitts and Nevis                                        Tonga
Sudan                                                      Trinidad and Tobago
Syrian Arab Republic                                       Ukraine
Tajikistan                                                 Vanuatu
Togo                                                       Vietnam
Turkey                                                     Yemen, Republic of
Uruguay
Zambia
                                               40



Table B2: Income Level
1=Low Income           2=Lower-Middle Income    3=Upper-Middle Income   4=High Income

Afghanistan, I.S. of   Albania                  Antigua and Barbuda     Aruba
Bangladesh             Algeria                  Argentina               Australia
Benin                  Angola                   Barbados                Austria
Burkina Faso           Armenia                  Belize                  Bahamas, The
Burundi                Azerbaijan               Botswana                Bahrain, Kingdom of
Cambodia               Belarus                  Chile                   Belgium
Cameroon               Bolivia                  Costa Rica              Canada
Central African Rep.   Bosnia & Herzegovina     Croatia                 Hong Kong
Chad                   Brazil                   Czech Republic          Macao
Comoros                Bulgaria                 Dominica                Cyprus
Congo, Republic of     Cape Verde               Equatorial Guinea       Denmark
Côte d'Ivoire          China                    Estonia                 Faroe Islands
Eritrea                Colombia                 Gabon                   Finland
Ethiopia               Djibouti                 Grenada                 France
Gambia, The            Dominican Republic       Hungary                 Germany
Ghana                  Ecuador                  Latvia                  Iceland
Guinea                 Egypt                    Libya                   Ireland
Guinea-Bissau          El Salvador              Lithuania               Israel
Haiti                  Fiji                     Malaysia                Italy
India                  Georgia                  Mauritius               Japan
Kenya                  Guatemala                Mexico                  Kuwait
Korea                  Guyana                   Oman                    Luxembourg
Kyrgyz Republic        Honduras                 Panama                  Malta
Lao People's Dem.Rep   Indonesia                Poland                  Netherlands
Lesotho                Iran, I.R. of            Russia                  Netherlands Antilles
Liberia                Iraq                     Seychelles              New Zealand
Madagascar             Jamaica                  Slovak Republic         Norway
Malawi                 Jordan                   South Africa            Portugal
Mali                   Kazakhstan               St. Kitts and Nevis     Saudi Arabia
Mauritania             Macedonia, FYR           St. Lucia               Singapore
Moldova                Maldives                 St. Vincent & Grens.    Slovenia
Mongolia               Morocco                  Trinidad and Tobago     Spain
Mozambique             Namibia                  Turkey                  Sweden
Myanmar                Paraguay                 Uruguay                 Switzerland
Nepal                  Peru                     Venezuela, Rep. Bol.    United Kingdom
Nicaragua              Philippines                                      United States
Niger                  Romania
Nigeria                Samoa
Pakistan               Sri Lanka
Papua New Guinea       Suriname
Rwanda                 Swaziland
São Tomé & Príncipe    Syrian Arab Republic
Senegal                Thailand
Sierra Leone           Tonga
Solomon Islands        Tunisia
Somalia                Turkmenistan
Sudan                  Ukraine
Tajikistan             Vanuatu
Tanzania               West Bank and Gaza
Togo
Uganda
Vietnam
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
                                                      41

Table B3: Data Availability for each country

       country         start   end          country          start   end          country          start   end
Afghanistan, I.S. of   1979    1981   Gambia, The            1978    1997   Nigeria                1977    2004
Albania                1984    2003   Georgia                1997    2004   Norway                 1970    2004
Algeria                1970    1997   Germany                1971    2004   Oman                   1974    2003
Angola                 1985    2004   Ghana                  1975    2004   Pakistan               1970    2004
Antigua and Barbuda    1977    2002   Grenada                1977    2002   Panama                 1977    2004
Argentina              1970    2004   Guatemala              1970    2004   Papua New Guinea       1976    2001
Armenia                1993    2004   Guinea                 1986    2004   Paraguay               1970    2004
Aruba                  1991    2002   Guinea-Bissau          1982    1997   Peru                   1970    2004
Australia              1970    2004   Guinea-Bissau          2001    2003   Philippines            1970    2004
Austria                1970    2004   Guyana                 1977    1985   Poland                 1985    2004
Bahamas, The           1976    2003   Guyana                 1992    2004   Portugal               1972    2004
Bahrain, Kingdom of    1980    2003   Haiti                  1971    2003   Romania                1987    2004
Bangladesh             1976    2004   Honduras               1974    2004   Russia                 1994    2004
Barbados               1970    2003   Hungary                1982    2004   Rwanda                 1976    2004
Belarus                1993    2004   Iceland                1970    2004   Samoa                  1978    1999
Belgium                2002    2004   India                  1970    2003   São Tomé & Príncipe    1974    1990
Belize                 1984    2004   Indonesia              1970    2004   São Tomé & Príncipe    1998    2002
Benin                  1974    2003   Iran, I.R. of          1976    1990   Saudi Arabia           1970    2004
Bolivia                1970    2004   Iran, I.R. of          1993    2000   Senegal                1974    2003
Bosnia & Herzegovina   1998    2004   Iraq                   1976    1977   Seychelles             1976    2004
Botswana               1975    2003   Ireland                1970    2004   Sierra Leone           1977    2004
Brazil                 1970    2004   Israel                 1970    2004   Singapore              1970    2004
Bulgaria               1980    2004   Italy                  1970    2004   Slovak Republic        1993    2000
Burkina Faso           1974    1994   Jamaica                1970    2004   Slovak Republic        2002    2003
Burkina Faso           2000    2001   Japan                  1970    2004   Slovenia               1992    2004
Burundi                1985    2003   Jordan                 1970    2004   Solomon Islands        1975    1999
Cambodia               1992    2004   Kazakhstan             1995    2004   Somalia                1977    1989
Cameroon               1977    1995   Kenya                  1975    2004   South Africa           1970    2004
Canada                 1970    2004   Korea                  1970    2004   Spain                  1970    2004
Cape Verde             1986    2003   Kuwait                 1975    2003   Sri Lanka              1970    2004
Central African Rep.   1977    1994   Kyrgyz Republic        1993    2004   St. Kitts and Nevis    1980    2002
Chad                   1977    1994   Lao People's Dem.Rep   1984    2001   St. Lucia              1979    2002
Chile                  1970    2004   Latvia                 1992    2004   St. Vincent & Grens.   1978    2002
China                  1982    2004   Lesotho                1975    2004   Sudan                  1977    2004
Hong Kong              1998    2004   Liberia                1979    1987   Suriname               1977    2004
Macao                  2002    2002   Libya                  1977    1987   Swaziland              1974    2004
Colombia               1970    2004   Libya                  1990    2004   Sweden                 1970    2004
Comoros                1980    1995   Lithuania              1993    2004   Switzerland            1970    2004
Congo, Republic of     1978    2003   Luxembourg             1995    2004   Syrian Arab Republic   1970    2004
Costa Rica             1970    2004   Macedonia, FYR         1996    2004   Tajikistan             2002    2004
Côte d'Ivoire          1970    2004   Madagascar             1974    2003   Tanzania               1988    2004
Croatia                1993    2004   Malawi                 1977    2002   Thailand               1970    2004
Cyprus                 1976    2004   Malaysia               1970    2003   Togo                   1974    2003
Czech Republic         1993    2004   Maldives               1980    2004   Tonga                  1975    1993
Denmark                1970    2004   Mali                   1975    2003   Tonga                  2001    2002
Djibouti               1992    1995   Malta                  1971    2004   Trinidad and Tobago    1970    2003
Dominica               1977    2002   Mauritania             1975    1998   Tunisia                1970    2004
Dominican Republic     1970    2004   Mauritius              1980    2004   Turkey                 1970    2004
Ecuador                1970    2004   Mexico                 1970    2004   Turkmenistan           1996    1997
Egypt                  1970    2004   Moldova                1994    2004   Uganda                 1980    2004
El Salvador            1970    2004   Mongolia               1993    2004   Ukraine                1994    2004
Equatorial Guinea      1987    1996   Morocco                1970    2004   United Kingdom         1970    2004
Eritrea                1992    2000   Mozambique             1980    2004   United States          1970    2004
Estonia                1992    2004   Namibia                1990    2004   Uruguay                1970    2004
Ethiopia               1981    2004   Nepal                  1976    2004   Vanuatu                1982    2003
Euro Area              1998    2004   Netherlands            1970    2004   Venezuela, Rep. Bol.   1970    2004
Fiji                   1979    1999   Netherlands Antilles   1980    1985   Vietnam                1996    2002
Finland                1970    2004   New Zealand            1970    2004   Yemen, Republic of     1990    2004
France                 1970    2004   Nicaragua              1977    2004   Zambia                 1978    1991
Gabon                  1978    2003   Niger                  1974    2003   Zambia                 1997    2000
                                                               42

Table B4: Estimated β for each country*
                                             Ye    R-                                                     Ye
Name                   Beta     SE           ars   squared     Name                  Beta     SE          ars   R-squared
Albania                -0.864   [0.170]***   19       0.4337   Kazakhstan            -1.036   [0.45]*       9       0.4668
Algeria                -0.499   [0.196]**    27       0.2159   Kenya                 -0.597   [0.18]***    29       0.3039
Angola                 -1.018   [0.192]***   19       0.5085   Korea                 -0.336   [0.1]***     34       0.1715
Antigua and Barb.      -0.531   [0.169]***   25       0.2654   Kuwait                -0.859   [0.06]***    28       0.4328
Argentina              -0.396   [0.083]***   34       0.1896   Kyrgyz Republic       -0.669   [0.245]**    11       0.3358
Aruba                  -1.216   [0.270]***   11       0.6406   Lesotho               -0.369   [0.159]**    29       0.1855
Australia              -0.333   [0.144]**    34       0.1534   Liberia                -0.71   [0.344]*      8       0.2223
Austria                -0.342   [0.196]*     34       0.1659   Libya                 -0.764   [0.27]***    24         0.37
Bahamas, The           -0.422   [0.198]**    27       0.2768   Luxembourg            -1.235   [0.31]***     9       0.6728
Bahrain, Kingdom of    -0.543   [0.167]***   23       0.2777   Macedonia, FYR        -1.024   [0.426]*      8       0.4954
Bangladesh             -0.436   [0.144]***   28       0.2207   Madagascar            -0.397   [0.170]**    29       0.2189
Barbados               -0.236   [0.071]***   33        0.184   Malawi                -0.558   [0.19]***    25       0.2794
Benin                   -0.87   [0.095]***   29       0.4344   Malaysia              -0.275   [0.115]**    33        0.114
Bolivia                -0.716   [0.234]***   34       0.3455   Maldives              -0.263   [0.117]**    24       0.2686
Botswana               -0.371   [0.158]**    28       0.1934   Mali                  -0.684   [0.278]**    28       0.3379
Brazil                 -0.214   [0.093]**    34       0.0841   Malta                 -0.249   [0.106]**    33       0.1074
Bulgaria               -0.515   [0.189]**    24       0.2707   Mauritius             -0.514   [0.16]***    24       0.3008
Burkina Faso           -0.449   [0.228]*     21       0.2525   Mexico                -0.413   [0.15]***    34       0.2041
Burundi                -1.153   [0.215]***   18       0.5653   Mongolia              -0.512   [0.244]*     11       0.2986
Cambodia               -0.845   [0.141]***   12       0.4238   Morocco                 -0.2   [0.115]*     34       0.0936
Cameroon               -0.837   [0.358]**    18       0.3319   Mozambique             -0.41   [0.151]**    24       0.2075
Canada                 -0.194   [0.107]*     34       0.0816   Nepal                 -0.312   [0.121]**    28       0.1609
Cape Verde              -0.25   [0.121]*     17       0.1713   New Zealand           -0.498   [0.14]***    34       0.2497
Central African Rep.   -1.015   [0.237]***   17       0.5007   Niger                 -0.593   [0.19]***    29       0.3091
Chad                    -0.52   [0.193]**    17       0.2594   Nigeria               -0.615   [0.16]***    27       0.2834
Chile                  -0.447   [0.117]***   34       0.2108   Norway                -0.118   [0.090]      34       0.0428
China                  -0.506   [0.152]***   22       0.2379   Oman                  -0.676   [0.15]***    29       0.3454
Hong Kong              -0.506   [0.173]**      6      0.3946   Pakistan              -0.347   [0.145]**    34       0.1785
Colombia               -0.361   [0.136]**    34       0.1842   Panama                  -0.4   [0.192]**    27       0.1984
Comoros                -0.604   [0.150]***   15        0.302   Papua New Guinea      -0.276   [0.122]**    25       0.1239
Congo, Republic of     -0.629   [0.137]***   25       0.3085   Paraguay              -0.334   [0.157]**    34       0.1621
Costa Rica             -0.329   [0.103]***   34       0.1602   Peru                  -0.533   [0.19]***    34       0.2844
Côte d'Ivoire          -0.272   [0.117]**    34       0.1252   Philippines           -0.285   [0.123]**    34       0.1364
Croatia                -0.714   [0.298]**    11       0.4914   Poland                -0.717   [0.23]***    19       0.3541
Cyprus                 -0.404   [0.124]***   28       0.2039   Portugal              -0.325   [0.09]***    32       0.1774
Czech Republic         -0.626   [0.184]***   11       0.4961   Rwanda                -0.887   [0.23]***    28       0.4664
Denmark                -0.142   [0.072]*     34        0.066   Samoa                 -0.402   [0.212]*     21       0.2103
Dominica               -0.658   [0.308]**    25       0.3384   Saudi Arabia          -0.225   [0.101]**    34       0.1048
Dominican Republic     -0.477   [0.232]**    34       0.1703   Seychelles             -0.47   [0.14]***    28         0.23
Ecuador                 -0.73   [0.185]***   34       0.3629   Sierra Leone          -0.619   [0.232]**    27       0.3095
El Salvador            -0.917   [0.196]***   34         0.47   Slovenia              -0.702   [0.12]***    12       0.5682
Eritrea                 -0.42   [0.133]**      8      0.3374   Solomon Islands       -0.601   [0.20]***    24       0.3213
Ethiopia               -0.818   [0.225]***   23       0.3456   Somalia               -0.837   [0.20]***    12        0.456
Euro Area              -0.732   [0.263]**      6      0.3507   South Africa          -0.434   [0.165]**    34       0.2458
Fiji                   -0.537   [0.145]***   20       0.2653   Spain                 -0.247   [0.118]**    34       0.1023
France                 -0.346   [0.132]**    34       0.1711   Sri Lanka              -0.47   [0.14]***    34       0.2363
Gabon                  -0.435   [0.140]***   25       0.2133   St. Kitts and Nevis   -0.456   [0.167]**    22        0.209
Gambia, The            -0.331   [0.132]**    19       0.2128   St. Lucia              -0.43   [0.175]**    23       0.2742
                                                                       43

Georgia                   -1.051    [0.115]***       7        0.8795   St. Vincent & Gren.    -0.56   [0.14]***   24   0.3311
Ghana                     -0.585    [0.165]***      29        0.3038   Sudan                 -0.359   [0.129]**   27   0.1894
Grenada                   -0.317    [0.160]*        25        0.1633   Suriname              -0.642   [0.16]***   27   0.3163
Guatemala                 -0.627    [0.165]***      34        0.3334   Swaziland             -0.216   [0.083]**   30   0.1343
Guinea                    -1.033    [0.280]***      18        0.5167   Syria                 -0.527   [0.13]***   34    0.268
Guinea-Bissau             -0.125    [0.132]         17         0.034   Thailand              -0.198   [0.05]***   34   0.0907
Guyana                    -0.297    [0.096]***      20        0.1822   Togo                  -0.838   [0.20]***   29   0.6201
Haiti                     -0.282    [0.126]**       32         0.153   Tonga                 -1.004   [0.25]***   19   0.5141
Honduras                  -0.586    [0.163]***      30        0.2968   Trinidad & Tobago     -0.382   [0.11]***   33   0.2019
Hungary                   -0.385    [0.225]         22        0.1799   Tunisia               -0.407   [0.14]***   34   0.1996
Iceland                   -0.722    [0.153]***      34        0.3515   Turkey                -0.764   [0.18]***   34   0.3605
India                     -0.189    [0.108]*        33        0.0736   Uganda                -0.372   [0.194]*    24   0.1863
Indonesia                 -0.358    [0.126]***      34        0.1789   United Kingdom        -0.237   [0.101]**   34   0.1315
Iran, I.R. of             -0.992    [0.214]***      21        0.5216   United States         -0.008   [0.070]     34   0.0004
Israel                    -0.403    [0.165]**       34        0.2148   Uruguay               -0.494   [0.13]***   34   0.2462
Italy                     -0.425    [0.171]**       34        0.2136   Vanuatu               -0.887   [0.14]***   21   0.4174
Jamaica                   -0.507    [0.142]***      34        0.2612   Venezuela             -0.656   [0.13]***   34   0.3164
Japan                     -0.222    [0.090]**       34        0.1013   Vietnam               -0.499   [0.218]*     6    0.409
Jordan                    -0.586    [0.158]***      34        0.2926   Zambia                -0.926   [0.18]***   16   0.4478

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                              44

                                         References

Aghion P., P. Bacchetta and A. Banerjee (2001) “Financial Development and the Instability of
       Open Economies,” manuscript, MIT.
Aghion, P., A. Banerjee, and T. Piketty (1999). “Dualism and Macroeconomic Volatility,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 1357-1397.
Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, R. Ranciere and K. Rogoff. (2006), “Exchange Rate Volatility and
       Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial Development,” NBER WP # 12117.
Aiznman, J. and N. Marion (2003). "The High Demand for International Reserves in the Far
       East: What's Going On?" Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 2003,
       17/3, pp. 370-400.
Aizenman, J and D. Riera-Crichton (2006) “Real Exchange Rate and International Reserves in
       the Era of Growing Financial and Trade Integration,” NBER Working paper # 12363.
Aizenman, J. and J. Lee (2005) “International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercantilist
       Views, Theory and Evidence,” forthcoming, Open Economies Review.
Aizenman, J. and J. Lee (2006) “Financial versus Monetary Mercantilism – Long-run View of
       Large International Reserves Hoarding,” manuscript.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (1998). “Optimal Financial Crises,” Journal of Finance 53, 1245-1284.
Barnett, S. (2004) “Banking Sector Developments,” pp.43-50 in China’s Growth and Integration
       into the World Economy, edited by Eswar Prasad. IMF Occasional Paper 232.
Ben-Bassat A. and D. Gottlieb (1992). “Optimal international reserves and sovereign risk.”
       Journal of International Economics 33, 345–62.
Broda C. and C. Tille (2003) “Coping with Terms-of-Trade Shocks in Developing Countries,”
        Current issues in Economics and Finance, Volume 9, Number 11, Federal Reserve Bank
        of New York.
Caballero, R. J. (2003). "On the International Financial Architecture: Insuring Emerging
       Markets." NBER Working Paper 9570. National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Cambridge, Mass.
Caballero, R. J., and S. Panageas. (2003). “Hedging Sudden Stops and Precautionary Recessions:
       A Quantitative Framework.” NBER Working Paper 9778. National Bureau of Economic
       Research, Cambridge, Mass.
Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi and P-O Gourinchas. (2006). “An Equilibrium Model of "Global
       Imbalances" and Low Interest Rates,” NBER WP 11996.
Calderón C. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel, (2003) “Macroeconomic policies and performance in Latin
       America,” Journal of International Money and Finance, December, 895-923
Calvo, G. 1998. “Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden
       stops.” Journal of Applied Economics 1, 7, 7, 35–54.
________, Alejandro Izquierdo and Luis-Fernando Mejía. (2003) “On the empirics of sudden
       stops,” manuscript, IDB.
_________, (1991). "The Perils of Sterilization." IMF Staff Papers, vol. 38, pp. 921-926.
Chang, R. and A. Velasco. (1999) "Liquidity Crises in Emerging Markets: Theory and Policy,"
       NBER/Macroeconomics Annual, 1999, 11-57.
Davis, J., R. Ossowski, J. Daniel, and S. Barnett. (2001). “Stabilization and Savings Funds for
       Nonrenewable Resources, Experience and Fiscal Policy Implications,” IMF Occasional
       paper # 205.
De Gregorio, J, & H. C. Wolf. (1994) "Terms of Trade, Productivity, and the Real Exchange
       Rate," NBER Working Papers 4807.
                                             45

Diamond, D. and P. Dybvig. (1983) “Bank Runs, Liquidity and Deposit Insurance,” Journal of
       Political Economy 91, pp. 401-419.
Dooley P. Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and P. Garber. (2003). “An essay on the revived
       Bretton Woods system.” Working Paper No. 9971. Cambridge, MA: NBER.
___________________. (2005) International Financial Stability Deutsche Bank, October, 2005.
Edwards, S. (1983). “The demand for international reserves and exchange rate adjustments: the
       case of LDCs, 1964–1972.” Economica 50, 269–80.
______ (2004). “Thirty years of current account imbalances, current account reversals, and
       sudden stops.” IMF Staff Papers 51 (Special Issue), 1–49.
Eichengreen, B. (2006a) "Global Imbalances: The Blind Men and the Elephant," Issues in
       Economic Policy No. 1 (Washington: Brookings Institution).
____________ (2006b) “Insurance Underwriter or Financial Development Fund: What Role for
       Reserve Pooling in Latin America? NBER Working Paper # 12451.
Flood, R. and N. P. Marion (2002) “Holding international reserves in an era of high capital
       mobility.” In Brookings Trade Forum 2001, ed. S. Collins and D. Rodrik. Washington,
       DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Garcia, P, and C. Soto, 2004. “Large Holdings of International Reserves: Are They Worth It?”
       Central Bank of Chile Working Papers N° 299, December.
Glick, R. and M. Spiegel. (2005) “The Bretton Woods System: Are We Experiencing a Revival?
       Symposium Summary,” SF FED Economic Letter # 2005-32.
Goldfajn, I. and R. Valdes. (1997). Capital Flows and the Twin Crises: The Role of Liquidity.
       IMF working paper no. 97/87.
Hauner, D. (2005). “A Fiscal Price Tag for International Reserves,” IMF WP/05/81.
Hutchison, M. and I. Noy. (2005) “How Bad Are Twins? Output Costs of Currency and Banking
       Crises.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37(4): 725-52.
Hviding, K, M. Nowak and L. A. Ricci. (2004) “Can higher reserves help reduce exchange rate
        volatility?” IMF Working Paper 04/189.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). (1995) Towards a Less Volatile Economy: 1995
       Economic and Social Progress in Latin America Report. Washington, D.C.
Jeanne, O., and R. Ranciere (2005) “The Optimal Level of International Reserves for Emerging
       Market Economies: Formulas and Applications,” IMF Research Department, May 2005.
Kaminsky, G. L. and C. M. Reinhart. (1999) “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
       Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review; 89(3): 473-500.
Levy Yeyati, E. (2005) “Liquidity Insurance in a Financially Dollarized Economy” forthcoming,
       Financial Markets Volatility and Performance in Emerging Markets, (NBER/Inter-
       American Seminar on Economics) NBER and University of Chicago Press. S. Edwards
       and M. G. P. Garcia, editors.
Ranciere, R., A. Tornell and F. Westermann. (2003) “Crises and growth: a re-evaluation,” NBER
        WP 10073
Rodrik, D. (2005) “The social cost of foreign exchange reserves,” forthcoming, International
       Economic Journal.
Rodrik, D, and A. Velasco, (2000) "Short-Term Capital Flows," Annual World Bank Conference
       on Development Economics 1999, April.
Taylor, A, 2002, “A century of current account dynamics,” Journal of International Money and
        Finance, 21, 6, November 2002, 725-748.
                                 46

                              Figure 1
                            The time line


                           Beginning of period 1:
Entrepreneurs with initial wealth H1 , subject to collateral constraint μ, use
     bank financing μH 1 . The combined liquidity (1 + μ ) H1 finances
       investment K1 and hoarding reserves, R1 , (1 + μ ) H 1 = K 1 + R1 .




                                End of period 1:
Liquidity shock materializes; an adverse shock δ ; δ < 0 induces deposit drop
of l (−δ ) μ H1 . Æ Reserves R1 are used to finance any liquidity shock and to
hire non-traded specific input z (at p1 ). Costly liquidation of capital from K1
to K1 ; K1 ≤ K1 would boost liquidity by [ K1 − K1 ] /(1 + θ ); θ ≥ 0 .




                                      Period 2:
                            1
 Output materializes, y2 = K1β z1− β ; Non-liquidated deposits are paid return
                            a
  rf . Any non used reserves yield return rf .
                                                47

                                             Figure 2
                                Volatility and planned investment

      K1         ε = ε~
                                                       K1




                                                             ε = ε~
                                            ε                                                  ε

                       A. θ = 0.2                                        B. θ = 0.02


The simulation corresponds to the case where β = 0.5; l = 1; H = 1; μ = 1.


                                             Figure 3
                              Volatility and relative expected output



                                                                             Optimal IR



                                                                             IR=0



                                                                             ε

The simulation corresponds to the case where θ = 0.2 β = 0.5; l = 1; H = 1; μ = 1. The bold
curve corresponds to no liquidation and optimal precautionary demand for reserves, the solid
curve corresponds to zero precautionary demand, where all the adjustment is made by
liquidation.
                                                                           48




         Table 1: REER vs. Terms of Trade Shocks and Mitigation through Reserve Accumulation
         Dependent                                                                                     Natural
         Variable: Log REER           All            Developing      Industrial       Manufactures     Resources        LATAM          ASIA

         Log Terms of Trade shock     1.802***       1.836***        0.95             0.442            4.376***         1.642**        2.269**
                                      [0.244]        [0.255]         [0.594]          [2.077]          [0.779]          [0.802]        [1.104]
         Log TOT*Reserves             -3.873***      -3.937***       -1.603           12.269           -10.676          -0.537         -4.672**
                                      [0.746]        [0.766]         [4.607]          [23.668]         [7.013]          [9.164]        [2.280]

         Observations                 1863           1260            603              271              253              343            202
         R-Squared                    0.4549         0.4367          0.5947           0.4066           0.6162           0.3903         0.2161
         Years                        1970-2004      1970-2004       1970-2004        1970-2004        1970-2004        1980-2004      1970-2004
         Robust standard errors in brackets
         * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




         Table 2: REER vs. Lagged Terms of Trade Shocks and Mitigation through Reserve
         Accumulation
         Dependent                                                                                     Natural
         Variable: Log REER         All            Developing     Industrial      Manufactures         Resources        LATAM          ASIA

         Lagged Log TOT shock       1.773***       1.806***       0.784           0.23                 4.362***         1.205          1.762
                                    [0.278]        [0.289]        [0.581]         [1.895]              [0.759]          [0.827]        [1.103]
         Lagged Log TOT*RES         -3.557***      -3.633***      0.988           6.282                -11.528*         4.654          -4.024*
                                    [0.887]        [0.910]        [4.573]         [21.767]             [6.473]          [10.059]       [2.388]

         Observations               1852           1263           589             262                  252              343            201
         R-Squared                  0.4465         0.4302         0.5947          0.4027               0.6165           0.3898         0.2047
         Years                      1970-2004      1970-2004      1970-2004       1970-2004            1970-2004        1980-2004      1970-2004
         Robust standard errors in brackets
         * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




         Table 3: Log REER vs. TERMS OF TRADE: Selective Individual Countries
Dependent Variable      Terms of                  Terms of                                                       Total Effect     Total Effect    Volatility
Log REER                Trade                     Trade * Reserves                       Obs      R-squared       1990-99          2000-04         of TOT
Argentina                44.994     [6.597]***        -793.738         [113.969]***         25     0.5594         -0.76438         -27.4739        0.0099
Chile                    8.436      [1.561]***        -50.188           [13.080]***         23     0.6338         -1.46511         -0.97332        0.0517
Ecuador                  7.158      [1.322]***         -46.25           [21.816]**          23      0.66          3.386239         5.400608        0.0573
Mexico                   3.841      [2.048]*          -177.211          [71.729]**          23     0.1901         -5.69239         -9.71975        0.0360
                                                       49



                         Table 4: Current account Persistence across subgroups
                               Dependent
                               Variable
                               D(CU/GDP)         Lag(CU/GDP)        SE           Obs.        R-squared
         All Sample            All               -0.437***          [0.026]        4053           0.2548
         1970-2004             Developing        -0.441***          [0.027]        3346           0.2608
                               OECD              -0.260***          [0.036]         707           0.2315
                               MA                -0.250***          [0.056]         273           0.3655
                               NR                -0.362***          [0.049]         391           0.4182
                               LATAM             -0.432***          [0.088]         594           0.3082
                               ASIA              -0.217***          [0.063]         298           0.3812
         1980-1992             All               -0.544***          [0.041]        1661           0.3316
                               Developing        -0.546***          [0.042]        1394           0.3336
                               OECD              -0.433***          [0.057]         267           0.2228
                               LATAM             -0.523***          [0.091]         234           0.3395
                               ASIA              -0.248***          [0.067]         114           0.1626
         1993-2004             All               -0.563***          [0.046]        1708           0.3421
                               Developing        -0.568***          [0.047]        1445           0.3443
                               OECD              -0.347***          [0.059]         263           0.2224
                               LATAM             -0.507***          [0.059]         216           0.3963
                               ASIA              -0.315***          [0.087]         112            0.166
         Indebtedness          DEBT1             -0.435***          [0.047]        1016           0.2737
                               DEBT2             -0.512***          [0.040]         930           0.3515
                               DEBT3             -0.412***          [0.057]         999           0.2449
         Income Level          INCOME1           -0.413***          [0.044]        1137           0.2679
                               INCOME2           -0.495***          [0.056]        1105           0.3302
                               INCOME3           -0.496***          [0.057]         844           0.2809
                               INCOME4           -0.315***          [0.050]         961            0.224


Table 5: Estimated β for selective countries*

            Name                            β               SE                Observations         R-squared
Argentina                                   -0.396    [0.083]***                             34         0.1896
Brazil                                      -0.214    [0.093]**                              34         0.0841
Chile                                       -0.447    [0.117]***                             34         0.2108
Costa Rica                                  -0.329    [0.103]***                             34         0.1602
Dominican Republic                          -0.477    [0.232]**                              34         0.1703
Ecuador                                       -0.73   [0.185]***                             34         0.3629
El Salvador                                 -0.917    [0.196]***                             34            0.47
Haiti                                       -0.282    [0.126]**                              32          0.153
Honduras                                    -0.586    [0.163]***                             30         0.2968
Mexico                                      -0.413    [0.149]***                             34         0.2041
Uruguay                                     -0.494    [0.128]***                             34         0.2462
Venezuela                                   -0.656    [0.129]***                             34         0.3164

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                       50



Table 6: Univariate Regressions
    Dependent Variable :Alpha                             ALL       Non OECD

              RESERVES                                    0.068        0.183
                                                         [0.110]     [0.100]*
NOMINAL EXCHANGE VOLATILITY                              -0.056        0.058
                                                         [0.247]      [0.240]
      FINANCIAL INTEGRATION                               0.142       -0.042
                                                         [0.110]      [0.113]
            TERMS OF TRADE                                0.058        0.116
                                                         [0.083]      [0.085]
             GDP GROWTH                                   1.701        2.119
                                                       [0.635]***   [0.639]***
   % SHARE OF COMMODITIES                                -0.415       -0.311
                                                       [0.096]***   [0.102]***
              INLFATION                                  -0.017        0.009
                                                         [0.044]      [0.044]
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




Table 7: Multivariate Regression

Alpha                 ALL          Non Oecd

Reserves              0.058        0.192
                      [0.089]      [0.082]**
Inflation             -0.101       -0.072
                      [0.042]**    [0.043]*
NE Volatility         0.566        0.545
                      [0.303]*     [0.294]*
TOT                   0.177        0.195
                      [0.088]**    [0.098]*
Financial Int         0.298        0.076
                      [0.114]**    [0.127]
Manufactures          0.784        0.628
                      [0.212]***   [0.225]***
Observations          94           80
R-squared             0.2084       0.1618
