                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         HOW LARGE IS THE HOUSING WEALTH EFFECT? A NEW APPROACH

                                         Christopher D. Carroll
                                            Misuzu Otsuka
                                             Jirka Slacalek

                                         Working Paper 12746
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12746


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2006




This paper is based on material originally prepared for an Academic Consultants' meeting of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 30, 2004; for the version of the paper originally
presented at the Fed, see Carroll (2004). We thank the discussant of that paper, Robert Shiller, as well
as Ben Bernanke, Alan Greenspan, Robert Hall, Nicholas Souleles, Stephen Zeldes, the staff of the
Fed, and other attendees at the meeting for very valuable feedback. The data and econometric programs
that generated all of the results in this paper are available at http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/.
We are also grateful to Emmanuel de Veirman and Sherif Khalifa for excellent research assistance.
For brief summaries of many of the papers in the literature at the time that paper was written, see Khalifa
(2004). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Christopher D. Carroll, Misuzu Otsuka, and Jirka Slacalek. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Large Is the Housing Wealth Effect? A New Approach
Christopher D. Carroll, Misuzu Otsuka, and Jirka Slacalek
NBER Working Paper No. 12746
December 2006
JEL No. C22,E21,E32

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents a simple new method for estimating the size of 'wealth effects' on aggregate consumption.
The method exploits the well-documented sluggishness of consumption growth (often interpreted as
'habits' in the asset pricing literature) to distinguish between short-run and long-run wealth effects.
In U.S. data, we estimate that the immediate (next-quarter) marginal propensity to consume from a
$1 change in housing wealth is about 2 cents, with a final long-run effect around 9 cents. Consistent
with several recent studies, we find a housing wealth effect that is substantially larger than the stock
wealth effect. We believe that our approach is preferable to the currently popular cointegration- based
estimation methods, because neither theory nor evidence justifies faith in the existence of a stable
cointegrating vector.

Christopher D. Carroll                                Jirka Slacalek
Department of Economics                               DIW Berlin
Mergenthaler 440                                      14195 Berlin, Germany
Johns Hopkins University                              jslacalek@diw.de
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
ccarroll@jhu.edu

Misuzu Otsuka
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City 1550
Philippines
misuzuotsuka@adb.org
1       Introduction
The exuberant increase in U.S. property prices in the past few years has been useful
for economic commentators, who otherwise would have found it difficult to explain
why household spending has been so robust despite a deflated stock market and
modest income growth.1 The challenge for serious economic analysis is to decide
whether such explanations amount to bedtime stories for the credulous, or instead
contain a solid scientific core of truth that can be relied upon to manifest itself again
in the future.
    The traditional starting point for quantitative analysis of such questions is an
off-the-shelf perfect-foresight consumption model that does not distinguish between
forms of wealth; an exogenous increment to financial wealth has the same effect as
an equal-sized real estate boom. Conventional wisdom puts these effects somewhere
in the neighborhood of 3 to 5 cents on the dollar. Many plausible objections can
be made to treating property wealth like corporate shares, but we argue below that
theory does not produce a clear presumption about whether the wealth effect should
be larger for stocks or for housing; the answer, in the end, must be empirical.
    Unfortunately, much of the available evidence comes from cointegration regres-
sions with dubious theoretical validity and shaky empirical foundations. The the-
oretical problem is that cointegration models implicitly require the existence of a
stable long-run relationship between consumption, labor income, and wealth. The-
ory implies no such stability, unless every major facet of the economy is perpetually
unchanging. Even for the U.S., the 50 year span of available data has seen major
changes in taxes, demographics, productivity growth, financial structure, social insur-
ance, and every other aspect of reality incorporated in the theory (and embodied in
the cointegrating vector). It is unsurprising, therefore, that empirical tests strongly
suggest instability in the cointegrating vectors.2
    As an alternative to the questionable cointegration approach, this paper pro-
poses and implements a new methodology for estimating wealth effects, motivated
by the large empirical literature documenting substantial sluggishness in aggregate
consumption growth.3
    The methodology can be thought of as a tool for measuring two key aspects of the
    1
     Real personal consumption expenditure grew at an annual rate of 3.4 percent between 2002Q4
and 2005Q4 on average. While real housing prices surged by 8.1 percent a year, wages and salaries
increased only by 2.4 percent. As of this writing, the real values of most U.S. stock indices have not
regained their bubble-era peaks.
   2
     See Rudd and Whelan (2006) and Slacalek (2004).
   3
     The empirical literature on the sluggishness of consumption starts with Flavin (1981) and
Campbell and Deaton (1989). Recent research suggests that this stylized fact can be alternatively
explained by habit formation or inattentiveness (see e.g. Fuhrer, 2000; Sommer, 2002; Reis, 2004 and
Carroll and Slacalek, 2006).


                                                  1
wealth effect: Speed and strength. Our estimates imply that the immediate effects
of wealth fluctuations are much smaller than the medium-run effects. In particular,
we find that the immediate (next-quarter) marginal propensity to consume from
a $1 change in housing wealth is about 2 cents, with a final long-run effect of 9
cents. Consistent with most other studies, we find a housing wealth effect that is
considerably larger than the stock wealth effect.
    This large estimate of the housing wealth effect suggests that markets and poli-
cymakers do need to pay careful attention to property prices. But the sluggishness of
the estimated adjustment process also suggests that policymakers typically will have
plenty of time to react to housing wealth effects as they make their way through the
pipeline.


2       Estimates Based on Consumption Growth Dynamics
Our approach exploits the robust empirical fact that aggregate consumption growth
responds only sluggishly to shocks. The most persuasive evidence that sluggishness is
an unavoidable fact is the reluctant introduction of habits into quantitative macroe-
conomic models in the last few years. Models that include habits are proliferating
because they can match the core empirical fact of sluggish consumption growth along
with attendant implications for asset pricing and other empirical phenomena.4
    A canonical model by Muellbauer (1988) incorporates habits by allowing for an
effect of past consumption choices on current utility,

                                                   (Ct − χCt−1 )1−ρ
                              u(Ct , Ct−1 ) =                       ,
                                                        1−ρ
where χ is a parameter capturing the importance of habits. The idea is that high
consumption in t − 1 increases the stock of habits and consequently decreases present
utility.
    Dynan (2000) shows that in Muellbauer’s model the Euler equation can be ap-
proximated by

                            ∆ log Ct+1 = ς + χ∆ log Ct + εt+1 ,                                   (1)
    4
    It is perhaps useful here to reiterate that the empirical fact is sluggish spending growth. Habits
are not a fact, they are a possible interpretation of the fact of sluggishness. Other interpreta-
tions might not involve habits. For example, Carroll and Slacalek (2006) show that, in aggregate
data, habit formation models are indistinguishable from models without habits in which consumers
have accurate knowledge of their own idiosyncratic circumstances but sticky expectations about the
macroeconomy.




                                                  2
so that the importance of habits can be estimated from the serial correlation param-
eter in consumption growth.5 The disturbance term εt+1 summarizes the combined
effect of all shocks on consumption growth and includes a part due to the wealth
shocks ∆ log Wt+1 .
    Suppose that our actual empirical measure of consumption contains either some
transitory measurement error, or transitory elements of spending (e.g. hurricane-
related purchases) that are not incorporated in the theory that leads to (1). The
evolution of measured consumption C ∗ (i.e. incorporating any purely transitory ele-
ments) can be written as
                                ∗
                         ∆ log Ct+1 = β0 + β1 ∆ log Ct∗ + ζt+1 .                             (2)

    Sommer (2002) points out that if the transitory element of consumption spend-
ing is confined to a quarter (which he argues is a reasonable assumption both for
measurement error and hurricanes), while the process for true consumption follows
(1) (possibly with χ = 0, which corresponds to the random walk model), the error
process for measured consumption will be an MA(1) with a negative coefficient. In
these circumstances direct estimation of (2) on NIPA data will yield an estimate of
β1 that is a downward-biased estimate of the habit parameter χ, where the size of
the bias will depend on the magnitude of the transitory component of expenditures.
    Sommer shows that instrumental variables estimation using instruments dated
t − 2 or earlier should largely overcome these problems. In addition, he presents IV
estimates that suggest a serial correlation coefficient for “true” consumption growth
in the neighborhood of 0.7 (whether the measure of spending is total consumption
expenditures, spending on nondurables and services, or spending on nondurables
alone).
    This is a case where the first stage of the two-stage least squares instrumenting
process is as interesting as the second stage. The first stage, in principle, is just a
regression of the form
                                                ′
                               ∆ log Ct = η0 + Zt−1 η + νt ,

where Zt−1 is the set of instruments. There is an extensive literature, provoked by
Hall (1978), that seeks variables that are good at predicting consumption growth. In
Hall’s original paper, changes in stock prices were identified as one of the few variables
with predictive power; subsequently a variety of other useful variables were identified,
including various measures of interest rates, consumer sentiment, and lagged income
growth.
   5
   For fuller derivations and discussion, see Habits.pdf in the first author’s graduate macroeco-
nomics lecture notes, available on his web page.



                                               3
2.1    Estimating the Wealth Effect
To estimate the wealth effect, we must modify Sommer’s methodology in several
directions. First, the ultimate goal here is to obtain an estimate of the marginal
propensity to consume out of wealth. But (1) is written in terms of the growth rate
of consumption. Even if the model were estimated as a just-identified system where
the only instrument for lagged consumption growth is lagged changes in wealth, the
result would be a relationship between the growth rate of wealth and the growth rate
of consumption, which is not an MPC. Worse, this approach makes no sense if wealth
is split up into a stock and a nonstock component. If the null hypothesis is equal
MPCs out of the two components then the coefficients on their log changes will not
be identical unless stock and nonstock wealth are the same size in every period.
    There is a simple solution to these problems, which is to use the ratio of changes
in wealth to an initial level of consumption rather than wealth growth.6 That is, if
we define

                                  ∂Ct = (Ct − Ct−1 )/Ct−5
                               ∂Wt−1 = (Wt−1 − Wt−2 )/Ct−5

and so on, then a first-stage regression of the form

                                     ∂Ct = α0 + α1 ∂Wt−1                                            (3)

yields a direct estimate of the marginal propensity to consume in quarter t out of a
change in wealth in quarter t − 1. Furthermore, if W S and W N are the stock and
nonstock components of wealth, a first-stage regression of the form
                                             S          N
                             ∂Ct = α0 + α1 ∂Wt−1 + α2 ∂Wt−1                                         (4)

yields directly comparable estimates of relative MPCs.
    Regressions of the form (3) or (4) pass all the standard tests of instrument validity
and therefore justify estimation of an IV equation of the form

                                  ∂Ct+1 = γ + χ∂Ct + ξt+1                                           (5)

where γ is an unimportant constant.
   Given an initial (current-quarter) MPC out of wealth of µ and a serial correlation
coefficient χ for ∂C, the usual infinite horizon formula implies that the ultimate effect
   6
    Because we will later be using variables with lags up to a year, the “initial” level here is defined
as consumption five quarters before the current quarter.




                                                   4
on the level of consumption (the “long-run MPC”) from a unit innovation to wealth
is
                                                    µ
                                   MPCLR =             .
                                                   1−χ
    As a digression, this seems a good place to point out that “the long-run MPC” is
a concept of questionable fundamental validity, because in the long-run the amount of
wealth is endogenous with respect to consumption choices; indeed, one interpretation
of the cointegration discussion above is that the only sensible definition of the “long-
run MPC” is that it is zero.
    Our interpretation of the econometric object we call the “long-run MPC” is that
it really reflects the medium-run dynamics of consumption (over the course of a few
years); that is, the effects over a time frame short enough that the consequences of the
consumption decisions have not had time to have a substantial impact on the level
of wealth. Thus the distinction between what we are presenting as a long-run MPC
and what comes out of a cointegration analysis is that in principle the cointegration
analysis characterizes some average characteristics of the whole 45-year sample, while
our results reflect average dynamics over a much shorter horizon.
    Returning to the main thrust, the simplest way to estimate the “long-run MPC,”
would have been to directly report the relevant coefficient estimates on one-quarter-
lagged ∂W from the first-stage regressions. If that MPC had been α then the fact that
we should have α = χµ implies that the long-run MPC could have been estimated
from
                                                     α
                                 MPCLR =                   ,
                                                  χ(1 − χ)

where the χ in the denominator adjusts for the fact that the estimated coefficient is
on once-lagged rather than the current change in wealth.
    Unfortunately, the coefficient estimates when only a single lag of each of the
two measures of wealth was included in the regression were a bit too sensitive to
the inclusion of other instruments for us to be comfortable reporting them directly.7
However, if the model of serial correlation in true consumption growth is right, it is
easy to make an alternative measure of the change in wealth that should capture the
relevant facts. For a given value of χ, assuming independent shocks to wealth from
quarter to quarter we should have:

          ∆Ct+1 ≈ µχ(∆Wt + χ∆Wt−1 + χ2 ∆Wt−2 + χ3 ∆Wt−3 ) + ǫt+1 .
  7
    The estimates are not enormously sensitive—they typically imply long-run MPCs between 0.02
and 0.1.



                                              5
   Now define
             ¯ t = (∆Wt + χ∆Wt−1 + χ2 ∆Wt−2 + χ3 ∆Wt−3 )/Ct−4
             ∂W                                                                      (6)

and since similarly ∂Ct+1 = (Ct+1 − Ct )/Ct−4 this leads to an approximate equation
            ¯ of the form
for ∂C and ∂W
                                             ¯ t−1 .
                               ∂Ct = α0 + α1 ∂W                                      (7)

Under the assumption that the dynamic model of consumption is right, the coefficient
             ¯ t should be the immediate (first-quarter) MPC out of an innovation
estimate on ∂W
to wealth.
    Thus, the estimate of the long-run MPC out of wealth reported in table 2 is given
by
                                                  αn
                               MPCLR
                                  n  =                  .                            (8)
                                               χ(1 − χ)
for the αn corresponding to the respective measure of wealth.
    To summarize, for each of the instrument sets, the procedure is as follows:

  1. Estimate (5) by IV, generating the estimate of χ reported in table 2.
                               ¯ as per (6).
  2. Construct the estimate of ∂W

  3. Estimate (7) or the corresponding equation for the other instrument sets, yield-
     ing the estimate of the short-run MPC contained in table 1.

  4. Construct the estimate of the long-run MPC for table 2 via (8).

    The logic of the foregoing is admittedly a bit circular, but the circularity is moti-
vated more by presentational issues than substance: It seemed essential, for stream-
lined exposition, to be able to report a single statistic as the immediate MPC and
a single statistic as the long-run MPC out of wealth shocks. However, when only a
single lag of wealth is used in the first-stage regression the coefficient estimates are
implausibly sensitive to the exact specification and exactly which instruments are
included. On the other hand, when a few lags in the equation are used the sum of
the coefficients on the lags tends to yield similar short-run coefficients, but is harder
to summarize. The result was the compromise represented by table 1.

2.2   Estimation Results
As a baseline, the first row of table 1 presents the estimation results of the regression
(7) of the change in consumption ∂Ct+1 on a weighted average of the change in wealth

                                           6
over the prior year ∂W¯ t . Thus, the regression coefficients are now interpretable as the
marginal propensity to consume out of changes in wealth in the previous quarter. The
reported results are for total personal consumption expenditures, because the focus
here is on the effects of wealth on aggregate demand, but appropriately scaled-down
results can be obtained for spending excluding durables, or excluding both durables
and services.
     The coefficient estimate in this baseline model implies that if wealth grew by
$1 last quarter, then consumption will grow by about $0.017 more in the current
quarter than if wealth had been flat. While this wealth effect is highly statistically
robust, lagged wealth growth alone explains only about 14 percent of quarterly con-
sumption growth (as implied by R2 from the regression of ∂Ct on a constant and
¯ t−1 , . . . , ∂W
∂W              ¯ t−4 not reported in table 1).8
     The next step is to find a parsimonious set of additional variables that have signif-
icant predictive power for consumption growth. There is a traditional set of variables
often used in this literature, dating back to the work of Campbell and Mankiw (1989),
including the recent performance of stock prices as well as lagged interest rates and
income growth rates. However, for our purposes an adequate representation is ob-
tained by adding just two explanatory variables: lagged unemployment expectations
from the University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment survey (to capture changes in
economic uncertainty), and the lagged Fed funds rate. The latter is included in the
hope that it will capture some of the effects of monetary policy, leaving the housing
wealth variable to capture more exogenous movements in house prices.
     The second row shows that when the extra variables are added, the coefficient on
the change in wealth is diminished (by about half). This makes sense because the
extra variables are correlated with the change in wealth. However, the extra variables
also have considerable independent predictive power for consumption growth. Over-
all, the explanatory power of the regression including both extra measures is almost
double the power of the regression that only includes lagged wealth.
     The third row regresses the consumption change on the change in stock and
nonstock wealth separately; the point estimate of the effect of nonstock wealth is
more than twice as large as the coefficient on stock wealth (which is close to the
original estimate of the effect of total wealth). However, the coefficient on nonstock
wealth is much less precisely estimated than the coefficient on stock wealth, and a
statistical test indicates that the hypothesis that the two coefficients are actually
equal cannot be statistically rejected at the 95 percent significance level. One reason
the coefficient on nonstock wealth is harder to pin down is that nonstock wealth
varies considerably less than stock wealth, as shown in figure 1.
  8
    This does not merely reflect time aggregation; even twice-lagged wealth changes have highly
statistically significant predictive power for consumption growth.



                                              7
    The final row presents the preferred specification, in which stock and nonstock
wealth effects are examined separately from the other explanatory variables. Results
are broadly what would be expected: Both coefficients are substantially smaller, and
the coefficient on nonstock wealth is about twice as large as that on stock wealth, but
the difference between the two coefficients is not statistically significant. However,
the coefficient on nonstock wealth is statistically significantly different from zero, at
the 0.077 percent level.
    The results in this table are not the bottom line, because they reflect only the
next-quarter effect on consumption growth. To obtain the long-run MPCs, we need
to estimate equation (5) and apply formula (8). Results of these calculations are
reported in table 2.9
    The first column shows that all models find a very substantial, and highly sta-
tistically significant, amount of momentum in consumption growth. Note also that
the regressions that include the extra explanatory variables (which had much greater
power for consumption growth) find notably higher estimates of momentum. Fur-
thermore, in experiments not reported here (but available from the authors), a much
more extensive set of instruments was examined. The bottom line is that any in-
strument set that has a reasonable degree of predictive power for ∂Ct (e.g., an R̄2 of
0.1 or more) generates a highly statistically significant estimate of the χ coefficient.
Furthermore, the estimate of χ tends to be larger the better is the performance of
the first-stage regression.10
    The last two columns report the estimated “long-run” MPCs out of stock and
nonstock wealth. When the MPCs are permitted to differ for stock and nonstock
wealth, the higher short-run MPCs out of nonstock wealth from table 1 translate
into higher long-run MPCs here, with the preferred model estimate (the last row) of
a long-run MPC out of nonstock wealth of 9 cents on the dollar.
    One intuition for why the MPC out of stock wealth is substantially lower than
that out of nonstock wealth is shown in figure 1. Stock wealth is considerably more
volatile than nonstock wealth. If the model is really true, these high frequency fluc-
tuations should have considerable power in explaining subsequent spending patterns.
In practice, high frequency stock market fluctuations do not seem to translate into
   9
     It may be surprising that current income growth is not included as an additional regressor, a la
Campbell and Mankiw (1989). But Sommer (2002) reports that when lagged consumption growth
and current income growth, instrumented by the same variables, are included together, the coefficient
on lagged consumption growth remains statistically unchanged (a bit lower, but still greater than
0.5), and current income growth is not statistically significant, with a point estimate that is much
lower than in the usual Campbell–Mankiw regressions. The Sommer results can be confirmed using
the model presented here.
  10
     To address a final concern: Using 2003 vintage data, as opposed to Hall’s 1976 vintage, there
are plenty of instruments with a lot of predictive power—the Fed funds rate by itself generates an
R̄2 greater than 0.16.


                                                 8
very large consumption fluctuations, so the coefficient is estimated to be relatively
small. 11
    We claimed in the introduction that theory does not give a clear presumption
about whether there should be larger wealth effect for stocks or houses. It might
seem that more liquid assets (such as stocks) are more likely to be used to smooth
consumption. Consequently, consumption should respond more strongly to shocks to
liquid assets. On the other hand, the distribution of wealth across households also
affects the MPC estimated in aggregate data. The median dollar of stock wealth is
held by a considerably wealthier household than the median dollar of housing wealth.
Economic theory, empirical evidence, and common sense support the proposition that
the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth is smaller for richer households. So
even if the MPC out of stock wealth is greater than that out of housing wealth for any
individual household, in the aggregate an increase in housing wealth could produce
a larger boost to consumption than an increase in stock wealth because the housing
wealth increase is concentrated among households with a higher overall MPC. In
addition, it is plausible to imagine that consumers think of house price increases as
a more reliable or permanent increase in wealth than an equivalent dollar change in
stock market values, whether or not such a view is supported by econometric evidence
or economic theory. Such beliefs could justify a substantially larger effect of housing
wealth than stock wealth on consumption.12
    Our preferred estimates pin down the “long-run” MPC out nonstock wealth at
0.09, more than twice as large as the MPC out of stock wealth of 0.04. This suggests
that the theoretical arguments for the larger size of housing wealth outweigh the ones
in the opposite direction.

2.3    Comparison with Existing Empirical Work
The work most closely related to ours is Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2003) (henceforth
CQS), which provides estimates from both a panel of developed countries (since 1975)
and a panel of states within the U.S. Using annual data, CQS find a highly statistically
significant estimate of the MPC out of housing wealth in the U.S. of around 0.03–
0.04. In contrast, the CQS estimate of the MPC out of stock market wealth is small
and statistically insignificant. The coefficient on housing wealth is estimated to be
highly statistically significantly larger than the coefficient on stock wealth.
    Unfortunately, the econometric evidence does not speak with one voice. An IMF
study by Ludwig and Slok (2004) estimates a larger effect of stock wealth than hous-
  11
     Figure 1 actually shows levels of wealth rather than differences ∂W ¯   used in the regressions.
However, the volatility in levels is transferred into differences. Consequently, it turns out that the
standard deviation of the stock wealth measure ∂W  ¯ S is about three times as large as that of ∂W
                                                                                                ¯ N.
  12
     For further discussion, see Carroll (2004).


                                                  9
ing wealth in a panel of 16 OECD countries, and also reports some evidence of an
increase in wealth effects over time. Girouard and Blöndal (2001) fail to find consis-
tent results across countries: In some, the housing wealth effect is stronger, while in
others the stock wealth effect is stronger (and in some neither was significant). And
a study by Dvornak and Kohler (2003) modelled closely on the CQS study but us-
ing Australian state-level data finds a larger stock wealth effect than housing wealth
effect.
    There are reasons to be skeptical of results based on macroeconomic or regional
data. Perhaps the foremost is that movements in asset prices are not exogenous
fluctuations; they should be affected by many of the same factors that affect con-
sumption decisions, most notably overall macroeconomic prospects. House prices
should depend, in part, on the overall future purchasing power of current and fu-
ture homeowners, while stock prices should reflect expectations for corporate profits,
which are of course closely tied to the broader economy. An impressive new pa-
per (using U.K. and South African data) by Aron and Muellbauer (2006) attempts
to address this issue by including control variables for credit market liberalizations.
Thus, to isolate a “pure” housing wealth effect, one would want data on spending by
individual households before and after some truly exogenous changes in their house
values, caused for example by the unexpected discovery of neighborhood sources of
pollution.
    Recent studies by Disney, Henley, and Jevons (2002) and Campbell and Cocco
(2006) seem to represent the closest approximations to such an ideal microeconomic
dataset. Disney, Henley, and Jevons use data on spending patterns for a set of British
households, along with county-level indicators of house prices. They find a median
marginal propensity to consume out of housing wealth in the range 0.09–0.14 during
the recent house price boom in Britain.
    Campbell and Cocco (2006) use British data from the U.K. Family Expenditure
Survey and the Nationwide data set of regional home price indexes to investigate the
wealth effect for various demographic groups. They find a statistically significant elas-
ticity of consumption to house prices of about 1.7 among older homeowners, but no
significant effect among young renters. Additional microeconometric estimates of the
wealth effect are reported in Engelhardt (1996), Juster, Lupton, Smith, and Stafford
(2001), Lehnert (2003), Levin (1998) and Bostic, Gabriel, and Painter (2005).
    On balance, most macro- and microeconometric studies are consistent with a
medium-run MPC (after 3 years) out of housing wealth in the range of 0.04–0.10,
comparable to our estimates from aggregate U.S. data.




                                           10
3        Comparison of Our Methodology with the Cointegra-
         tion Approach
Our approach described in section 2 provides an alternative way to estimate the
wealth effect without having to appeal to the strong assumptions which are embedded
in cointegration methods.13 The cointegration methodology consists of estimating
the cointegrating regression between (logarithms of) consumption, labor income and
wealth. This work typically invokes as a theoretical justification the following log-
linear approximation to the consumer’s intertemporal budget constraint (based on
Campbell and Mankiw, 1989)
                                     ∞                                           
         Γ               Γ            X
                                            i Γ                               Γ
 log Ct − log Yt − 1−        log Wt =     γ      ∆ log Yt+i −∆ log Ct+i + 1−      rt+i ,
         Ψ               Ψ                     Ψ                              Ψ
                                      i=1
                                                                                     (9)
where Ct is consumption, Yt labor income, Wt household asset holdings (wealth),
1 − Γ/Ψ is the steady-state ratio of savings invested in physical assets and γ =
1 − exp(log(C/W )) with log(C/W ) being the log of the steady-state consumption–
wealth ratio.
     Equation (9) is often presented as a preference-free relationship implied solely by
the budget constraint, embodying minimal theoretical restrictions, e.g. Lettau and Ludvigson
(2004), p. 280:
         Importantly, however, the empirical approach described next does not
         require imposing such additional [preference] structure. The empirical
         results we obtain exploit only cointegration, a phenomenon that can be
         motivated by the logic of a simple budget constraint identity, applicable
         to a wide variety of theoretical structures.
    As hinted above, the problem with this argument is that the underlying theory
does not suggest a stable γ unless all aspects of the economy are perpetually un-
changing. The assumption is effectively that the target ratio of market wealth to
total wealth Γ/Ψ (or, equivalently, the ratio of market wealth to human wealth) is
stationary. Unfortunately, neither partial nor general equilibrium theory provides a
plausible rationale for such a stationarity assumption. For example, in the classic
Hall (1978) model with a quadratic utility function the level of consumption follows
a random walk. Since consumption is proportional to total wealth, the level of total
    13
    The number of papers applying the cointegration methodology has recently risen considerably.
References include Bertaut (2002), Byrne and Davis (2003), Fernandez-Corugedo, Price, and Blake
(2003),      Pichette and Tremblay     (2003),     Catte, Girouard, Price, and Andre     (2004),
Lettau and Ludvigson (2004), Fisher, Otto, and Voss (2005) and Hamburg, Hoffmann, and Keller
(2005).


                                              11
wealth must also follow a random walk. But if income (and therefore human wealth)
trends upward, it must be the case that Γ/Ψ is falling. So even the benchmark Hall
model does not imply stability in the required sense.
    More deeply, in any sensible macroeconomic model, the long-run relationship
between (the logs of) consumption, income and wealth is bound to be determined
by the steady state interest rate, productivity growth rate, population growth rate,
tax rates, insurance arrangements, and other parameters. If any of these parameters
change permanently over the time frame examined, any effort to find a unique, stable
cointegrating relationship between the three variables is misguided.14 This is of course
particularly problematic if one hopes to separate a long-run cointegrating relationship
from persistent transitional dynamics toward the steady state. In that case, in order
to make reliable estimation and inference it would be necessary to have very long
spans of structurally stable data (probably on the order of hundreds of years), which
are not available in practice.
    The empirical evidence on the existence of unique, stable cointegrating relation-
ship between consumption, income, and wealth is rather mixed. Some of the papers
cited above argue that there is no evidence against the stability of the cointegrating
relationship, but others, including Hahn and Lee (2001), Rudd and Whelan (2006)
and Slacalek (2004) argue that with properly constructed data the relationship does
not exist or is structurally unstable.
    In addition, the cointegration approach effectively postulates that consumption
growth depends only on its own lags and the lags of income and wealth. The error-
correction counterpart of cointegrating regression (9) is
                           ∆ log Ct = νc + αc ec
                                              ˆ t−1 + srt−1 + et ,                           (10)
where ec
       ˆ t−1 is the deviation from the long-run trend (cointegrating residual) and srt−1
the short-run adjustment terms. It is, however, well-known that additional variables,
such as consumer sentiment or measures of liquidity constraints predict consump-
tion growth (see e.g. Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994) and Bacchetta and Gerlach
(1997)). As a result, estimates based on equations like (10) potentially suffer from
omitted variable bias.


4        Conclusion
Housing price fluctuations apparently have substantial effects on consumer spending.
The immediate (first-quarter) impact is likely to be relatively small (the immediate
    14
    Empirically, there is strong evidence of persistent changes in the mean of productivity growth
in the U.S. The average labor productivity growth in the non-farm business sector was 2.6 percent
between 1955 and 1972, 1.5 percent between 1973 and 1994 and 2.7 percent between 1995 and 2004.
For additional evidence see e.g. Hansen (2001).


                                               12
quarterly MPC in our preferred model is about 2 cents on the dollar), but over a time
span of several years it probably accumulates to the 4–10 cent range. These figures
are consistent with evidence from micro data and the experience across U.S. states.
Whether the housing wealth effect is substantially larger than the stock wealth effect
is more uncertain; while the bulk of the evidence seems to point in that direction, the
estimated size of the differences is not large enough (in U.S. aggregate data) to yield
confidence in the conclusion. For monetary policy purposes, these results suggest that
it is important to keep a close eye on developments in housing markets separately
from equity markets, since even the possibility of a significantly higher MPC out of
housing wealth can shift the balance of risks in a macroeconomic forecast. Such a
perspective, for example, could have helped in understanding and interpreting the
surprising strength of the U.S. consumption and residential investment spending in
the early 2000s even as the stock market suffered a historic decline.
     More importantly, the risks of the opposite experience are also worth noting.
While in most places there seem to be good fundamental reasons for the rise in
housing wealth over the last few years, the housing price dynamics in some areas
might be driven by bubble components. If these components grow large and decline
abruptly, our results suggest that consumption will be affected substantially.

References
Aron, Janine, and John Muellbauer (2006): “Housing Wealth, Credit Conditions and Con-
  sumption,” working paper 9, Centre for the Study of African Economies, Oxford University.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Stefan Gerlach (1997): “Consumption and Credit Constraints:
  International Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 40, 207–238.

Bertaut, Carol (2002): “Equity Prices, Household Wealth, and Consumption Growth in Foreign
  Industrial Countries: Wealth Effects in the 1990s,” IFDP working paper 724, Federal Reserve
  Board.

Bostic, Raphael, Stuart Gabriel, and Gary Painter (2005): “Housing Wealth, Financial
  Wealth, and Consumption: New Evidence from Micro Data,” working paper, University of South-
  ern California.

Byrne, Joseph P., and E. Phillip Davis (2003): “Disaggregate Wealth and Aggregate Consump-
  tion: An Investigation of Empirical Relationships for the G7,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
  Statistics, 65(2), 197–220.

Campbell, John Y., and João F. Cocco (2006): “How Do House Prices Affect Consumption?
  Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Campbell, John Y., and Angus S. Deaton (1989): “Why Is Consumption So Smooth?,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 56, 357–74.




                                               13
Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and Interest
  Rates: Reinterpreting the Time-Series Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, ed.
  by Olivier J. Blanchard, and Stanley Fischer, pp. 185–216. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Carroll, Christopher D. (2004): “Housing Wealth and Consumption Expenditure,” Paper Pre-
  pared for Academic Consultants Meeting of Federal Reserve Board, January 2004, Available at
  http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/FedHouseWealthv2.pdf.

Carroll, Christopher D., Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, and David W. Wilcox (1994): “Does Con-
  sumer Sentiment Forecast Household Spending? If So, Why?,” American Economic Review, 84(5),
  1397–1408.

Carroll, Christopher D., and Jirka Slacalek (2006): “Sticky Expectations and Consumption
  Dynamics,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.

Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller (2003): “Comparing Wealth Effects:
  The Stock Market Versus the Housing Market,” Institute of Business and Economic Research
  Working Paper No. W01-004.

Catte, Pietro, Nathalie Girouard, Robert Price, and Christophe Andre (2004): “Housing
  Market, Wealth and the Business Cycle,” working paper 17, OECD.

Disney, Richard, Andrew Henley, and David Jevons (2002): “House Price Shocks, Negative
  Equity and Household Consumption in the UK in the 1990s,” Mimeo, University of Nottingham.

Dvornak, Nikola, and Marion Kohler (2003): “Housing Wealth, Stock Market Wealth and
  Consumption: A Panel Analysis for Australia,” Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion
  Paper 23.

Dynan, Karen E. (2000): “Habit Formation in Consumer Preferences: Evidence from Panel Data,”
  American Economic Review, 90(3).

Engelhardt, Gary V. (1996): “House Prices and Home Owner Saving Behavior,” Regional Science
  and Urban Economics, 26, 313–336.

Fernandez-Corugedo, Emilio, Simon Price, and Andrew Blake (2003): “The Dynamics
  of Consumers Expenditure: The UK Consumption ECM Redux,” working paper 204, Bank of
  England.

Fisher, Lance A., Glenn Otto, and Graham Voss (2005): “Housing Booms, Non-Financial
  Wealth and Consumption: Lessons from the Australian Experience,” mimeo, University of Victo-
  ria.

Flavin, Marjorie A. (1981): “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About
  Future Income,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), 974–1009.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. (2000): “An Optimizing Model for Monetary Policy: Can Habit Formation
  Help?,” American Economic Review, 90(3).

Girouard, Nathalie, and Sveinbjörn Blöndal (2001): “House Prices and Economic Activity,”
  OECD Economic Department Working Paper 279.



                                             14
Hahn, Jaehoon, and Hangyong Lee (2001): “On the Estimation of the Consumption-Wealth
  Ratio: Cointegrating Parameter Instability and its Implications for Stock Return Forecasting,”
  mimeo, Columbia University.

Hall, Robert E. (1978): “Stochastic Implications of the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis:
  Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 96, 971–87.

Hamburg, Britta, Mathias Hoffmann, and Joachim Keller (2005): “Consumption, Wealth
  and Business Cycles in Germany,” discussion paper 16, Deutsche Bundesbank.

Hansen, Bruce E. (2001): “The New Econometrics of Structural Change: Dating Breaks in U.S.
  Labor Productivity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(4), 117–28.

Juster, F. Thomas, Joseph Lupton, James P. Smith, and Frank Stafford (2001): “The
  Decline in Household Saving and Wealth Effect,” Mimeo, University of Michigan.

Khalifa, Sherif (2004): “Brief Summaries of Principal Papers on Housing Wealth Effects,”
  http://econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/wealthLit.html.

Lehnert, Andreas (2003): “Housing, Consumption, and Credit Constraints,” Manuscript, Board
  of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson (2004): “Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset
  Values: Reevaluating the Wealth Effect on Consumption,” American Economic Review, 94(1),
  276–299.

Levin, Laurence (1998): “Are Assets Fungible? Testing the Behavioral Theory of Life Cycle
  Savings,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 36, 59–83.

Ludwig, Alexander, and Torsten Slok (2004): “The Relationship between Stock Prices, House
  Prices and Consumption in OECD Countries,” Topics in Macroeconomics, 4(1, Article 4), available
  at http://ideas.repec.org/a/bep/mactop/v4y2004i1p1.

Muellbauer, John N. (1988): “Habits, Rationality, and Myopia in the Life Cycle Consumption
 Function,” Annales d’économie et de Statistique, 9, 47–70.

Pichette, Lise, and Dominique Tremblay (2003): “Are Wealth Effects Important for Canada?,”
  working paper 30, Bank of Canada.

Reis, Ricardo (2004): “Inattentive Consumers,” mimeo, Princeton University.

Rudd, Jeremy, and Karl Whelan (2006): “Empirical Proxies for the Consumption-Wealth Ra-
  tio,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 34–51.

Slacalek, Jirka (2004): “International Evidence on Cointegration between Consumption, Income,
  and Wealth,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins University.

Sommer, Martin (2002): “Habits, Sentiment and Predictable Income in the Dynamics of Aggregate
  Consumption,” working paper number 458; updated 2006, Johns Hopkins University, Available
  at http://econ.jhu.edu/pdf/papers/wp458 version2006.pdf.




                                               15
Appendix: Description of Data
Consumption Total personal consumption expenditure; source: National Income and Prod-
    uct Accounts, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
(Total) Wealth Net worth; source: Flow of Funds Accounts, Board of Governors of the
     Federal Reserve System.
Stock wealth Sum of equity by households, corporate equity by private pension funds,
     government retirement fund, bank trusts and estates, closed end funds, mutual funds
     and life insurance companies; source: Flow of Funds Accounts, Board of Governors of
     the Federal Reserve System.
Nonstock wealth Net worth – Stock wealth.
Population source: National Income and Product Accounts, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Fed funds rate source: Fred II database of St. Louis Fed,
     http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/.
Unemployment expectations Question 12 of the University of Michigan Survey of Con-
    sumer Expectations; source: Survey Research Center,
    http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/.

   Consumption and wealth are measured in real per capita terms, deflated with the con-
sumption deflator. All results are reported for quarterly data, 1960Q1–2004Q3.
   The archive with programs and data used in this paper can be downloaded at
http://www.econ.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/.




                                          16
                                 Figure 1: Components of Household Wealth
                    150
                    100
           Wealth
                    50
                    0




                          1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985    1990   1995   2000   2005

                                   Net Worth          Stock Wealth           Nonstock Wealth




Note: Per capita real wealth figures in thousands of year 2000 dollars. Net worth is our measure of
total wealth.




                                                       17
               Table 1: Short-Run Effect of Wealth on Consumption
                       ¯ t−1 + α2 ∂W
         ∂Ct = α0 + α1 ∂W         ¯ S + α3 ∂W¯ N + α4 M Ut−1 + α5 F Ft−1
                                     t−1        t−1

        Next-Quarter Effect                            Extra
      of $1 Change in Wealth                         Variables
   Total      Stock     Nonstock              Unemp Exp Fed Fund                   Test of
   ¯ t−1
   ∂W         ¯ S
              ∂W          ¯ N
                          ∂W                    M Ut−1        F Ft−1            ¯ S = ∂W
                                                                                ∂W      ¯ N          R̄2
                      t−1            t−1
  0.0168∗∗∗                                                                      (Assumed)          0.128
 (0.0044)
  0.0107∗∗∗                                       0.081∗∗       −0.457∗∗          (Assumed)         0.232
 (0.0032)                                        (0.033)        (0.208)
                 0.0157∗∗∗ 0.0381∗∗∗                                                0.078           0.136
                (0.0046)   (0.0113)                                               (Accepted)
                 0.0081∗∗∗ 0.0182∗∗               0.073∗∗       −0.492∗∗            0.239           0.230
                (0.0026)   (0.0083)              (0.036)        (0.214)           (Accepted)

Notes: Sample period is 1960Q1–2004Q3. Standard errors in parentheses. {*,**,***}=Statistical
significance at {10,5,1} percent. Coefficients on wealth variables reflect MPCs in the quarter following
a wealth change: For example, the coefficient 0.0168 in the first row implies that a one dollar increase
in wealth in the previous quarter translates into a 1.7 cent increase in consumption in the current
quarter. The wealth variables are from the Flow of Funds balance sheets for the household sector.
M U is the fraction of consumers who expect the unemployment rate to decline over the next year
minus the fraction who expect it to increase. F F is the nominal Fed funds rate. The wealth and
consumption variables were normalized by the level of consumption expenditures at t−4 to correct for
the long-term trends in consumption and wealth. The equations without the extra variables exhibited
serial correlation and so standard errors for those equations are corrected for serial correlation using
the Newey–West procedure with 8 lags.




                                                  18
         Table 2: Consumption Growth Momentum and the Long Run MPC
                          ∂Ct+1 = ς + χEt−1 ∂Ct + ξt+1

  Variables used      Consumption Growth                     Implied Long-Run
   to forecast        Momentum Coefficient                     MPC out of
    Et−1 ∂Ct                  χ                      Total W Stock W S Nonstock W N
       W                     0.59∗∗                   0.069
                            (0.23)
       W,                    0.78∗∗∗                  0.061
     MU, FF                 (0.14)
     W S, W N                0.47∗∗                                0.063             0.153
                            (0.20)
     W S, W N ,              0.73∗∗∗                               0.041             0.091
     MU, FF                 (0.13)

Notes: Sample period is 1960Q1–2004Q3. Standard errors are in parentheses. {*,**,***}=Statistical
significance at {10,5,1} percent. The long-run MPCs are calculated from the formula αn /χ(1 − χ)
where αn is the corresponding next-quarter MPC estimated in table 1. Standard errors for all
equations are heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust. When more instruments are used to
forecast ∂Ct (for example, the Fed funds rate and the change in unemployment over the previous
year), the estimate of χ tends to rise further and the standard error falls further. The measure of
the change in wealth used for the regressions is the ∂W measure defined in the text, as this can be
measured without an estimate of χ, unlike the ∂W¯ measures used in the previous table.




                                                19
