NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMERGENCE AND PERSISTENCE OF INEFFICIENT STATES
Daron Acemoglu
Davide Ticchi
Andrea Vindigni
Working Paper 12748
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12748

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

We thank Miriam Golden, Guido Tabellini and seminar participants at IGIER-Bocconi, the Latin American
Meetings of the Econometric Society, and Yale for useful comments and suggestions. Acemoglu gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation and the hospitality of the Yale
Economics Department. Vindigni gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of Collegio Carlo Alberto
and of the Yale Leitner Program in International Political Economy. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2006 by Daron Acemoglu, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Emergence and Persistence of Inefficient States
Daron Acemoglu, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni
NBER Working Paper No. 12748
December 2006
JEL No. H11,H26,H41,P16
ABSTRACT
Inefficiencies in the bureaucratic organization of the state are often viewed as important factors in
retarding economic development. Why certain societies choose or end up with such inefficient organizations
has received very little attention, however. In this paper, we present a simple theory of the emergence
and persistence of inefficient states. The society consists of rich and poor individuals. The rich are
initially in power, but expect to transition to democracy, which will choose redistributive policies.
Taxation requires the employment of bureaucrats. We show that, under certain circumstances, by
choosing an inefficient state structure, the rich may be able to use patronage and capture democratic
politics. This enables them to reduce the amount of redistribution and public good provision in democracy.
Moreover, the inefficient state creates its own constituency and tends to persist over time. Intuitively,
an inefficient state structure creates more rents for bureaucrats than would an efficient state structure.
When the poor come to power in democracy, they will reform the structure of the state to make it
more efficient so that higher taxes can be collected at lower cost and with lower rents for bureaucrats.
Anticipating this, when the society starts out with an inefficient organization of the state, bureaucrats
support the rich, who set lower taxes but also provide rents to bureaucrats. We show that in order
to generate enough political support, the coalition of the rich and bureaucrats may not only choose
an inefficient organization of the state, but they may further expand the size of bureaucracy so as to
gain additional votes. The model shows that an equilibrium with an inefficient state is more likely
to arise when there is greater inequality between the rich and the poor, when bureaucratic rents take
intermediate values and when individuals are sufficiently forward-looking.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Davide Ticchi
Department of Economics
University of Urbino
via Saffi, 42
61029 Urbino ITALY
ticchi@uniurb.it

Andrea Vindigni
Princeton University
Department of Politics
037 Corwin Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
vindigni@Princeton.EDU

1

Introduction

There are large cross-country diﬀerences in the extent of bureaucratic corruption and the
eﬃciency of the state organization (e.g., World Bank, 2004). An influential argument, dating
back at least to Tilly (1990), maintains that diﬀerences in “state capacity” are an important
determinant of economic development.1 The evidence that many less-developed economies in
sub-Saharan Africa, Asia and Latin America only have a small fraction of their GDP raised
in tax revenue and invested by the government (e.g., Acemoglu, 2005) and the correlation
between measures of state capacity and economic growth (e.g., Rauch and Evans, 2000) are
also consistent with this view. Societies with limited state capacity are also those that invest
relatively little in public goods and do not adopt policies that redistribute resources to the
poor.2 Brazil provides a typical example of a society, where the state sector has been relatively
ineﬃcient and democratic politics has generated only limited public goods and benefits for the
poor (e.g., Gay, 1990, Evans, 1992, Weyland 1996, Roett, 1999).
In this paper, we construct a political economy model, which links the emergence and
persistence of ineﬃcient states to the strategic use of patronage politics by the elite as a means
of capturing democratic politics. Democratic capture enables the elite to limit the provision
of public goods and redistribution, but at the cost of aggregate ineﬃciencies. Our approach
therefore provides a unified answer both to the question of why ineﬃcient states emerge in
some societies and why many democracies pursue relatively pro-elite policies. It also suggests
why certain democracies may exhibit relatively poor economic performance and adopt various
ineﬃcient policies.3
Our model economy consists of two groups, the rich elite and poor citizens. Linear taxes can
be imposed on both groups, with the proceeds used to finance public good investments. The
rich are generally opposed to high levels of taxes and public good investments. Tax collection
requires that the state employs bureaucrats to prevent individuals from evading taxes, but
bureaucrats themselves also need to be given incentives so that they exert eﬀort (or do not
accept bribes). The eﬃciency with which a central authority can monitor the bureaucrats is our
measure of the organization of the state. Political competition is modeled either by assuming
the existence of two parties, respectively aligned with the rich and the poor, or by allowing free
1

See, for example, Evans (1989, 1995), Levi (1989), Migdal (1988), Epstein (2000), Herbst (2000), Centeno
(2002) and Kohli (2004).
2
See, for example, Etzioni-Halevy (1983) on the importance of state capacity and bureaucratization for the
development of the welfare state in the West, and Rothstein and Uslaner (2005) on the importance of state
capacity for income redistribution.
3
On the comparative post-war growth performance of democracies, see, for example, Barro (1999).

1

entry into the political arena by citizen candidates (Osborne and Slivinski, 1996, Besley and
Coate, 1997). In both cases, there is no commitment to policies before elections and the party
that comes to power chooses the policy vector, including taxes, public good provision, and
bureaucratic wages, and whether to reform the eﬃciency of the state institutions. Democratic
political competition is made interesting by the fact that bureaucrats may support either the
rich or poor parties (candidates) and their support may be pivotal in the outcome of elections.
We consider two possible organizations of the state: the first is an “eﬃcient” organization,
in which bureaucrats will be detected easily if they fail to exert eﬀort, while the second is an
“ineﬃcient” one in which monitoring bureaucrats is diﬃcult. In equilibrium, when the state is
ineﬃcient, bureaucrats need to be paid rents in order to induce them to perform their roles of
tax collection and inspection. The presence of rents creates the possibility of patronage politics,
whereby bureaucrats may support the party that will maintain the ineﬃcient structure.4
In a society that is always dominated by the rich elite or that is permanently in democracy
(with a poor citizen as the median voter), the political process produces an eﬃcient organization
of bureaucracy, since an ineﬃcient state creates additional costs and no benefits for those
holding power. Our main result is that when the society starts out as nondemocratic (under
the control of the rich elite) and is expected to transition to democracy, the rich may find it
beneficial to choose an ineﬃcient organization of the state so as to exploit patronage politics to
limit redistribution. In particular, bureaucrats realize that once the poor median voter comes
to power in democracy, there will be bureaucratic reform, reducing their rents from then on.
Therefore, if the rich elite, when in power, choose an ineﬃcient organization of the state,
the current bureaucrats–who are receiving rents–prefer to support the rich rather than vote
with the poor. Consequently, an ineﬃcient state organization emerges as a political instrument
for the rich elite to capture the democratic decision-making process by fostering a coalition
between themselves and the bureaucrats. It is also noteworthy that the ineﬃcient state not
only emerges in equilibrium, but also persists; when the state is ineﬃcient, the bureaucrats
vote for the party of the rich, which chooses not to reform the bureaucracy and continues to
maintain the support of the existing bureaucrats and thus its political power.
Our analysis shows that patronage politics typically leads not only to the emergence and
persistence of an ineﬃcient state apparatus, but also to the overemployment of bureaucrats.
4

In our basic model, the assumption that the main role of bureaucrats is tax inspection is not essential. The
important feature is that an ineﬃcient state organization must pay bureaucrats rents in order to provide them
with the right incentives. Bureaucrats’ role as tax inspectors becomes important in the extension in subsection
5.3, where they can be bribed by producers evading taxes. We simplify the presentation by assuming that
bureaucrats’ main role is tax inspection throughout.

2

This is because the rich may prefer to hire additional (unnecessary) bureaucrats so as to boost
their party’s votes. Consequently, a captured democracy will typically feature an ineﬃcient
state (bureaucracy), provide relatively few public goods and employ an excessive number of
bureaucrats. This pattern of bureaucratic ineﬃciency is consistent with the stylized view of
corrupt and low-capacity bureaucracies in many less developed countries (e.g., Geddes, 1991,
and Rauch and Evans, 2000).5
We also show that the equilibrium with an ineﬃcient state is more likely when there is
greater inequality. This is because greater inequality raises the equilibrium tax rate in democracy and makes it more appealing for the rich to create an ineﬃcient state apparatus to prevent
democratic outcomes. An ineﬃcient state also requires intermediate levels of rents/“eﬃciency
wages” for bureaucrats; when rents are limited, bureaucrats would not support the rich, while
too high rents would make the ineﬃcient state equilibrium prohibitively costly for the rich
elite. Finally, an ineﬃcient state is more likely to arise when agents are more forward-looking,
because bureaucrats support the ineﬃcient state in order to obtain future rents.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief discussion of a
number of case studies that illustrate how patronage politics has been used to limit redistribution towards the poor and also discusses the related literature. Section 3 outlines the
basic economic and political environment. Section 4 characterizes the equilibria of the baseline
model both under permanent nondemocratic and democratic regimes as benchmarks, and more
importantly, under a regime that starts out as nondemocratic and becomes democratic thereafter. We show that in this last political environment the rich elite may choose an ineﬃcient
state organization and a suﬃciently large bureaucracy in order to create a majority coalition.
Section 5 generalizes this framework in a number of directions; in particular, it allows for more
general contracts with bureaucrats, considers a citizen-candidate setup for political competition, and allows producers to bribe bureaucrats to evade taxes. Section 6 briefly investigates a
distinctive implication of our approach about the relationship between relative wages of public
sector employees and the amount of public good provision in democracies. We report crosscountry correlations consistent with this implication. Section 7 concludes, while the Appendix
contains some of the proofs omitted from the text.
5

Even with the overemployment of bureaucrats, bureaucrats and the rich elite may not have an absolute
majority in the electorate. In practice, the elites may be able to control the political system using other
methods such as lobbying in addition to the support of the bureaucrats. Here, we isolate our main mechanism
by focusing on a baseline model where the rich are able to capture democracy without any lobbying or other
non-electoral activities.

3

2

Motivation and Related Literature

In this section, we briefly discuss a number of case studies that motivate our analysis and also
relate our paper to the existing literature in political economy.

2.1

Patronage Politics, Ineﬃcient States and Elite Control

The experiences of many societies in Latin America, Asia and Africa illustrate the link between
patronage politics, ineﬃcient states and elite control. Here we briefly mention three cases.
Perhaps the most transparent example of ineﬃcient and oversized bureaucracy comes from
Brazil. Several authors (e.g. Gay, 1990, Weyland 1996, Roett, 1999) have argued that the
distribution of large numbers of public jobs, both in the public administration and in parastatal organizations, has created a pattern of patronage politics in Brazil.6 The control over
these jobs has enabled traditional elites to preserve their political power and limit the amount
of public good provision and redistribution. In fact, despite the high level of inequality in
Brazil, elites have been able to control politics for much of the 20th century with only limited
amount of repression and relatively short periods of military rule. Interestingly, the amount
of redistribution and public good provision does not show marked diﬀerences between military
and democratic periods.
Patronage politics has often ensured that even those in poorest neighborhoods of Rio have
supported the traditional parties rather than socialist or social democratic parties running
on platforms of greater public good provision and redistribution (Gay, 1990). Students of
Brazilian politics have noted the role of public sector employees in this process. For example,
Roett (1999 p. 91) writes “state company employees emerged as being among the strongest
supporter of the patrimonial order”. In return, successive governments have withstood external
pressures from the IMF and have not reformed the public sector, despite the “public perception
that public-sector workers were overpaid and underworked” (Roett, p. 97). The process of
reforming the public sector has started only recently and progressed slowly.
Another example of eﬀective patronage politics is provided by the policies of Parti Socialiste (PS) of President Leopold Sedar Senghor in Senegal. After independence, PS faced
increasing challenges from various diﬀerent opposition groups, including urban workers and
farmers. Nevertheless, it managed to preserve its power, with relatively limited amount of
6

In the early 1980s, about 4 million people had a job in some branch of the Brazilian public sector. Evans
(1992) observes that the Brazilian state is commonly recognized as a huge cabide de emprego (source of jobs) and
remarks that in contrast to the Weberian conception, recruitment of public employees in Brazil is not related
to merit but to political connections.

4

repression, largely owing to its use of patronage politics. In fact, Senghor promoted some
amount of political liberalization and allowed the creation of a multi-party system. However,
PS also exploited its incumbency advantage to manipulate the democratic process by creating
an extensive patronage network centered on the state apparatus and parastatal sector. Interestingly, it was precisely during this period of democratization that the size of the public sector
grew substantially (Boone 1990, Beck, 1997). Boone (1990 p. 347) describes this process as:
“The strategic allocation of government jobs coopted restive intellectuals and professionals and
incorporated them into political factions anchored in the state bureaucracy.” Thanks to this
successful implementation of patronage politics, PS retained much of its power following the
transition to democracy.
A final example of the rise of patronage politics in the face of political competition comes
from Italy. The evolution of the Italian bureaucracy in the post-WWII decades demonstrates
that the mechanism that our model identifies may operate even in relatively developed countries. A significant extension in the Italian bureaucracy was initiated by the Italian Christian
Democratic Party (DC) in the 1950s after the electoral challenge from the Communist Party
increased sharply, especially following the 1953 political elections. Until the defeat in World
War II, Italian politics was dominated by Mussolini’s dictatorship. After the war, DC emerged
as the dominant party. In the 1950s, faced by electoral challenge from the left, DC created a
highly disorganized and oversized bureaucracy, which subsequently became a natural source of
political support and patronage for the party. Golden (2003 p. 199) describes the motive for
the expansion of the bureaucracy as:
“The massive system of political patronage that the leaders of the DC constructed
after 1953 was their aggregate answer ... to enlarging the party’s aggregate vote
share while protecting the incumbency advantage of individual legislators.”
In part with the support of the bureaucracy that it created, DC’s dominance of Italian politics
continued until the 1980s and prevented the formation of a left-wing government.

2.2

Related Literature

Our paper is related to a number of diﬀerent literatures. The first is the political science and
sociology literature on the organization of the state and the bureaucracy mentioned above.
In contrast, there is relatively little work on the internal organization of the state and bureaucracy in economics. Some exceptions include Acemoglu and Verdier (1998), Dixit (2002),
Egorov and Sonin (2005) and Debs (2006). None of these papers investigate the relationship
5

between patronage politics and the emergence of the ineﬃcient state as a method of limiting
redistribution.
Our paper is also related to a number of other strands of the literature in political economy.
First, the reason why the elite both initially and later on choose ineﬃcient institutions is
to control political power in a democratic regime. As such, our paper is related to other
models of elites manipulating policies in democratic settings, including lobbying models, such
as Austen-Smith (1987), Baron (1994), Dixit, Grossman and Helpman (1997), and Grossman
and Helpman (1996), and models in which traditional elites are able to capture democratic
politics, e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson (2006b).
The small literature on the ineﬃciency of the form of redistribution is also closely related
to our work. Becker and Mulligan (2003) and Wilson (1990) argue that ineﬃcient methods
of redistribution are chosen as a way of limiting the amount of redistribution (see also Coate
and Morris, 1995, Rodrik, 1995). There is a close connection between this idea and the main
mechanism in our paper, whereby an ineﬃcient state is chosen by the rich in order to limit the
amount of future redistribution. Nevertheless, there is also an important distinction; in the
basic Becker-Mulligan-Wilson story, it is not clear why the society can commit to the form of
redistribution and not to the amount of redistribution. In contrast, in our model the choice of
an ineﬃcient bureaucracy is a way of aﬀecting the future political equilibrium so as to bring
the party aligned with the interests of the rich to political power, and via this channel, to
limit the provision of public goods and taxation. As such, our mechanism is also related to
the rationale for ineﬃcient redistribution suggested in Saint-Paul (1996) and Acemoglu and
Robinson (2001), where a politically powerful group may push for ineﬃcient forms of transfers
in order to maintain its future political power.
There is also a small literature on how politicians may distort policies for strategic reasons. Papers in this literature include models where ineﬃcient policies (such as excessive state
employment) are chosen in order to gain votes (e.g., Fiorina and Noll, 1978, Geddes, 1991,
Shleifer and Vishny, 1994, Lizzeri and Persico, 2001, Robinson and Torvik, 2005). Still other
papers suggest that ineﬃcient choices (including wasteful investments, large budget deficits,
and ineﬃcient fiscal systems) are made in order to constrain future politicians (e.g., Glazer,
1989, Persson and Svensson, 1989, Tabellini and Alesina, 1990, Aghion and Bolton, 1990,
Cukierman, Edwards, and Tabellini, 1992). None of these papers feature the mechanism of an
elite creating an ineﬃcient state structure to maintain their political power in the face of an
emerging democracy.
Our model is also related to the literature on comparative politics and public finance
6

(e.g., Persson and Tabellini, 2003, Ticchi and Vindigni, 2005), which investigates sources of
diﬀerences in fiscal policies among democracies. Our approach suggests an alternative, but
complementary, source of variation, related to the desire and the ability of the economic elite
to dominate democratic politics, which can generate both diﬀerences in the level of public
goods provision and in the eﬃciency of the state.
Finally, our approach is related to sociological analyses of “cooptation” in democracy by
existing elites in the Marxist sociology and political science literatures. In particular, Therborn
(1980 pp. 228-234) argues that the control of the state apparatus is a crucial objective of the
economic elites in democracy, which they achieve using strategies including cooptation (see
also the discussion of hegemony in Gramsci, 1971). However, this literature neither articulates
a mechanism through which the elite may accomplish these objectives nor models the costs of
such a strategy relative to other options.7

3

Basic Model

3.1

Description of the Economic Environment

Consider the following discrete time infinite-horizon economy populated by a continuum 1 of
agents, each of which has the following risk-neutral preferences
E0

∞
X
t=0

³
´
β t cjt + Gt − hejt ,

at time t = 0, where E0 is the expectations at time t = 0, β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor,

cjt ≥ 0 denotes the consumption of the agent in question (agent j), Gt ≥ 0 is the level of
public good enjoyed by all agents, ejt ∈ {0, 1} is the eﬀort decision of the agent (which will be
necessary in some occupations), and h > 0 is the cost of eﬀort.
There are two types of agents: n > 1/2 are poor (low-skill), while 1 −n are rich (high-skill).
We denote poor agents by the symbol L (corresponding to low-productivity), and rich agents
by H, and also use L and H to denote the set of poor and rich agents.
There are two occupations: producer and bureaucrat. In each period, as long as some
amount of investment in infrastructure, K > 0, is undertaken, each producer generates an
income depending on his skill; AL for poor agents and AH > AL for rich agents. If the
7
Another major diﬀerence between the Marxist approaches and ours is that in our model bureaucrats can
side either with rich or poor agents, whereas in most Marxist approaches, the state apparatus is, ultimately,
controlled by the economic elite (e.g., Miliband, 1969, Poulantzas, 1978, Therborn, 1980). In this respect, the
notion of bureaucracy and state apparatus in our model is also diﬀerent from that of Max Weber, which views
bureaucracy as an “apolitical” organization, with no goals or interests. See also Alford and Friedland (1985) for
a critical discussions of Marxist and non-Marxist theories of the state.

7

investment in infrastructure K is not undertaken at time t, then no agent can produce within
that period. Producers receive and consume their income net of taxes.
A set of agents denoted by Xt are bureaucrats at time t. These agents do not produce,
but receive a net wage of wt ≥ 0 from the government (i.e., they do not pay taxes on their
wage income). The role of bureaucrats is tax collection. In particular, we will allow for a
linear tax rate τ t ∈ [0, 1] on earned incomes in order to finance the infrastructure investment
K, additional spending on the public good Gt and the wages of bureaucrats. This tax rate
is the same irrespective of whether the individual is rich or poor. To simplify the discussion,
we assume that only poor agents can become bureaucrats. This assumption is not necessary
for the results, since it will be evident below that low-productivity poor agents always prefer
bureaucracy more than the high-productivity rich agents (see Remark 2 below).
Both rich and poor agents can try to evade taxes. We assume that if an individual tries
to evade taxes, he gets caught with probability p (xt ), where p : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is an increasing,
twice continuously diﬀerentiable, and strictly concave function with p (0) = 0, and xt denotes
the number of bureaucrats exerting positive eﬀort at time t. More formally, this is defined as
R
xt = j∈Xt ejt dj. This expression incorporates the fact that bureaucrats who do not exert eﬀort
are not useful.8

If an individual is caught evading taxes, all of his income during that period is lost. For
simplicity, we assume that this income does not accrue to the government either (though
this is not an important assumption). We also assume that there is full anonymity in the
market, so that the past history of individual producers is not observed. This implies that
future punishments on tax evaders are not possible. Moreover, because of limited liability, i.e.,
cjt ≥ 0, more serious punishments are not possible.
Since eﬀort is costly, bureaucrats will exert eﬀort only if their compensation depends on
their eﬀort decision. We assume that if they do not exert eﬀort, bureaucrats are caught with
probability qt at time t. If they are not caught, they receive the wage wt , and if they are
caught shirking, they lose their wage, but are not fired from the bureaucracy. This assumption
simplifies the algebra and the exposition considerably and is relaxed in subsection 5.1 below.
The probability of detection qt depends on the quality of the organization of the state
(“eﬃciency of the state”). In particular, we allow two levels of eﬃciency, It ∈ {0, 1}, such that
q (I = 1) = 1, so that with an eﬃcient organization of the state any shirking bureaucrat is
8
Alternatively, instead of inducing bureaucrats to exert eﬀort, it may be important to ensure that they do
not accept bribes from the individuals supposed to pay taxes (e.g., Acemoglu and Verdier, 1998, 2000). We
investigate a variant of our model with corruption in subsection 5.3.

8

immediately caught, while q (I = 0) = q0 < 1, so that with an ineﬃcient organization shirking
bureaucrats are not necessarily detected. To simplify the analysis we assume that I = 1 has
no cost relative to I = 0.9
At each date, the political system chooses the following policies:
• A tax rate on all earned income τ t ∈ [0, 1].
• The wage rate for bureaucrats wt ∈ R+ .
• A level of public good Gt ∈ R+ .
• The number of bureaucrats hired, Xt ∈ [0, 1].
• A decision on the organization of the state for the next date, It ∈ {0, 1}–the eﬃciency
of the state at the current date, It−1 , is part of the state variable, determined by choices
in the previous period.
The additional restrictions on these policies are as follows:
1. The government budget constraint (specified below) has to be satisfied at every date.
2. If Xt ≥ Xt−1 , then existing bureaucrats cannot be fired (although each bureaucrat can
decide to quit if he finds this beneficial). Moreover, if Xt < Xt−1 , then no new bureaucrats
are hired and a fraction (Xt − Xt−1 ) /Xt of the bureaucrats is fired (those fired being
randomly chosen irrespective of their past history).
We denote a vector of policies satisfying these restrictions by ρt ≡ (τ t , wt , Gt , Xt , It ) ∈ R.

3.2

Description of the Political System

We will consider three diﬀerent political environments:
1. Permanent nondemocracy: the rich elite are in power at all dates, meaning that only
the rich can vote, and since all rich agents have the same policy preferences over the
available set of policies, the policy vector most preferred by a representative rich elite
will be implemented.
9
In general, one can imagine that setting up a more eﬃcient state apparatus may involve additional expenditures. We ignore those both to simplify the algebra and also to highlight that ineﬃcient states can arise even
when an eﬃcient organization is costlessly available.

9

2. Permanent Democracy: the citizens, who form the majority, are in power at all dates
starting at t = 0 (or at all dates there are elections as described below).
3. Emerging Democracy: the rich elite are in power at t = 0, and in all future dates, the
regime will be democratic with majoritarian elections.
The first two environments are for comparison. The third one is our main focus in this
paper. It is a simple way of capturing the idea that some decisions are originally taken by
elites, anticipating that democracy will arrive at some point–in this case right at date t = 1.10
To start with, we model the democratic system in a very simple way, by assuming that there
are two parties, one run by an elite agent and one run by a poor agent, and that bureaucrats
cannot run for oﬃce. We use the symbols P and R to denote these parties and dt = P
denotes that party P is elected to oﬃce at date t. Parties are unable to make commitments
to the policies they will implement once they come to power. Thus whichever party receives
the majority of the votes comes to power and the agent in control of the party chooses the
policy vector that maximizes his own utility. This last assumption departs from the standard
Downsian models of political competition where parties commit to their policy platform before
the election. Instead, it is closer to the literature on citizen-candidate models, which will be
discussed further in subsection 5.2 (see also Alesina, 1988). Specifically, in subsection 5.2,
we will consider a richer model of democratic politics, where each agent can run as a citizencandidate, and we will show that the same results apply with this richer setup. Nevertheless,
it is useful to start with the simpler environment with only two parties to highlight the main
economic forces.

3.3

Timing of Events

To recap, the timing of events within each date is:
• The society starts with some political regime, nondemocracy or democracy, i.e., st ∈
{N, D} , a set Xt−1 ⊂ L of agents who are already bureaucrats (since, by assumption,
the set of bureaucrats Xt−1 must be a subset of the set of poor agents), and a level of
eﬃciency of the state, It−1 ∈ {0, 1}. Then:
10

In this case, the society is nondemocratic at date t = 0, and we assume that it will become democratic for
exogenous reasons at date t = 1. It is possible to model democratization as equilibrium institutional change along
the lines of the models of endogenous democratization in the literature (see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006a, for
a discussion and references), but doing so would complicate the analysis without generating additional economic
insights in the current context.

10

1. In democracy, all individuals j ∈ [0, 1] vote for either party P or party R, i.e., individual
j decides vtj ∈ {P, R}.

2. In democracy, the elected party or in nondemocracy the representative elite agent decides
the policy vector ρt ≡ (τ t , wt , Gt , Xt , It ) ∈ R.
3. Observing this vector, each individual j ∈
/ Xt−1 decides whether to apply to become a
bureaucrat, χjt ∈ {0, 1} , and each individual j ∈ Xt−1 decides whether to quit bureau-

cracy, χjt ∈ {0, 1} (which is denoted by the same symbol without any risk of confusion).

Naturally, by assumption, χjt = 0 for all the rich agents. The number of bureaucrats at
o
n
R1
time t is then min Xt , 0 χjt dj , i.e., the minimum of the number of bureaucrats chosen
by the polity in power and the number of people applying to or remaining in bureaucracy.
This also determines the current set of bureaucrats, Xt .

4. Each bureaucrat decides whether to exert eﬀort, ejt ∈ {0, 1}, which determines xt =
R
j
j∈Xt et dj, and thus the probability of detection of individuals evading taxes.
5. Production takes place and each producer decides whether to evade taxes or not, denoted
by ztj ∈ {0, 1}.
6. A fraction p (xt ) of producers evading taxes are caught.
7. A fraction qt = q (It−1 ) of shirking bureaucrats are caught and punished.
8. Taxes are collected, remaining bureaucrats are paid their wage, wt , and the public good
Gt is supplied.
Naturally, the society starts with X−1 = ∅, i.e., in the initial date there are no incumbent
bureaucrats. We also suppose that I−1 = 0 (though this has no bearing on any of our results
except the actions at time t = 0, since the choice of It ∈ {0, 1} is without any costs).

4

Characterization of Equilibria

We now characterize the equilibrium of the environments described above.

4.1

Definition of Equilibrium

Throughout, we focus on pure strategy Markov Perfect Equilibria (MPE).11
11
We focus on MPE both because in the current context the MPE is unique and is relatively straightforward
to characterize and also because the focus on MPE makes the emergence of a coalition between the rich and the
bureaucrats more diﬃcult (since there cannot be “commitment” to future rents for bureaucrats).

11

Recall that Markovian strategies condition only on the payoﬀ-relevant state variables (and
on the prior actions within the same stage game). An MPE is defined as a set of Markovian
strategies that are best responses to each other given every history. In the current game, the
aggregate state vector can be represented as St ≡ (st , It−1 , Xt−1 ) ∈ S, where st ∈ {N, D} is the
political regime at time t, It−1 ∈ {0, 1} is the eﬃciency of the bureaucracy inherited from the
previous period, and Xt−1 is the size of the bureaucracy inherited from the previous period.12

Individual actions will be a function of the aggregate state vector St and the individual’s
identity, in particular, at ∈ {L, H, B} representing whether the individual is a poor producer,
rich producer or a bureaucrat. Thus as a function of St and at , each individual will decide
which party to vote for, i.e., vtj ∈ {P, R}, whether to apply (or to remain) in bureaucracy,

χjt ∈ {0, 1}, whether to evade taxes, ztj ∈ {0, 1}, if the individual is a producer, and whether

to exert eﬀort, ejt ∈ {0, 1}, if the individual is a bureaucrat. Finally, strategies also include

the choice of It ∈ {0, 1}, τ t ∈ [0, 1], Xt ∈ [0, n], and Gt ∈ R+ when the individual is the party
leader. Thus Markovian strategies can be represented by the following mapping
σ : S × {L, H, B} → {P, R} × {0, 1}3 × [0, 1] × [0, n] × R+ .
An MPE is a mapping σ ∗ that is best response to itself at every possible history.
We will often refer to subcomponents of σ rather than the entire strategy profile, and with
a slight abuse of notation, we will use v (I | a) to denote the voting strategy of an individual
of group a ∈ {L, H, B} as a function of the eﬃciency of the state institutions. Moreover,
when there is no risk of confusion, we will use the index j to denote individuals or groups
interchangeably.

4.2

Preliminary Results

We now state a number of results that will be useful throughout the analysis.
/ Xt , i.e., all producers evade taxes at time t.
Lemma 1 If p (xt ) < τ t , then ztj = 0 for all j ∈
Proof. Write the payoﬀ of an individual producer j ∈
/ Xt at time t when the tax rate is τ t
and the size of (eﬀort-exerting) bureaucracy is xt as

12

ª
©
j
(σ ∗ ) ,
Vtj = max (1 − τ t ) Aj , (1 − p (xt )) Aj + Gt + βVt+1

In addition, for each individual we could specify whether the individual is currently a bureaucrat, i.e.,
whether j ∈ Xt−1 and whether he is a party leader as part of the individual-specific state vector. Nevertheless,
Markovian strategies can be defined without doing this, which simplifies the notation.

12

j
where Aj is the productivity of this individual, and σ ∗ is the optimal policy, so that βVt+1
(σ ∗ )

is the discounted optimal continuation value for the individual. The max incorporates two
terms. The first, (1 − τ t ) Aj , is what the individual will consume if he pays a fraction τ t of

his income in taxes. The second, (1 − p (xt )) Aj , is his expected consumption when evading

taxes. In particular, in this case, the individual takes home his full productivity Aj with
probability (1 − p (xt )), but is caught and loses all his current income with probability p (xt ).

Limited liability implies cjt ≥ 0 and the current behavior has no eﬀect on the continuation value

j
(σ ∗ ) given the anonymity assumption. This expression immediately establishes that the
βVt+1

max term will pick tax evasion, i.e., ztj = 0, if p (xt ) < τ t , as claimed in the lemma.
Since with tax evasion there is no government revenue, Lemma 1 implies that in equilibrium
we need to have the following incentive compatibility constraint for producers
p (xt ) ≥ τ t
to be satisfied. Alternatively, defining
π (τ ) ≡ p−1 (τ ) ,

(1)

producers’ incentive compatibility constraint can be expressed as:13
xt ≥ π (τ t ) .

(2)

This condition requires the number of bureaucrats exerting eﬀort to be greater than π (τ t ).
This constraint is suﬃcient to ensure that all individuals choose not to evade taxes.
It can be easily verified that since p (·) is strictly increasing, continuously diﬀerentiable
and strictly concave, π (·) defined in (1) is strictly increasing, continuously diﬀerentiable and
strictly convex.
Lemma 2 If
wt <

h
,
qt

(3)

then ejt = 0 for all j ∈ Xt , i.e., all bureaucrats will shirk at time t.
Proof. Write the payoﬀ of a bureaucrat j ∈ Xt at time t when the wage rate is wt and the
detection probability is qt as
j
Vtj = max {wt − h, (1 − qt ) wt } + Gt + βVt+1
(σ ∗ ) ,
13
This condition can also be interpreted as a “state capacity constraint” since, given the eﬀective size of the
bureaucracy, it determines the maximum tax rate.

13

j
where σ ∗ is the optimal policy, so that βVt+1
(σ ∗ ) is the discounted optimal continuation value

for the individual. The max operator incorporates two terms representing the payoﬀ to exerting
eﬀort and receiving the wage for sure, wt − h, and the payoﬀ to shirking. Since, by assumption,

bureaucrats cannot be fired for shirking and limited liability makes sure that cjt ≥ 0, the payoﬀ
to shirking is (1 − qt ) wt . Whenever wt < h/qt , the max operator will pick the second term, so

that we have ejt = 0 for all j ∈ Xt as claimed in the lemma.

Remark 1 In subsection 5.1 below, we will allow bureaucrats caught shirking to be fired from
bureaucracy. In this case, it is clear that the optimal contract involves firing a bureaucrat if he
is caught shirking. Given this, the condition in Lemma 2 will have to be forward-looking, taking
into account the future rents that the bureaucrat will lose if caught shirking. In particular,
imagine a stationary equilibrium, where today and in all future periods the tax rate is equal
to τ̂ , the wage rate for bureaucrats is ŵ, and the probability of getting caught is q̂, then the
necessary condition (3) would become
µ
¶
(1 − τ̂ ) AL
ŵ − h
ŵ − h
< q̂β
+ (1 − q̂) ŵ + β
,
1−β
1−β
1−β
since the left-hand side is what the individual would receive by exerting eﬀort at every date,
whereas the right-hand side is the payoﬀ to deviating for one period, and then switching
to exerting eﬀort from then on (implicitly using the one-step ahead deviation principle, see
Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991, Chapter 4). In particular, the right-hand side has the individual
getting caught with probability q̂, receiving nothing today and the wage of a low-skill producer
from then on, and not getting caught with probability 1 − q̂, in which case he receives ŵ today
and then receives the discounted version of the left-hand side (as he switches back to exerting
eﬀort). A bureaucrat who loses his job always receives the wage of a low-skill producer from
then on, since along the equilibrium path, there will be no further hiring into bureaucracy.
Rearranging terms, the above inequality can be expressed as:
ŵ < β (1 − τ̂ ) AL +

(1 − β (1 − q̂)) h
.
q̂

(4)

In a stationary equilibrium where bureaucrats are fired when caught shirking, condition (4) will
replace (3), and when it is satisfied, all bureaucrats will shirk. Correspondingly, the incentive
compatibility constraint, (5), below will change to the converse of this condition. We return
to a further analysis of this case in subsection 5.1.
If bureaucrats are expected to shirk, all individuals will evade taxes and there will be no
tax revenues. Consequently, the infrastructure investment K could not be financed and there
14

would be no production. Thus, the society also needs to satisfy the incentive compatibility
constraint of the bureaucrats given by
wt ≥

h
,
qt

(5)

where qt = q (It−1 ). This constraint is necessary and suﬃcient to ensure that all bureaucrats
choose to exert eﬀort. In addition, (poor) individuals must prefer to become bureaucrats. That
is, the participation constraint
wt ≥ (1 − τ t ) AL + h,

(6)

needs to be satisfied so that bureaucrats receive at least as much as they would obtain in
private production.
Remark 2 If rich agents could become bureaucrats, the equivalent participation constraint,
corresponding to (6), for rich agents would be
wt ≥ (1 − τ t ) AH + h.
Comparison of this inequality with condition (6) makes it clear that poor agents are always
more willing to enter bureaucracy than rich agents. Our assumption that rich agents cannot
become bureaucrats therefore enables us to avoid imposing explicit conditions to ensure that
this inequality is not satisfied and (6) is.
The above discussion, in particular Lemmas 1 and 2, immediately establishes the following
lemma (proof omitted):
Lemma 3 In any MPE, conditions (2), (5) and (6) must hold and ejt = 1 for all j ∈ Xt and
/ Xt and all t.
all t, and ztj = 1 for all j ∈

In other words, in any equilibrium the incentive compatibility constraints of producers
and bureaucrats and the participation constraint of bureaucrats are satisfied, and no producer
evades taxes and all bureaucrats exert eﬀort.
From Lemma 3 (and the fact that only poor agents become bureaucrats), it immediately
follows that, as long as the constraints (2) and (5) are satisfied, the government budget constraint can be written as:
K + Gt + wt Xt ≤ (1 − n) τ t AH + (n − Xt ) τ t AL ,

(7)

where the left-hand side is government expenditures, consisting of the investment in infrastructure, spending on public goods and bureaucrats’ wages, while the right-hand side is government
15

tax receipts collected from rich and poor agents. This expression takes into account that all
bureaucrats exert eﬀort and no producer evades taxes. Moreover, (7) highlights that in our
model, taxation reduces output through a particular general equilibrium mechanism; the government can raise taxes only by hiring bureaucrats and bureaucrats themselves do not produce
any output.
Finally, the following lemma is immediate and is stated without proof:
Lemma 4 Rich agents always vote for party R, i.e., for all j ∈ H, vtj = R, and poor producers
always vote for party P , i.e., for all j ∈ L and j ∈
/ Xt−1 , vtj = P .

4.3

Equilibria under Permanent Democracy and Nondemocracy

Equilibria under permanent democracy and permanent nondemocracy are of interest as a comparison to our main political environment, which involves the society starting as nondemocratic
and then transitioning to democracy. The following results are straightforward:
Proposition 1 Under permanent democracy, there exists a unique MPE. In this equilibrium,
at each t ≥ 0 dt = P and the following policy vector is implemented at each t > 0:
¡
¡ ¢
¢
It = 1, wt = 1 − τ D AL + h, Xt = π τ D ,

£
¡ ¢¤
£¡
¤ ¡ ¢
¢
Gt = GD ≡ (1 − n) τ D AH + n − π τ D τ D AL − 1 − τ D AL + h π τ D − K,

(8)

and τ D is the unique solution to the maximization problem:
max (1 − τ ) AL + G

(9)

τ ,G

subject to
£
¤
G = (1 − n) τ AH + [n − π (τ )] τ AL − (1 − τ ) AL + h π (τ ) − K.

Proof. By Lemma 4, for all j ∈ L, vtj = P . Under permanent democracy, the poor can
vote and form the majority starting at t = 0, thus dt = P for all t. Then the payoﬀ to the
decisive voter j 0 ∈ L can be written as
0

0

j
Vtj = (1 − τ ) At + Gt + βVt+1
(σ ∗ ) ,
0

j
(σ ∗ ) is the discounted optimal continuation
where again σ ∗ is the optimal policy and βVt+1
0

j
(σ ∗ ) is unaﬀected by current policies,
value for this individual. The continuation value βVt+1

16

thus the optimal policy can be determined as a solution to the following program:
max (1 − τ ) AL + G

(10)

τ ,w,X,I,G

subject to

max

½

π (τ ) ≤ X
¾
h
L
, (1 − τ ) A + h
≤ w
q (It )

G ≤ (1 − n) τ AH + [n − X] τ AL − wX − K
0 ≤ G.

It is evident that It = 1 relaxes the second constraint relative to It = 0, so will always be
chosen in all periods t ≥ 0. Moreover, there cannot be a solution in which any one of the
first three constraints is slack (since this would allow an increase in G, raising the value of the
ª
©
objective function), so we have X = π (τ ) and w = max h, (1 − τ ) AL + h = (1 − τ ) AL + h.

Substituting these equalities yields (9) for all periods where It = 1, i.e., for all t > 0. Strict
convexity of π (·) then ensures that τ D is uniquely defined.

Proposition 2 Under permanent nondemocracy, there exists a unique MPE. In this equilibrium, the following policy vector is implemented at each t > 0:
¡
¡ ¢
¢
It = 1, wt = 1 − τ N AL + h, Xt = π τ N , Gt = GN ≡ 0,

and τ N is the unique solution to the equation

¤
£
(1 − τ ) AL + h π (τ ) − (1 − n) τ AH − [n − π (τ )] τ AL + K = 0.

(11)

Proof. Under permanent nondemocracy, the rich retain political power forever. Then the
payoﬀ to the representative rich individual j 0 ∈ H can be written as
0

0

j
Vtj = (1 − τ ) AH + Gt + βVt+1
(σ ∗ ) ,
0

j
(σ ∗ ) is the discounted optimal continuation value for
where σ ∗ is the optimal policy and βVt+1
0

j
(σ ∗ ) is unaﬀected by current policies,
this individual. Because the continuation value βVt+1

17

the optimal policy can be determined as a solution to the following program:
max (1 − τ ) AH + G

(12)

τ ,w,X,I,G

subject to

max

½

π (τ ) ≤ X
¾
h
L
, (1 − τ ) A + h
≤ w
q (It )

G ≤ (1 − n) τ AH + [n − X] τ AL − wX − K
0 ≤ G.

It is again evident that It = 1 relaxes the second constraint relative to It = 0, so will always
be chosen. Moreover, the first three constraints must again hold as equalities, so we have
ª
©
X = π (τ ) and w = max h, (1 − τ ) AL + h = (1 − τ ) AL +h. Substituting for these equalities

in program (12), it follows immediately that G = 0, and the strict convexity of π (·) again
ensures the uniqueness of the solution to (11).
The main conclusion from both of these benchmark political environments is that the
politically decisive agents choose a policy vector consistent with their own interests, and this

always involves an eﬃcient organization of the state, i.e., It = 1 for all t ≥ 0. There is no reason
to make the state ineﬃcient. Consequently, both consolidated democratic and nondemocratic
regimes involve I = 1. Moreover, in both regimes the capacity of the state is fully utilized
in the sense that constraint (2) holds as equality and the minimum number of bureaucrats
necessary to prevent tax evasion are employed.

¢
¡
It is straightforward to see that the unique solution τ D , GD in (9) involves τ D > 0,

since infrastructure spending, K > 0, has to be financed (and for the same reason, τ N > 0
in Proposition 2). However, because raising further revenues involves the employment of
bureaucrats which is costly, it is possible that the solution to (9) involves GD = 0. If this were
the case, there would be no diﬀerence between the political bliss points of poor and rich agents
given in Propositions 1 and 2 and thus no interesting political conflict. Therefore, throughout
we are more interested in the case where the following condition is satisfied:
Condition 1 The solution to (9) involves GD > 0.
It can be verified that if the gap between AH and AL is small and π 0 (τ ) is large, this
condition will be violated. Therefore, this condition imposes that there is a certain degree of
inequality in society and raising taxes is not excessively costly, so that the poor would like
a higher level of public good provision than the rich. When Condition 1 is satisfied, it also
18

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
follows that τ D > τ N , and since π (·) is strictly increasing, π τ D > π τ N and the size of

the bureaucracy is larger in permanent democracy than in permanent nondemocracy.

4.4

Political Equilibrium with Regime Change

We now look at the more interesting case with regime change–i.e., where at date t = 0, the
rich are in power and from then on there will be elections. We start with a series of lemmas.
Our first result shows that with eﬃcient state institutions, the rich will choose their political
bliss point as in Proposition 2:
¡
¡ ¢
¢
Lemma 5 In an MPE, if dt = R and It = 1, then wt = 1 − τ N AL + h, Xt = π τ N ,
Gt = GN ≡ 0, and τ N is given by (11).

Proof. Given that It = 1, the solution to the equivalent of program (12) in the proof of
¡
¢
Proposition 2 for party R involves choosing the policy vector wt = 1 − τ N AL + h, Xt =
¡ ¢
π τ N , Gt = GN ≡ 0.
The next lemma establishes that the party representing the poor, party P , being elected

to oﬃce is an “absorbing state,” meaning that once the party of the poor is elected, the results
of Proposition 1 apply subsequently:
Lemma 6 If dt = P , then dt0 = P for all t0 ≥ t, and we have the following equilibrium policy
vector at all dates t0 > t:

¡
¡ ¢
¢
(13)
It = 1, wt = 1 − τ D AL + h, Xt = π τ D ,
£
¡
£¡
¤
¡
¢¤
¢
¢
Gt = GD ≡ (1 − n) τ D AH + n − π τ D τ D AL − 1 − τ D AL + h π τ D − K,

and τ D is given by (9).

Proof. The policy vector in (13) is the optimal policy of the citizens in permanent democracy (Proposition 1). Now suppose that party P is in power at time t, and suppose that it
chooses the policy vector specified in the lemma. Since this includes It = 1, the following
period, we start with It = 1 as part of the payoﬀ-relevant state vector. Suppose that σ ∗ is such
that v (I = 1 | B) = P . Then party P wins the majority at time t + 1. Alternatively suppose
that v (I = 1 | B) 6= P , but X < n − 1/2. Then, party P again wins the majority at time t + 1.
In both cases, repeating this argument for the next period shows that party P keeps power at
all dates and establishes the lemma.
To complete the proof we only need to rule out the case where v (I = 1 | B) = R and
X ≥ n − 1/2 (the proof to eliminate the case where bureaucrats randomize between the two
19

parties in a way to bring party R to power is identical). Since v (I = 1 | B) = R and I = 0
is costly for the rich (recall program (12) in the proof of Proposition 2), party R will choose
It = 1. Then from Lemma 5,
¡
¡ ¢
¢
wt = 1 − τ N AL + h, Xt = π τ N , Gt = GN ≡ 0.

This implies that the utility of the bureaucrat is the same as a poor producer. Then denoting
the utility of a bureaucrat supporting party d by V B (d), we have
¡

¢
1 − τ N AL + βV j (σ ∗ )
¡
¢
< 1 − τ D AL + GD + βV j (σ ∗ )

V B (R) =

= V B (P ) ,

where the inequality follows from the fact that the last term is the maximal utility of a poor
agent. Since this is also the utility that a bureaucrat will receive when party P is in power,
v (I = 1 | B) = R cannot be a best response, completing the proof of the lemma.
The intuition for this result is as follows. Once the party of the poor wins an election, they
will choose their preferred policy vector, which includes It = 1, and given an eﬃcient state,
bureaucrats will have no reason to support the rich party and the poor will continue to win
elections in all future periods and the organization of the state will continue to be eﬃcient.
An eﬃcient organization of the state ensures that bureaucrats receive no rents and receive the
same payoﬀ as poor producers. Thus they will also support party P , and the political bliss
point of the poor will be implemented in all future periods. This lemma also implies that when
It−1 = 1–i.e., when the state is eﬃcient–the rich will not be able to win a majority. This
is related to the basic idea of our approach: the rich can only convince bureaucrats to vote
for their party by committing to giving them rents and this can only be achieved when the
organization of the state is ineﬃcient, i.e., It−1 = 0.
We next investigate whether or not the rich may be able to convince the bureaucrats to
vote for their party starting with It−1 = 0. Since there is no commitment to policies, the party
of the rich, when in power, will choose policies in line with its (the rich agents’) preferences.
The next lemma characterizes these policies starting with It−1 = 0.
Lemma 7 Suppose that It−1 = 0, then wt = h/q0 . Moreover, if dt = R, then Gt = GE ≡ 0,

20

and if dt = P , then Gt = ĜD given by the solution to the following maximization program:
max (1 − τ ) AL + G

(14)

τ ,G

subject to
G = (1 − n) τ AH + [n − π (τ )] τ AL −

h
π (τ ) − K.
q0

Proof. That any party, when in power and inheriting It−1 = 0, will choose wt = h/q0
follows immediately from Lemma 3 (otherwise, the investment in infrastructure K cannot be
financed and there will be zero production). The fact that party R will choose Gt = GE ≡ 0
follows immediately from the program in (12) after imposing wt = h/q0 . To see that party P
will choose ĜD as in (14), it suﬃces to go back to the maximization problem (10), with the
additional restriction that wt = h/q0 .
Remark 3 As with the solution to the maximization problem (9), the solution to (14) may
involve ĜD = 0. With the same reasoning as there, when the level of inequality between the
rich and the poor is suﬃciently high, the solution to the program (14) will involve ĜD > 0.
The next lemma provides necessary conditions for the party of the rich to win an election
starting with It−1 = 0:
Lemma 8 In an MPE, dt = R, i.e., the rich will win the election at time t, if It−1 = 0,
(1 − q0 )
and

where GD is given by (8), ĜD

¡
¢
h
1−β D
> 1 − τ D AL + GD +
Ĝ ,
q0
β

1
Xt ≥ n − ,
2
is given by (14), and τ D is given by (9).

(15)

(16)

Proof. Lemma 6 establishes that It−1 = 0 is necessary. Now suppose that It−1 = 0 and
consider the scenario in which party R chooses It = 0 and Xt ≥ Xt−1 (so that no current
bureaucrat will be fired). Consider the case in which individual j ∈ Xt is pivotal and chooses
vtj = R in all future periods. Then, his net per-period payoﬀ will be wt − h = (1 − q0 ) h/q0 ,
and give him a lifetime utility of
Vtj =

1 (1 − q0 ) h
.
1−β
q0

(17)

In contrast, if j ∈ Xt were to choose vtj = P when pivotal, his value would be
Vtj =

h
j
− h + ĜD + β V̂t+1
.
q0
21

(18)

j
where V̂t+1
is the continuation value when party P is in power from then on, given by
j
=
V̂t+1

¢
¤
1 £¡
1 − τ D AL + GD .
1−β

This last expression incorporates the fact that if the poor are in power, they reform the
bureaucracy, setting It = 1, and that I = 1 is an absorbing state.
The comparison of (17) and (18) gives (15)–as a weak inequality–as a necessary condition
for bureaucrats to support party R when they are pivotal. Condition (16) is also necessary
since, if it were violated, bureaucrats would not be pivotal and party R would receive less than
half of the votes even with all of bureaucrats voting vtj = R. This argument establishes that
both (15) and (16) are necessary. Moreover, (15)–as a strict inequality–and (16) are also
suﬃcient to ensure dt = R, since when both of these conditions hold, it is a weakly dominant
strategy for bureaucrats to vote for party R whenever It−1 = 0 and the coalition of bureaucrats
and the rich have a majority.
Lemma 8 determines the conditions under which the bureaucrats will support party R
(a rich agent running for oﬃce) and will be numerous enough to give them the majority.
Condition (16) requires the size of the bureaucracy to be suﬃcient to give the majority to
party R when all bureaucrats vote with the rich. Nevertheless, n − 1/2 may not be the actual
size of bureaucracy. In particular, at X = n − 1/2, the government budget may not balance.
To ensure that it does, we need to consider two cases separately.
Let us first define τ E as the tax rate that party R would choose as its unconstrained optimal
policy to finance the investment in infrastructure, K, given that bureaucratic wages are equal
to w = h/q0 . Clearly, τ E is given by the unique solution to the equation
£
¡ ¢¤
¡ ¢ h
− (1 − n) τ E AH − n − π τ E τ E AL + K = 0.
π τE
q0

(19)

In other words, τ E balances the government budget when the minimum number of bureaucrats
¡ ¢
necessary to avoid tax evasion, X = π τ E , are employed.
¡ ¢
The first case corresponds to the one where π τ E ≥ n − 1/2, so that the unconstrained
optimal size of bureaucracy for party R is also suﬃcient to make sure that condition (16) is
satisfied and the rich have a majority.

¡ ¢
The second case applies when this inequality does not hold, i.e., when π τ E < n − 1/2.

In this case, the unconstrained optimal policy for the rich would not satisfy (16), and party
R cannot win the election with the minimum number of bureaucrats. Instead, party R can
win an election only if X ≥ n − 1/2, and with this larger size of bureaucracy, budget balance
22

requires the greater tax rate τ̂ E given by the solution to
µ
¶
1 h
1
n−
− (1 − n) τ̂ E AH − τ̂ E AL + K = 0.
(20)
2 q0
2
¡ ¢
It can be verified that whenever n − 1/2 > π τ E , we also have τ̂ E > τ E , and whenever
¡ ¢
n − 1/2 ≤ π τ E , τ̂ E ≤ τ E . This implies that the size of the bureaucracy necessary for the
¡ ¢
rich to form a winning coalition is the maximum of π τ E and n − 1/2, and correspondingly,
ª
©
the tax rate that party R needs to set is max τ E , τ̂ E .
The results so far have provided the necessary conditions for the rich to be able to generate

suﬃcient votes from the bureaucrats to remain in power. It remains to check whether the rich
prefer to pursue this strategy and commit to an ineﬃcient state in order to maintain political
power in democracy. The following lemma answers this question:
Lemma 9 Suppose that condition (15) holds. Then the rich prefer to set It = 0 for all t if the
following condition is satisfied:
either τ E ≥ τ̂ E ,
or

τE

E

< τ̂ ,

¡

and
and

¢
τ D − τ E AH > GD ,

¡
¢ H
E
1
−
τ̂
A > ¢
¢
¤
£¡
¡
(1 − β) 1 − τ E AH + β 1 − τ D AH + GD ,

(21)

where GD is given by (8), τ D is given by (9), τ E is given by (19), and τ̂ E is given by (20).
Proof. Suppose that bureaucrats play v (I = 0 | B) = R (that is, they will vote for party
R whenever the state is ineﬃcient). Under the rule of party P , the per period return of the
¡
¢
rich is 1 − τ D AH + GD . When τ E ≥ τ̂ E , party R can remain in power by choosing I = 0
¡
¢
and obtain the per period return 1 − τ E AH , which establishes the first part (21).

For the second part, note that party R can always choose its myopic optimum when in

power. This will give a representative rich agent utility

¡
¢
Here 1 − τ E AH

¢
¡
V R = 1 − τ E AH +

¢
¤
β £¡
1 − τ D AH + GD .
1−β
£¡
¢
¤
is current consumption, and β 1 − τ D AH + GD / (1 − β) is the contin-

uation value, which follows from the observation that since, by assumption, τ E < τ̂ E , we have
¡ ¢
n − 1/2 > π τ E and thus party R will lose the election at the next date. Then Lemma 6
implies that party P will win all elections in all future dates. Alternatively, party R can choose
X = n − 1/2 and guarantee to be in power forever, but at the expense of taxing the rich at
the higher rate τ̂ E . This will give a representative rich agent utility
¡
¢
1 − τ̂ E AH
R
.
V̂ =
1−β
23

Comparison of V̂ R with V R in the previous expression gives the second part of (21).
Remark 4 If Condition 1 were not satisfied, the conditions in Lemma 9 could never be satisfied. In particular, when Condition 1 does not hold, we have GD = 0 and τ D = τ E , so
that neither part of condition (21) could hold. This is a direct consequence of the fact that a
significant conflict in policies between the rich and the poor is necessary for the rich to set up
an ineﬃcient system of patronage politics.
Now putting all these lemmas together we obtain:
Proposition 3 Consider the political environment with emerging democracy. If conditions
(15) and (21) hold, then there exists a unique MPE. In this equilibrium, the rich elite choose
It = 0 for all t ≥ 0, the rich party R always remains in power and the following policies are
implemented:
© ¡ ¢
ª
h
, Xt = max π τ E , n − 1/2 ,
q0
ª
©
= GE ≡ 0, and τ t = max τ E , τ̂ E ,

wt =
Gt

where τ E is given by (19) and τ̂ E is given by (20).

If, on the other hand, one or both of conditions (15) and (21) hold with the reverse inequality, the unique MPE involves It = 1 in the initial period, and for all t ≥ 1, dt = P and the
unique policy vector is
¡ ¢
¢
1 − τ D AL + h, Xt = π τ D ,
£
¡ ¢¤
£¡
¤ ¡ ¢
¢
= GD ≡ (1 − n) τ D AH + n − π τ D τ D AL − 1 − τ D AL + h π τ D − K,

wt =
Gt

¡

and τ D is given by (9).

Proof. The first part of the proposition follows immediately from combining Lemma 8
and Lemma 9, which provide the conditions, summarized by (15) and (21), under which the
party of the rich, R, can convince the bureaucrats to vote for them, and this is desirable for
the rich relative to living under the rule of party P . When (15) or (21) does not hold, then
party P is in power and the second part of the proposition follows immediately from Lemma
6 and Proposition 1.
Remark 5 Proposition 3 does not cover the case in which one of conditions (15) and (21)
holds as equality; in this case the MPE is no longer unique. It is straightforward to see that
24

in such a case, either the rich or the poor party could receive the majority of the votes, or the
rich could be indiﬀerent between maintaining an ineﬃcient and an eﬃcient state. We do not
describe the equilibrium in these cases to avoid repetition and to save space.
Remark 6 It can also be verified that the set of parameter values where It = 0 emerges as an
equilibrium in Proposition 3 is nonempty. A straightforward way of doing this is to consider
high values of β as in the proof of Proposition 5 in the Appendix.
Proposition 3 is our first major result. It establishes the possibility that the rich elite,
who are in power temporarily at time t = 0, may choose an ineﬃcient state organization
and a large (ineﬃcient) bureaucracy as a way of credibly committing to providing rents to
bureaucrats. This enables them to create a majority coalition consisting of themselves and
the bureaucrats, and thus capture democratic politics. This coalition implements policies
that support low redistribution and low provision of public goods, but creates high rents for
bureaucrats. Perhaps more interestingly, after t = 1, even when the society is democratic, the
ineﬃcient state institutions persist and the rule of the rich continue. This is in spite of the
fact that at any date these ineﬃcient institutions can be reformed at no cost and made more
eﬃcient. The reasoning is related to the formation of the coalition between the rich and the
bureaucrats in the first place. The rich realize that they will be able to maintain power only
by keeping an ineﬃcient state structure and creating suﬃcient rents for bureaucrats. If these
rents disappear, bureaucrats will ally themselves with the poor, since their net income will be
the same as the net income of poor producers (recall Lemmas 5 and 6). It is precisely the
presence of ineﬃcient state institutions creating rents for the bureaucrats that induces them to
support the policies of the rich. Recognizing this, when in power the rich choose to maintain
the ineﬃcient state structure. At the next date, the party representing the rich receives the
support of the bureaucrats and the rich; consequently, the rich remain in power and the cycle
continues. The model therefore generates a political economy theory for both the emergence
and the persistence of ineﬃcient state institutions.14
It is also noteworthy that even though taxes are lower in the equilibrium with ineﬃcient
state than they would have been under permanent democracy (recall Proposition 1 and Lemma
9), the size of the bureaucracy can be greater than under permanent democracy. This could be
the case when the rich elite hire more bureaucrats than necessary for preventing tax evasion
14
The nature of persistence here is diﬀerent from the persistence of policies arising in Coate and Morris (1999),
Hassler et al. (2003), or Gomes and Jehiel (2005), because the focus is not on persistence of a certain set of
collective decisions within a given institutional framework, but on the persistence of the ineﬃciency of state
institutions.

25

in order to create a majority in favor of the persistence of the ineﬃcient state–i.e., in the case
¡ ¢
where X > π τ E . In particular, note that bureaucracy will be more numerous under the
control of the elite than in democracy whenever
¡ ¢
π τ D < n − 1/2.

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
Since in this case equation (21) implies that τ E < τ D , we must also have π τ E < π τ D <

n − 1/2 and thus

¡ ¢
X > π τE .

Consequently, the rich not only choose an ineﬃcient state organization, but they also choose
overemployment of bureaucrats, in the sense that bureaucracy is now unnecessarily large and
the number of bureaucrats is strictly greater than that necessary for tax inspection. The
capture of democratic politics by the rich elite therefore creates an ineﬃcient state, with
poorly monitored and overpaid bureaucrats, and also leads to a situation in which the capacity
of the state is not fully utilized. These ineﬃciencies imply that the allocation of resources in
a captured democracy is worse than in a nondemocracy (or than in a perfectly functioning
democracy). Naturally, these ineﬃciencies have a political rationale, which is to increase the
number of bureaucrats that will vote for the party aligned with the rich, so that the rich can
maintain political power in the future.
Interestingly, because creating an ineﬃcient bureaucracy is more costly than creating an
eﬃcient one (which is smaller and gives bureaucrats no rents), the citizens are worse oﬀ in
ª
©
a nonconsolidated (emerging) democracy, where they are taxed at rate max τ E , τ̂ E , than

they would be under a consolidated nondemocracy, where they are only taxed at rate τ N <
©
ª
max τ E , τ̂ E . Moreover, the rich are also worse oﬀ in this equilibrium than they would be in
a permanent nondemocracy, since they are paying higher wages to bureaucrats and possibly
employing an excessive number of them.

4.5

Comparative Statics

We next investigate the conditions under which the equilibrium involves the emergence and
persistence of ineﬃcient state institutions. The following proposition establishes that a certain
degree of inequality between the poor and the rich (i.e., a high level of AH /AL ), a suﬃciently
high discount factor, β, and intermediate bureaucratic rents, (1 − q0 ) h/q0 , are necessary for
the emergence of ineﬃcient state institutions.
¢
¡
Proposition 4 Consider an economy characterized by the parameters β, n, AL , AH , K, h, q0
and the function p (·). Holding all other parameters constant, we have:
26

1. there exists a > 1 such that if AH /AL ≤ a, then the state is always eﬃcient, i.e., It = 1;
2. there exist a0 > 1 and β̄ ∈ (0, 1) such that as long as AH /AL ≥ a0 , β ≤ β̄ implies It = 1;
¡ ¢
3. there exists θ > 0 and θ such that if (1 − q0 ) h/q0 ∈
/ θ, θ , then It = 1.

Proof. For the first part simply recall Remark 4; inspection of the maximization problem

(9) immediately shows that as AL → AH , Condition 1 will be violated and the conditions in
(21) cannot hold. Then the result follows from Lemma 9 and Proposition 3.
For the second part, recall from Remark 3 that some minimal level of inequality, say
AH /AL ≥ a0 , is necessary for ĜD > 0. Suppose this is the case. From Proposition 3, condition

(15) is necessary for It = 0. Since ĜD > 0, there exists β 0 ∈ (0, 1) such that (1 − q0 ) h/q0 =
β 0 ĜD / (1 − β 0 ). Since the sum of the other terms on the right hand side of (15) is positive,

this implies that there exists β̄ < β 0 such that for all β ≤ β̄ (15) will be violated and thus
It = 1.
For the third part, note that bureaucratic rents are equal to h/q0 −h = (1 − q0 ) h/q0 , which
needs to be greater than or equal to the right hand side of (15). Let this right hand side be
denoted by θ (and note that θ > 0). If (1 − q0 ) h/q0 < θ, then (15) will be violated and It = 1.
This implies that we need (1 − q0 ) h/q0 ≥ θ > 0. Next observe from (19) that there exists a
value of (1 − q0 ) h/q0 , say θ0 , such that τ̂ E = 1. It is evident that when τ̂ E = 1, condition
(21) cannot be satisfied, thus It = 1. This implies that for It = 0, we need h/q0 ≤ θ0 and thus
(1 − q0 ) h/q0 ≤ θ.
The first part of the proposition implies that a certain level of inequality is necessary for
the emergence of an ineﬃcient state. This is intuitive; with limited inequality, democracy
will not be redistributive and it will not be worthwhile for the rich to set up an ineﬃcient
bureaucracy in order to keep the poor away from power. The second part implies that the
high discount factor is also necessary for the emergence of the ineﬃcient state. This follows
because bureaucrats vote for party R as an “investment”, that is, to obtain higher returns in
the future. Instead, if they deviate and vote for party P , in the current period they receive
both the same high wages (since It = 0) and the positive level of public good provided by party
P , ĜD > 0. If their discount factor were very small, it would be impossible for rich agents
to convince bureaucrats to support their party.15 Finally, the third part of the proposition
implies that bureaucratic rents need to take intermediate values. If bureaucratic rents are very
15

Robinson (2001) and Acemoglu and Robinson (2006b) also obtain the result that higher discount factors
may lead to greater ineﬃciencies. However, in these models the source of ineﬃciency is very diﬀerent. In
particular, ineﬃcient political equilibria arise when pivotal agents–elites or rulers–are suﬃciently patient and
thus take ineﬃcient actions in order to secure their future political survival.

27

small, bureaucrats would not support the party of the rich. If they are very large, it becomes
prohibitively costly for the rich to control democratic politics.
While Proposition 4 shows that a certain degree of inequality is necessary for It = 0, it does
not establish that inequality has a monotonic eﬀect on the likelihood of an ineﬃcient state.
The next proposition establishes this result under somewhat more restrictive assumptions.
In this proposition, by greater inequality we mean a mean-preserving spread of the income
distribution in the economy, i.e., a simultaneous increase in AH and decrease in AL such that
mean income, Y = (1 − n) AH + nAL remains constant.
Proposition 5 Suppose that π (τ ) is log-concave in τ and τ D given by (9) satisfies τ D <
¡ ¢
1 − π τ D < 1. Then there exists β̃ ∈ (0, 1) such that for all β ≥ β̃, greater inequality makes

the ineﬃcient state equilibrium, i.e., It = 0, more likely.
Proof. See the Appendix.

Remark 7 The condition that π (τ ) is log-concave is not very restrictive. For example, any
p (x) that takes the power function form, i.e., p (x) = P0 xα for P0 > 0 and α ∈ (0, 1), satisfies
¡ ¢
this condition. The condition that τ D < 1 − π τ D < 1 is also natural; if this condition were
¢
¡
violated, we would have that the utility of the poor in democracy 1 − τ D AL + GD would be
non-increasing in AL (see the Appendix).

In addition to generalizing the first part of Proposition 4, this result implies that taxes (and
public spending) can be higher in more equal societies, because unequal societies are more likely
to create ineﬃcient bureaucracies to limit taxation and public spending. This result therefore
presents an alternative explanation to the often-discussed negative cross-sectional correlation
between inequality and redistribution (e.g. Perotti, 1996, Bénabou, 2000).

5

Extensions

In this section, we discuss a number of extensions of our benchmark model. First, we allow
bureaucrats to be fired when they are caught shirking, so that the incentive compatibility constraint of bureaucrats is forward-looking and takes into account the rents that a bureaucrat
will lose when he gets caught not exerting eﬀort. Second, we allow a richer political environment where each individual can run for oﬃce (form a party) as a citizen-candidate, so that
bureaucrats can also form their own party and compete against the party of the poor and the
rich. Third, we consider the case where the moral hazard problem of bureaucrats arises from
their temptation to accept bribes that might be oﬀered by taxpayers.
28

5.1

Equilibrium When Bureaucrats Can Be Fired

The main result of the previous section, Proposition 3, was derived under the assumption that
bureaucrats cannot be fired when they are caught shirking. This simplified the analysis by
enabling us to write the incentive compatibility constraint of bureaucrats in the simple form
of condition (5). As discussed in Remark 1 this was mainly for expositional reasons. We now
allow bureaucrats to be fired when they are caught shirking. It is clear that from the viewpoint
of discouraging shirking, a contract which commits to firing bureaucrats when they are caught
shirking is optimal. The discussion in Remark 1 establishes that, in a stationary equilibrium,
the incentive compatibility constraint of bureaucrats, the equivalent of (5), in this case, would
be:
(1 − β (1 − q̂)) h
.
(22)
q̂
Given this condition, all of the results from the previous section apply with appropriate modŵ ≥ β (1 − τ̂ ) AL +

ifications. In particular we have (proof omitted):
Lemma 10 Consider the environment where bureaucrats can be fired for shirking. Then in
¡
¢
any MPE, if dt = R and It−1 = 0, we have wt = β 1 − τ̃ E AL + (1 − β (1 − q0 )) h/q0 and

Gt = GE ≡ 0, where τ̃ E is the solution to
∙
¸
¢
¡
(1 − β (1 − q0 )) h
λm β 1 − τ̃ E AL +
− (1 − n) τ̃ E AH − [n − λm ] τ̃ E AL + K = 0
q0
© ¡ ¢
ª
where λm ≡ max π τ̃ E , n − 1/2 .

(23)

Moreover, we have the following generalization of Lemma 9 (proof omitted):

Lemma 11 Consider the environment where bureaucrats can be fired for shirking. Then in
any MPE, the rich will win the election at time t only if there is an ineﬃcient state, i.e.,
It−1 = 0; if bureaucrats prefer to support the party of the rich, i.e., if
¢
¢
¡
¡
(1 − β) (1 − q0 )
1−β D
Ĝ ,
h > 1 − τ D AL + GD +
(24)
β 1 − τ̃ E AL +
q0
β
and if the rich-bureaucrat coalition has the majority, i.e., if
1
(25)
Xt ≥ n − ,
2
where τ̃ E is given by (23), GD is given by (8), τ D is given by (9), and ĜD is given by the
solution to
max (1 − τ ) AL + G
τ ,G

subject to

∙
¸
¡
¢ L
h
E
G = (1 − n) τ A + [n − π (τ )] τ A − β 1 − τ̃ A + (1 − β (1 − q0 ))
π (τ ) − K.
q0
H

L

29

Furthermore, the rich prefer this equilibrium and choose It = 0 at time t only if
¡

¢
τ D − τ̃ E AH > GD .

(26)

These two lemmas give the following analogue to Proposition 3:
Proposition 6 Consider the political environment with emerging democracy and suppose that
bureaucrats can be fired if caught shirking. Then, if conditions (24) and (26) hold, the unique
MPE is one in which the rich elite choose It = 0 in the initial period and for all t thereafter,
the rich party always remains in power and the following policies are implemented at all dates:
¡
© ¡ ¢
¢
ª
wt = β 1 − τ̃ E AL + (1 − β (1 − q0 )) h/q0 , Xt = max π τ̃ E , n − 1/2 , Gt = GE ≡ 0, and
τ t = τ̃ E , where τ̃ E is given by (23).

If one or both of conditions (24) and (26) hold with the reverse inequality, the unique MPE
involves It = 1 in the initial period, and for all t ≥ 1, dt = P and the unique policy vector
¡
¡ ¢
£
¡ ¢¤
¢
wt = 1 − τ D AL + h, Xt = π τ D , Gt = GD ≡ (1 − n) τ D AH + n − π τ D τ D AL − K −
¤ ¡ ¢
£¡
¢
1 − τ D AL + h π τ D , and τ D as given by (9).
Proof. Combining Lemma 10 and Lemma 11 provides the conditions, (24) and (26),

under which the party of the rich, R, can convince the bureaucrats to vote for them, and this
is desirable for the rich relative to living under the rule of party P . When instead (24) or (26),
or both, do not hold, then party P is in power and the second part of the proposition follows
immediately from Lemma 6 and Proposition 1.
Proposition 6 demonstrates that the main results from Proposition 3 generalize to the
environment where bureaucrats can be fired if caught shirking. One important diﬀerence is
worth noting, however. In our main analysis, Proposition 4 showed that a higher discount
factor, β, makes the emergence of an ineﬃcient state more likely. Instead, when bureaucrats
can be fired, the relationship between the discount factor and the emergence of ineﬃcient states
is more complex. Higher β again increases the importance that bureaucrats attach to future
rents, but it also reduces the level of rents, because being fired from bureaucracy becomes more
costly.

5.2

Political Equilibrium Citizen-Candidates

The previous analysis limited the political system under democracy to a two-party competition
between P and R, the two parties representing the interests of the poor and the rich. We
justified this by assuming that bureaucrats are not allowed to run for oﬃce. Even if bureaucrats
are not allowed to run for oﬃce, it is possible that a party representing their interest might
30

form. If such a party forms, bureaucrats may vote for that party, and the coalition between
the rich and the bureaucrats, choosing low public good provision and low taxes, may not
materialize. We now investigate whether in general we expect this to be the case or not when
multiple parties can enter the political system.
We follow Osborne and Slivinski’s (1996) and Besley and Coate’s (1997) citizen-candidate
model, where each individual agent can run as a candidate and upon election chooses his mostpreferred policy vector. This setup is quite similar to the one we used above, since parties could
not make credible policy promises and the policy vector was chosen after a politician (party)
was elected oﬃce. The problem with the citizen-candidate models in general is that when more
than two parties compete, coordination among the citizens regarding which party has a chance
to win the election is important for the outcomes and typically lead to multiple equilibria in the
voting stage. To avoid these problems, we consider the following modification of the standard
citizen-candidate model:
1. Each individual can decide to form a party and run for oﬃce, and this has cost ε, which
is taken to be small (in particular, we will consider the case where ε ↓ 0). Individuals derive no
utility from coming to power, but simply benefit from being in power by implementing policies
that are in line with their interests.
2. Given all parties that are running for oﬃce, individuals vote using ballots with transferable votes, meaning that each individual ranks all parties in strict order of preference. In
particular, the vote of individual j can be represented as vtj = i1 i2 i3 , where i1 , i2 and i3 are
distinct elements of {R, P, B}, e.g., vtj = RBP . In the first stage, parties are allocated votes
according to the first preferences of the voters. Then as is standard with this type of voting
rule, the party that gets the lowest fraction of votes is eliminated, and its votes are allocated
to the second-ranked choice of the voters who had originally voted for this party. This process
continues until one of the parties has a majority.
To simplify the discussion, in this section we assume that bureaucrats cannot be fired if
caught shirking, so the incentive compatibility constraint for bureaucrats is given by (5)–
though this has no eﬀect on any of the results in the section.
Given this setup, the notion of Markov Perfect Equilibrium is modified accordingly. The
analysis in this case is still tractable thanks to the following series of lemmas:
Lemma 12 Truthful ranking is a weakly dominant strategy for each individual.
Proof. The transferable votes imply that at any stage of the elimination process, either an
individual is pivotal, has a choice between two options, and thus is better oﬀ ranking his more
31

preferred outcome above a less preferred outcome. Alternatively, the individual is not pivotal,
any choice is a best response. This establishes that truthful ranking is weakly dominant.
Lemma 13 In any MPE, there will never be more than one party operated by an individual
of the same group. Thus the maximum number of parties is three.
Proof. The result follows since the policies chosen by two parties run by two poor agents
(or two rich agent or two bureaucrats) will be identical. Moreover, from Lemma 12, each
agent ranks parties truthfully, thus the addition of a new party will not change the equilibrium
probability that a party run by a poor individual, a rich individual or a bureaucrat wins the
election. Thus conditional on a party run by a poor agent existing, there is no point for any
other poor agent to incur the cost ε > 0 and form a party.
Lemma 13 then enables us to simply look at the (truthful) preference ranking of each
individual over at three parties {P, R, B}, corresponding to parties run by a poor individual,
a rich individual and a bureaucrat (there is no source of confusion in this notation, since
there can at most be one party run by a poor agent, one run by a rich agent, and one run
by a bureaucrat). To do this, we need to know the policies that will be chosen by the three
types of parties. Our previous analysis already establishes the policies that will be chosen by
parties P and R (provided that party R is trying to come to oﬃce by attracting the votes
of bureaucrats). We therefore only need to look at the policy choice of a party run by a
bureaucrat. The following lemma characterizes this choice:
Lemma 14 Taking future election results as given, the party dt = B would choose the following
©
¡ ¢ª
¡
¢
policy vector: Gt = 0, Xt = min Xt−1 , π τ B , and τ B , wB such that
wB = arg max w
τ ,w

subject to
min {Xt−1 , π (τ )} w + K ≤ (1 − n) τ AH + [n − min {Xt−1 , π (τ )}] τ AL .
Proof. This immediately follows by writing the program to maximize the return to a
bureaucrat (without allowing firing of existing bureaucrats):
max

τ ,w,Xt ,I,G

32

w+G

subject to

max

½

min {Xt−1 , π (τ )} ≤ X
¾
h
L
, (1 − τ ) A + h
≤ w
q (It )

G ≤ (1 − n) τ AH + [n − X] τ AL − wX − K
0 ≤ G.

Intuitively, bureaucrats would maximize their wages subject to the government budget
constraint. Notice that Lemma 14 applies taking the results of future elections as given. If the
current bureaucratic government could influence the outcome of future elections, this could
©
¡ ¢ª
be beneficial for it only by increasing Xt above min Xt−1 , π τ B , which would (from the
government budget constraint) make this policy vector even less attractive to poor and rich
agents.
The key to the results in this section is the following observation: because a bureaucratic
government will maximize wages paid to bureaucrats (and provide no public goods), it yields
a lower utility to poor agents than a rich government would do. As a result, we will see that a
bureaucratic government will never get elected. To show this more formally, let us denote the
vote of individual j at time t by vtj , which is a ranking over {P, R, B}. For example, vtj = P RB
means that the individual ranks the poor party first, the rich party second in the bureaucratic
party last.
We now have the following rankings for individuals:
Lemma 15 If j ∈ H, then vtj = RP B.

If j ∈ L and j ∈
/ X , then vtj = P RB.

If j ∈ X , then vtj = BRP .

Proof. We have already established that voters rank parties truthfully, so that all voters
rank their own party first. Assuming that party R implements the policy characterized in
Proposition (3) to attract the bureaucrats, we have that bureaucrats indeed prefer the rich to
the poor as second choice; hence, if j ∈ X , then vtj = BRP . Moreover, the poor prefer the rich
to the bureaucrats since neither of them oﬀers any public good, but the rich tax less than the
bureaucrats. This follows since both the rich and the bureaucrats choose to finance K, and
party B chooses a wage wB for bureaucrats higher than the wage h/q0 that the bureaucrats
get if the rich are in power. Hence, if j ∈ L and j ∈
/ X , then vtj = P RB. Finally, the second
33

choice of the rich is for the poor, both because the poor would provide a positive amount of
the public good rather than zero as the bureaucrats would, and because the poor would tax
less then the bureaucrats given that the marginal cost of taxation for the poor is positive, and
zero for the bureaucrats (who are not taxed by assumption). It follows that if j ∈ H, then
vtj = RP B.

Lemma 15 implies that the poor, when they cannot have a majority by themselves, will
support the rich party, thus as long as the bureaucrats are not in majority by themselves, i.e.,
Xt < 1/2 and the rich pursue the policy in Proposition 3, we will have dt = R. This implies
that the rich can continue to use same political strategies as in the previous section to control
political decision-making in democracy.
Now combining the previous lemmas, we have the following proposition, which mirrors
Proposition 3.
Proposition 7 Consider the political environment with emerging democracy and free political
¡ ¢
entry by citizen candidates. Suppose ε ↓ 0 that and that conditions (15) and (21) and π τ E <

1/2, where τ E is defined by (19) above. Then, in any MPE of the citizen-candidate political

game, only a party run by a rich agent is active. The unique equilibrium policy vector is given
ª
ª
© ¡ ¢
©
by It = 0, wt = h/q0 , Xt = max π τ E , n − 1/2 , Gt = GE ≡ 0, and τ t = max τ E , τ̂ E ,

for all t, where τ̂ E is given by (20).

¡ ¢
If one or both of conditions (15) and (21) holds with the reverse inequality and π τ D <

1/2, where τ D is defined by (9), then the unique MPE involves only a party run by a poor

agent is active, and the unique equilibrium policy vector involves It = 1 for all t, and for all
¡
¡ ¢
£
¡ ¢¤
¢
t ≥ 1, wt = 1 − τ D AL + h, Xt = π τ D , Gt = GD ≡ (1 − n) τ D AH + n − π τ D τ D AL −
¤ ¡ ¢
£¡
¢
1 − τ D AL + h π τ D − K.
Proof. This proposition can be proved by backward induction. First, suppose that con-

ditions (15) and (21) hold. Then, from Lemma 15, when X < 1/2, the bureaucratic party
will never win an election. The assumption that X−1 = ∅ implies that in the initial period
¡ ¢
X−1 < 1/2, and the assumption that π τ E < 1/2 ensure that X < 1/2 continues to be the

case when the rich party is in power. Therefore, when the rich party is in power, no bureau-

crat incurs the cost ε ↓ 0 to form a party, and thus bureaucrats support party R by the same
argument as in the proof of Proposition 3. Next, knowing that bureaucrats support party R,
no poor agent incurs the cost ε ↓ 0 to compete against party R as long as party R is choosing
the policy in Proposition 3 (if they did deviate from this policy, then a poor party can win an
election, and thus a poor agent will find it beneficial to enter and form a party since ε ↓ 0;
34

thus despite the fact that party P would not be running, party R has to adopt the same policy
vector as in Proposition 3). Finally, since ε ↓ 0, it cannot be an equilibrium for no rich agents
to form a party, since such a party would create strictly positive gains for each rich agent, and
the cost of creating a party is ε ↓ 0.
The proof of the cases where one or both of conditions (15) and (21) hold with the reverse
inequality is similar.
This proposition therefore shows that our main results regarding the use of an ineﬃcient
state as a way by the rich elite to control the democratic political process continue to apply
even when the political structure is enriched to allow free entry by citizen-candidates of any
occupation. The additional insights that is interesting in this case is that when the poor
producers prefer to support the party of the rich, R, rather than the party of the bureaucrats,
B, since the latter would impose high taxes and provide no public goods (spending all the
proceeds on bureaucratic wages).

5.3

Bureaucratic Corruption

We now briefly discuss an extension of our basic model in which the moral hazard problem on
the side of bureaucrats is not related to their eﬀort, but to whether or not they accept bribes
from producers evading taxes. This source of moral hazard problem is arguably as important
as the eﬀort choice of bureaucrats. Moreover, we will see below that it leads to an interesting
pattern of de facto regressive taxation as a result of successful patronage politics by the rich
elite.
The economic and political environment is similar to the baseline version of the model with
a two-party system. The only diﬀerence is that the bureaucrats no longer have an eﬀort choice.
Instead, producers that have evaded taxes can pay a bribe b ≥ 0 to the bureaucrat inspecting
them in order to avoid paying taxes.
Similar to the baseline model, we allow for two levels of monitoring eﬃciency, described by
the state variable It ∈ {0, 1}. When I = 1, there is an eﬃcient organization of the state and
corruption is detected with probability q (I = 1) = 1. When I = 0, the state organization is
ineﬃcient and corruption is detected with probability q (I = 0) = q0 < 1. We make a number of
assumptions to simplify the exposition. First, we assume that a bureaucrat caught accepting
bribes loses his wage and the bribe, but the punishment is limited to only one period; the
producer paying the bribes loses the bribe but receives no other punishment. Second, all bribe
payments and other income confiscated are lost and thus do not enter the government budget
constraint. Third, we assume that after matching with a bureaucrat, the producer has all the
35

bargaining power and makes a take-it-or-leave-it bribe oﬀer to the bureaucrat. All of these
assumptions can be relaxed without changing our main results.
Finally, we assume that each bureaucrat can be matched with at most one producer and
that, for the relevant part of the parameter values, p(x) < x/ (1 − x). Note that the function
p(x) is concave while x/ (1 − x) is convex and both are equal to zero for x = 0. Therefore,
there is a range for x ∈ [0, xm ] such that p(x) ≥ x/ (1 − x). We assume that xm is lower than
the minimum size of the bureaucracy necessary to finance the infrastructure K, which ensures
that the region where p(x) ≥ x/ (1 − x) is irrelevant for the equilibrium.
Let us start with the case where the state is ineﬃcient so that q = q0 and characterize the
most preferred policies of the rich. The participation constraint of the bureaucrat is slightly
diﬀerent from (6), since there is no cost of eﬀort. It requires that
wt ≥ (1 − τ t ) AL .

(27)

The incentive compatibility constraint for bureaucrats (5) is now replaced by the following
“no bribe constraint”:
wt ≥ (1 − q0 ) (wt + bt ) ,

(28)

where bt is the bribe oﬀered to the bureaucrat by a producer. Intuitively, the right hand
side of (28) represents the expected return of a bureaucrat that accepts a bribe bt , given by
the sum of the wage and the bribe, weighted by the probability of not being detected. If
condition (28) does not hold, it is not possible to prevent the corruption of bureaucrats by
producers.16 Condition (28) implies that, given the public sector wage wt , only bribes higher
than a threshold b (wt ) will be accepted, where
b (w) ≡

q0
w.
1 − q0

(29)

In what follows, we drop time subscripts to simplify notation. When in power, the rich
maximize their per-period utility with respect to τ , w, X, G, and the decision variable z ∈
{0, 1}, which, as before, designates their decision of whether to pay taxes. The expected utility
of the rich when they do not pay taxes is
½
H
u (z = 0) = p (x) max AH −

¾
q0
w, 0 + [1 − p (x)] AH + G.
1 − q0

(30)

Expression (30) incorporates the following facts: (i) producers are inspected by a bureaucrat
with probability p (x); (ii) bribing is detected with probability q0 ; (iii) the bribe oﬀered by the
16
Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2001) provide evidence that higher public sector wages relative to manufacturing wages reduce the scope for the corruption of the public administration.

36

rich to bureaucrats is equal to the lowest acceptable bribe b (w) ≡ q0 w/ (1 − q0 ) defined in
ª
©
(29); and (iv) when inspected, the income of a rich producer is max AH − q0 w/ (1 − q0 ) , 0 .
Expression (30) is maximized subject to the following constraints
¾
½
q0
L
w, 0 + [1 − p (x)] AL ≤ (1 − τ ) AL ,
p (x) max A −
1 − q0
xw + G + K ≤ (n − x) τ AL ,

(31)
(32)

and subject to the participation constraint (27) of the bureaucrats. Constraint (31) requires
that the poor prefer to pay taxes to tax evasion. This constraint has to be satisfied since at
least one class must pay taxes, otherwise it would not be possible to finance the infrastructure
investment, K (this is because, if the poor prefer to evade taxes, the rich will do so a fortiori).
Constraint (32) implies that the government budget constraint is satisfied, taking account of
the fact that public revenues come from the taxation of the poor only.
Lemma 16 Suppose that the rich prefer not to pay taxes. Then their optimal policies involve
w̃E ≡ (1 − q0 ) AL /q0 ,

(33)

p (x) = τ ,

(34)

and G̃E = 0 for some τ ∈ [0, 1].
Proof. See the Appendix.
We will next show that given (33) and (34), the equilibrium involves tax evasion by the
rich. Substituting for these expressions, we obtain the utility of the rich when they evade taxes
as

¡
¢
uH (z = 0) = (1 − τ ) AH + τ AH − AL .

(35)

In contrast, when a rich agent pays the tax rate (while all others evade taxes) his utility
would be
uH (z = 1) = (1 − τ ) AH ,

(36)
¡

¢
< (1 − τ ) AH + τ AH − AL ,

= uH (z = 0) .

Next let τ̆ E denote the unique value of τ satisfying the government budget constraint (32),
at the candidate equilibrium with the rich agents evading taxes
£
¡ ¢¤
¡ ¢ 1 − q0 L
A + K = n − π τ̆ E τ̆ E AL ,
π τ̆ E
q0
37

(37)

where π (·) is again defined in (1).

¡ ¢
As in the main analysis, there are two cases to consider depending on whether n − π τ̆ E

is greater than or less than 1/2. Here we simplify the analysis by focusing on the case where

there are suﬃciently many bureaucrats so that, together with the rich, they are the absolute
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
majority, i.e., n − π τ̆ E ≤ 1/2. The converse case with n − π τ̆ E > 1/2 necessitates that

the rich create an ineﬃciently large bureaucracy in order to win the election. Since the results
in this case are again similar, we do not discuss them in this extension.
Lemmas 5 and 6 continue apply in this modified environment. In particular, if bureaucrats
ever vote for the poor, there is a permanent transition to an equilibrium with an eﬃcient state
with the poor in power within one period from the election. The following lemma characterizes
the policy vector that the poor would implement in the period they win the election when the
existing organization of the state is ineﬃcient and also the policy vector that they will choose
when the state is eﬃcient.

Lemma 17 Suppose that dt = P and consider the following maximization program:
max (1 − τ ) AL + G

τ ,G,w

subject to
G = z (1 − n) τ AH + [n − π (τ )] τ AL − wπ (τ ) − K
¾
½
q (I)
L
w, 0 + [1 − p (π (τ ))] AL ≤ (1 − τ ) AL ,
p (π (τ )) max A −
1 − q (I)
¾
½
q (I)
w, 0 + [1 − p (π (τ ))] AH ≤ (1 − τ ) AH and z = 1, or z = 0,
p (π (τ )) max AH −
1 − q (I)
and (1 − τ ) AL ≤ w, where z ∈ {0, 1} denotes the decision of the rich whether to pay taxes.
Then the policy vector that the poor would choose when It−1 = 0, τ t = τ̂ D , Gt = ĜD , wt = ŵD ,

is given by the solution to this program when q (I) = q0 . The policy vector that the poor would
choose when It−1 = 1, is given by τ t = τ̆ D , Gt = ĞD , w = w̆D , when q (I) = 1 and the first
term in the last two inequalities is equal to zero.
The penultimate inequality in the maximization program in this lemma represents the “no
tax evasion” constraint for the poor, while the last constraint allows the program to choose
whether or not to satisfy the no tax evasion constraint of the rich. Notice that if this last
constraint is satisfied, the penultimate one will also be satisfied automatically (since AH > AL ).
When It−1 = 1 and the state is eﬃcient, bribery is not possible and the max term in the last
two inequalities becomes zero.
38

The next two lemmas are the analogues of Lemmas 8 and 9 and determine the conditions
under which the bureaucrats are willing to vote for the rich, and the rich prefer the allocation
in which they are in power to the one in which the poor are in power. Since their proofs are
similar to those of Lemmas 8 and 9, they are omitted.
Lemma 18 In an MPE, the rich will win the election at time t (i.e., dt = R) if only if
It−1 = 0,

´
h¡
i
³
¢
1 − q0 L
A > (1 − β) ŵD + ĜD + β 1 − τ̆ D AL + ĞD ,
q0

(38)

where ŵD , ĜD , τ̆ D and ĞD are defined in Lemma 17.

Condition (38) implies that the bureaucrats prefer to be in an ineﬃcient state under the
rule of the rich, given the “wage policy” that is optimal for the rich, rather than voting for the
poor. In fact, if they vote for the rich, the bureaucrats obtain a wage equal to (1 − q0 ) AL /q0 ,
whereas if they vote for the poor, they obtain a wage of ŵD and public with provision of ĜD

for one period (while the state is ineﬃcient), and subsequently a payoﬀ equal to the payoﬀ of
the poor under an eﬃcient state.
Lemma 19 Suppose that condition (38) holds. Then, the rich prefer to set It = 0 for all t if
the following condition is satisfied
i £
h¡
¢
¢
¡ ¡ ¢¢¤ H
¡ ¡ ¢¢ ¡ H
A + p π τ̆ E
A − AL
1 − τ̆ D AH + ĞD < 1 − p π τ̆ E

(39)

where τ̆ D and ĞD are defined in Lemma 17, and τ̆ E is given by (37).

Proof. It is immediate that (39) is suﬃcient to ensure that the rich prefer to be in power
with an ineﬃcient state, set the tax rate τ̆ E , evade taxes and pay bribes equal to AL with
¡ ¡ ¢¢
probability p π τ̆ E to living under democracy with taxes and public good provision given
by τ̆ D and ĞD as in Lemma 17.

Condition (39) states that the payoﬀ to the rich when the state is eﬃcient (and the poor
are in power) is lower than the expected payoﬀ that they get when the state is ineﬃcient (and
they are in power). The latter payoﬀ reflects the following facts: only the poor pay taxes, tax
¡ ¡ ¢¢
payers are inspected with probability p π τ̆ E = τ̆ E , and the rich oﬀer a bribe equal to AL
to the bureaucrat inspecting them.

The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium with bureaucratic corruption. Since
its proof follows that of Proposition 3 closely, it is omitted.

39

Proposition 8 Consider the political environment with emerging democracy. Then, if conditions (38) and (39) hold, the unique MPE is one in which the rich elite choose It = 0 in
the initial period and for all t thereafter, the rich party R always remains in power and the
following policies are implemented at all dates:
¡ ¢
1 − q0 L
A , Xt = π τ̆ E ,
q0
E
= G̃ ≡ 0, and τ t = τ̆ E ,

wt = w̃E ≡
Gt

where τ̆ E is given by (37). Moreover, only the poor pay taxes, while the rich evade taxes and
pay a bribe equal to b = AL when inspected.
If, on the other hand, one or both of conditions (38) and (39) hold with the reverse inequality, the unique MPE involves It = 1 for all t, and for all t ≥ 1, dt = P and the unique policy
vector is
¢
¡
¡ ¢
wt = w̆D ≡ 1 − τ̆ D AL , Xt = π τ̆ D ,
¢
£
¡ ¢¤
¡
¡ ¢
Gt = ĞD ≡ (1 − n) τ̆ D AH + n − π τ̆ D τ̆ D AL − 1 − τ̆ D AL π τ̆ D − K,

where τ̆ D and ĞD are defined in Lemma 17.

Proof. The first part of the proposition follows from Lemmas 16-19. The only part that
remains to be proved is that when one or both of conditions (38) and (39) hold with the reverse
inequality, the poor will be in power. To see this, note that these conditions (with the reverse
inequality) are suﬃcient for the rich to prefer democracy to setting up an ineﬃcient state and
evading taxes. Moreover, as before, if the state is eﬃcient (i.e., It = 1), the poor will be in
power. Therefore, we only have to show that the rich elite would not prefer an ineﬃcient state
and no tax evasion. This is straightforward since to prevent tax evasion by themselves, the
rich would have to set a higher tax rate than τ̆ E , since the “no tax evasion constraint” for the
rich under It−1 = 0 is
½
p (π (τ )) max AH −

¾
q0
w, 0 + [1 − p (π (τ ))] AH ≤ (1 − τ ) AH .
1 − q0

At τ̆ E , this constraint is violated (since it is satisfied as equality for AL ). Thus, this constraint will be satisfied at some tax rate τ 0 > τ̆ E , which would give a per-period utility of
¡ ¡ ¢¢
ª
©
(1 − τ 0 ) AH to rich agents, which is strictly less than p π τ̆ E max AH − q0 w/ (1 − q0 ) , 0 +
£
¡ ¡ ¢¢¤ H
1 − p π τ̆ E
A . Therefore, the rich are always better oﬀ evading taxes when in power.
This establishes that conditions (38) and (39) holding with reverse inequality are suﬃcient for
the equilibrium with the poor in power to emerge.
40

The most interesting result in Proposition 8 is that, when they are able to capture democratic politics, the rich do not pay any taxes at all. Instead, they (sometimes) pay bribes
equal to the tax burden on poor agents, AL . This implies that patronage politics turns de jure
proportional taxation into a de facto regressive one. In other words, when the rich elite are
able to set up an ineﬃcient state and receive the support of bureaucrats, they are not only able
to limit redistribution and public good provision, but they are also able to shift most of the
burden of taxation to the poor. Consequently, the tax rate faced by the poor may be higher
when corruption is possible than in the baseline model where both rich and poor pay taxes.

6

An Empirical Implication and Some Evidence

A distinctive empirical implication of our model is that democracies where relative wages of
bureaucrats are high should provide fewer public goods. This is because, all else equal, bureaucrats are paid higher relative wages when the elite use patronage politics to limit redistribution
and public good provision. In contrast, a naive intuition may suggest that relative wages of
bureaucrats and public good provision should be correlated positively, either because when
there is greater provision of public goods, more activities are entrusted to bureaucrats and
they need to be paid more, or because countries with a greater willingness to tax will spend
more both on public employment and on public good provision.17
We next look at the cross-country correlation between the relative wages of bureaucrats
and public good provision among democracies. Our measure of the relative wage of bureaucrats is average wage of public-sector employees relative to GDP per capita from World Bank
for 1991-2000. Our main measure of public good provision is total (central) government expenditure as a fraction of GDP for 1991-1998, and we also look at social services and welfare
spending as a fraction of GDP as an alternative dependent variable.18 Both of these variables
are from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (see the details in the Appendix). To
focus on democracies, we limit the sample to countries with an average Polity score greater
than or equal to 5 over the period 1991-1998, which corresponds to “stable democracies” (see
Persson and Tabellini, 2003). Our baseline sample contains 51 observations. Figure 1 shows
the correlation between the relative wages of bureaucrats and government expenditure share of
17

An alternative intuition may be that, with a fixed government budget, higher public sector wages would
force the government to reduce the rest of public good expenditures. In practice, there is considerable variation
in the level of government budgets, and we will see below that same results apply with a measure of spending
on social services and welfare.
18
We choose the total government expenditure as our main measure, both because we have more observations
on this variable and also because the alternative, social services and welfare spending share of GDP, is heavily
influenced by the age structure of the population. See below.

41

GDP. A strong negative relationship is visible in the figure, with most European countries having lower relative wages for bureaucrats and government expenditures than in Latin American
and Asian countries (there are few African countries in our sample).
The regression corresponding to Figure 1 is shown in column 1 of Table 1, with the robust standard errors in parentheses. The correlation between relative bureaucratic wages and
government expenditure share of GDP is statistically highly significant, with a t-statistic of
approximately 5. Column 2 of the table controls for GDP per capita. Richer countries spend
more on public goods and income per capita is also correlated with relative bureaucratic wages.
This regression shows that log income per capita is indeed significant, but the relationship between relative bureaucratic wages and government expenditures remains strong (the coeﬃcient
declines from -4.96 to -3.63, which continues to be significant at less than 1%). Column 3 also
controls for the Polity democracy score, which is insignificant and has little eﬀect on the coefficient of the relative wage of bureaucrats. Figure 2 shows the conditional correlation between
relative bureaucratic wage and government expenditure share of GDP corresponding to column
3 of Table 1. The same negative relationship as in Figure 1 is again visible.
Column 4 controls for the age structure of the population, in particular the fraction of
the population between the ages of 15-64 and the fraction over the age of 65. We expect
the age structure of the population to have a direct eﬀect on Social Security spending and
thus also on total government expenditures. The results in column 4 show that controlling for
the age structure variables significantly reduces both the coeﬃcient estimate of the relative
bureaucratic wage and the standard errors. The coeﬃcient estimate is now -1.82, with a
standard error of 0.85, which is still significant at 5%.
Columns 5-8 repeat the same regressions using social services and welfare spending as a
percentage of GDP as the dependent variable. The results are similar to those for government
expenditure and typically stronger, except when we control for the age structure variables. In
particular, in columns 5-8, relative bureaucratic wage is significant at less than 1%. Once we
include the controls for the age structure of the population, however, the relationship between
the relative bureaucratic wage and social services and welfare spending is no longer significant;
the coeﬃcient estimate declines significantly and the standard error doubles. This result might
reflect the fact that social services and welfare spending are closely related to the age structure
of the population and there is little cross-sectional variation left once we control for the age
structure variablesas.
In addition to the results shown in Table 1, we have also experimented with including
“semi-stable” democracies (those with Polity scores between 0 and 5). The results are similar
42

but slightly weaker. The results are also similar when we construct the sample using Freedom
House measures of political and civil rights. We also checked the robustness of the results to
various other controls. The results are broadly similar when we control for the legal origin of
the country, for parliamentary versus presidential systems, for majoritarian versus proportional
democracies, and for the age of democracy. Nevertheless, the results are significantly weakened
or disappear when we control for a full set of continent dummies. This is not entirely surprising,
since, as Figures 1 and 2 show, the results reflect the contrast of European countries to Latin
American and Asian countries.
Overall, it appears that there is a significant negative relationship between government
expenditure and the relative wages of bureaucrats, which becomes weaker when we control
for the age structure of the population and for continent dummies. While this cross-country
correlation is not as robust as we would like it to be, it is nonetheless encouraging for our
approach, since the negative relationship between relative wages of bureaucrats and government
expenditure is a counter-intuitive implication of our model and a naive intuition would have
suggested the opposite relationship between these two variables.

7

Concluding Remarks

Ineﬃciencies in the bureaucratic organization of the state are often viewed as an important
factor in retarding economic development. Many sociological accounts of comparative development emphasize the role of state capacity (or lack thereof) in explaining why some societies
are able to industrialize and modernize (e.g., Evans, 1995, Migdal, 1988). In addition, inefficient state organizations appear to coincide with limited amounts of public good provision
and redistribution towards the poor. Existing approaches do not address the question of why
certain societies choose or end up with such ineﬃcient organizations and do not clarify the
relationship between ineﬃcient state organizations and limited redistribution.
We presented a simple theory of the emergence and persistence of ineﬃcient states, in which
the organization of the public bureaucracy is manipulated by the rich elite in order to influence
redistributive politics. In particular, by instituting an ineﬃcient state structure, the elite are
able to use patronage and capture democratic politics. This enables them to limit the extent of
redistribution and public good provision. Captured democracies not only limit redistribution,
but also create a number of major distortions: the structure of the state is ineﬃcient, there is
too little public good provision and there may be overemployment of bureaucrats.
We also showed that an ineﬃcient state creates its own constituency and tends to persist

43

over time. Intuitively, an ineﬃcient state structure creates more rents for bureaucrats than
would an eﬃcient state structure. When the median (poor) agent comes to power in democracy,
he will reform the structure of the state to make it more eﬃcient so that the higher taxes can
be collected at lower cost (especially in terms of lower rents for bureaucrats). Anticipating
this, when the organization of the state is ineﬃcient, bureaucrats support the rich, who set
lower taxes but pay high wages to bureaucrats. In order to generate enough political support,
the coalition of the rich and the bureaucrats may not only choose an ineﬃcient organization of
the state, but they may further expand the size of bureaucracy so as to gain additional votes.
The model shows that an equilibrium with an ineﬃcient state is more likely when there
is greater income inequality and when democratic taxes are anticipated to be higher. An
interesting implication of this result is that inequality and redistribution may be negatively
correlated because higher inequality makes the capture of democratic politics more likely.
The pattern of elite control in democracy based on patronage politics and the emergence of
an ineﬃcient state organization bears some resemblance to the ineﬃcient bureaucratic structures in a number of countries. In addition to these case studies, we provided cross-country
correlations consistent with a distinctive implication of our model, that among democracies
there should be a negative relationship between the relative wages of state employees and the
amount of public good provision.
The general message from our analysis is that “not all democracies are created equal”; while
some democracies will adopt policies that redistribute to poorer segments of the society, others
may become captured by traditional elites. These captured democracies not only choose low
levels of redistribution, but, as part of their political rationale for survival, they also typically
create a range of ineﬃciencies. Our model suggests that these ineﬃciencies might be related
to the relatively poor performance of a number of democracies in Latin America and Asia.19
Analyses of the eﬀect of such policies on economic growth and investigations of other
methods via which the rich may limit the amount of redistribution in democratic politics
are interesting areas for future work. Another interesting area for further study is a more
careful empirical analysis of the relationship between the variation in the extent of government
expenditure, relative wages of state employees and potential elite capture of democratic politics.
19

Another potential political factor in the poor economic performances of Latin American democracies is
“populism”. Why some countries pursue populist policies is beyond the scope of the current paper. Nevertheless,
it may be conjectured that the political environment may be more conducive to populism when the majority of
the population fare relatively badly under democracy (see Acemoglu, 2007) and the type of democratic capture
studied in this paper is likely to limit the benefits of democracy for the majority of the population.

44

Appendix A: Omitted Proofs
7.1

Proof of Proposition 5

Consider changes in inequality that keep mean pre-tax income, Y = (1 − n) AH + nAL , constant. This
implies the following simple relationship between the pre-tax incomes of rich and poor agents:
AH =

Y − nAL
.
1−n

(40)

To prove the desired result, we need to show that (15) and (21) in Lemmas 8 and 9 are more likely
to hold when there is greater inequality, i.e., when AL is lower (and AH is given by (40)).
Let us rewrite condition (15) as
∙
¸
¡
¢ L
1
1−β D
h
D
D
≥
(41)
1−τ A +G +
≡ θ.
Ĝ
q0
1 − q0
β
¡ ¢
Next, consider condition (21) ©
in Lemma
first that τ E ≥ τ̂ E , i.e., when X = π τ E (recall
¡ E ¢ 9. Suppose
ª
that more generally X = max π τ , n − 1/2 ). Then, combining the government budget constraint
(19) with (40) gives
¡ ¢
π τE
K
h
E
τ =
+
.
(42)
E
L
Y − π (τ ) A q0 Y − π (τ E ) AL
Substituting for τ E from this expression, condition (21) can be rewritten as
¡ ¢
µ
¶
GD Y − π τ E AL
K
h
D
< τ − H
−
≡ θ.
E
q0
A
π (τ )
π (τ E )

(43)

Instead, when τ E < τ̂ E , the size of the bureaucracy is X = n − 1/2 ≡ λ. Solving for τ̂ E from (20)
and (40) as
λh/q0 + K
,
(44)
τ̂ E =
Y − λAL
´
³
¡
£¡
¢
¢
¤
the relevant part of condition (21), 1 − τ̂ E AH > (1 − β) 1 − τ E AH + β 1 − τ D AH + GD , can
be expressed as
¡
¢¤ ¡
¢
ª
h
1 ©£
∗
<
Y − λAL − K ≡ θ .
(1 − β) τ E + β τ D − GD /AH
q0
λ

(45)

∗

These three expressions define θ, θ and θ . Now summarizing our analysis, an ineﬃcient state will
be created under two diﬀerent scenarios:
¡ ¢
1. if X = π τ E and if conditions (41) and (43) are satisfied, which requires
θ ≤ h/q0 < θ;

2. if X = n − 1/2 ≡ λ and if conditions (41) and (45) are satisfied, which requires
∗

θ ≤ h/q0 < θ .
We will prove that higher inequality makes the ineﬃcient state equilibrium more likely by showing
∗
that the upper thresholds (θ in case 1 and θ in case 2) are increasing and the lower threshold, θ, is
∗
decreasing in the level of inequality–these naturally imply that the intervals ∆ ≡ θ − θ and ∆∗ ≡ θ − θ
increase with income inequality. We will also show that an increase in inequality does not cause a switch
from 1 to 2 or vice versa in a way to make the ineﬃcient state less likely.
We first establish an intermediate result:

45

Claim 1 We have

and

¡ ¢
1 + π0 τ D
∂τ D
=
−
< 0,
∂AL
π00 (τ D ) (AL + h)

(46)

¡ ¢
τ Eπ τ E
∂τ E
=
> 0.
∂AL
Y − π 0 (τ E ) (τ E AL + h/q0 ) − π (τ E ) AL

(47)

Proof. The first-order condition of program (9) for an interior τ D is
∂GD
= AL .
∂τ
Using (40), the equilibrium level of the public good (8) provided by the poor is
¡ ¢¡
¢
GD = τ D Y − K − π τ D AL + h .
The first-order condition (48) therefore becomes
¢
¡ ¢¡
Y − π0 τ D AL + h − AL = 0.

(48)

(49)

(50)

The solution for ¡τ D ¢is always positive since K > 0 needs to be financed. Moreover, the assumption
that τ D < 1 − π τ D < 1 ensures that τ D < 1. Diﬀerentiating (50) gives (46).
Next, diﬀerentiating the government budget constraint (19) and using (40) gives (47), where the
denominator is positive since τ E is always to the left of the peak of the Laﬀer curve.
Next, given the definition of θ in (41) we obtain that
¡ ¢¤
∂θ
1 £
=
1 − τD − π τD > 0
(51)
L
β→1 ∂A
1 − q0
¡ ¢
where the expression for the limit uses the fact that ∂ ĜD AL /∂AL exists, is¡ finite
¢ and is independent
on β, and the inequality again follows from the assumption that τ D < 1 − π τ D < 1. This inequality
implies that for suﬃciently high β, the ineﬃcient state becomes more attractive to bureaucrats as the
level of inequality increases.
We now show that higher inequality, represented by a decrease in AL with AH given by (40), makes
∗
the ineﬃcient state also more attractive to the rich by increasing θ and θ .
Consider two cases:
¡ ¢
Case 1: X = π τ E .
From (49), we have
¡ ¢¡
¢
τ D Y = GD + K + π τ D AL + h .
(52)
lim

Substituting (52) into (43) and some algebra gives

¡ ¢
¢
n AH − AL D AL D π τ D ¡ L
θ=
G + HG +
A + h − τ D AL .
E
H
E
π (τ )
A
A
π (τ )

Next, note that
#
"
£¡
¢
¤
¤
£
∂ AH − AL /AH
∂ AL /AH
1
n
AL
<0
=−
=−
+
∂AL
∂AL
AH
1 − n (AH )2
£
¡ ¢¤
¡ ¢
∂ 1/π τ E
π0 τ E ∂τ E
=−
<0
2
∂AL
[π (τ E )] ∂AL
£ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢¤
¡ ¢
¡ ¢ ¡ ¢
∂ π τ D /π τ E
π 0 τ D ∂τ D
π τ D π 0 τ E ∂τ E
=
−
<0
2
∂AL
π (τ E ) ∂AL
∂AL
[π (τ E )]

46

(53)

and from (49), using (50),
¡ ¢
∂τ D L
∂GD
=
A − π τ D < 0.
(54)
L
L
∂A
∂A
Diﬀerentiating (53), in turn, gives
#
"
¡ ¢
nπ 0 τ E ∂τ E AH − AL D
n
n
∂θ
AL
1
GD +
= −
G −
+
2
∂AL
AH
π (τ E ) AH
1 − n (AH )2
[π (τ E )] ∂AL
#
∙
¸ "
¡ D¢
n AH − AL ∂τ D L
n
1
AL
+
A −π τ
+
GD +
+
π (τ E )
AH
∂AL
AH
1 − n (AH )2
#
¡ ¢ ¡ ¢
∙
¸ " 0 ¡ D¢ D
¡ D¢
¢
π τ D π0 τ E ∂τ E ¡ L
π τ
AL ∂τ D L
∂τ
+ H
A −π τ
−
A +h +
+
2
L
E
L
L
E
A
∂A
π (τ ) ∂A
∂A
[π (τ )]
¡ D¢
D
π τ
∂τ
AL − τ D ,
+
−
E
π (τ )
∂AL
which can be rewritten as
#
¡ ¢
∙
¸"
nπ 0 τ E ∂τ E AH − AL D
n
n
1
AL
∂θ
= −
G −
+
(55)
GD +
−1
2
∂AL
AH
π (τ E )
AH
1 − n (AH )2
[π (τ E )] ∂AL
∙
¸
∙
¸ H
¡ D¢
∂τ D L
AL
n
n AH − AL
A − AL
+ LA
−π τ
+ H − τD +
−1
∂A
π (τ E )
AH
π (τ E )
AH
A
" ¡ ¢
#
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
π0 τ D ∂τ D
π τ D π0 τ E ∂τ E ¡ L
+
−
A +h
2
E
L
L
π (τ ) ∂A
∂A
[π (τ E )]
¡ D¢
π τ
+
.
π (τ E )
¡ ¢
E
/∂AL > 0, ∂τ D /∂AL < 0 and n > π τ E , all the terms in (55) except the last line,
∂τ
¡ Since
¢
¡
¢
π τ D /π τ E , are negative. Furthermore, we have
#
"
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¢ π τD
¡ D ¢ 1 + π0 τ D
¡ D¢
π0 τ D ∂τ D ¡ L
1
0
A +h +
,
(56)
=
−π τ
+π τ
π (τ E ) ∂AL
π (τ E )
π (τ E )
π 00 (τ D )
where the right and side of (56) is obtained using the expression for ∂τ D /∂AL in (46). Now, the log2
concavity of π (τ ) implies that [π 0 (τ )] > π 00 (τ ) π¡ (τ )¢ and¡ is suﬃcient
to ensure that (56) is negative.
¢
This implies that all the terms in (55) including π τ D /π τ E are negative, and therefore ∂θ/∂AL < 0
as desired. Note that this conclusion holds irrespective of the value of β.
Case 2: X = n − 1/2 ≡ λ.
The proof parallels that of case 1. From (45), using (52) and the fact that Y − λAL = (1 − n) AH +
(1/2)AL , we obtain
¸
¾
∙
½
¢
¡
¢
¡ ¢¡
1
(1 − n) AH + (1/2) AL D
∗
θ =
G
−
K
(1 − β) τ E Y − λAL + β π τ D AL + h + K − λτ D AL + GD −
λ
AH
(57)
Note that
£¡
¢
¤
∂ (1 − n) AH + (1/2) AL /AH
Y
=
(58)
2.
L
∂A
2 (1 − n) (AH )

47

Diﬀerentiating (57) and using (54), (58) and the fact that ∂τ E /∂AL exists and is independent of β,
we have
½
∗
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢ ∂τ D ¡ L
¡ ¢
1
∂τ D
∂τ D L
∂θ
lim
=
A − π τD +
A + h − λτ D − λ L AL +
π τ D + π0 τ D
L
L
L
β→1 ∂A
λ
∂A
∂A
∂A
∙ D
¸)
H
L
¡ D¢
∂τ
Y
(1 − n) A + (1/2) A
D
L
−
A −π τ
,
2G −
AH
∂AL
2 (1 − n) (AH )
which can be rewritten as
∗

(

¢
¡ ¢ ∂τ D ¡ L
¡ ¢
Y
D
(59)
A + h − λτ D −
π τ D + π0 τ D
2G +
L
H
∂A
2 (1 − n) (A )
µ
¶
¾
¡ D¢
1 AH − AL ∂τ D L
1 AL
+
A
−
n
−
π
τ
.
2
AH
∂AL
2 AH
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
Since ∂τ D /∂AL < 0, π 0 τ D > 0, n > 1/2 and AL < AH , all terms in (59) other than π τ D are
negative. Therefore, a suﬃcient condition to ensure that (59) is negative is
¡ ¢
¢
¡ D¢
¡ D ¢ ∂τ D ¡ L
¡ D ¢ 1 + π0 τ D
¡ ¢
0
0
A +h +π τ
= −π τ
(60)
+ π τ D < 0,
π τ
L
00
D
∂A
π (τ )
∂θ
lim
β→1 ∂AL

=

1
λ

where the right hand side of (60) is obtained using the expression for ∂τ D /∂AL in (46). This condition is
∗
equivalent to (56) and the log-concavity of π (τ ) is suﬃcient to ensure it. This establishes that ∂θ /∂AL
is negative for suﬃciently high β as desired.
The proof so far has established that the lower threshold θ declines as inequality increases and that
∗
the upper thresholds θ and θ increase as inequality increases. To complete the proof of the proposition,
we need to ensure that there would be no switch from the wider to the smaller interval, which could
happen if we have a switch from τ E ≥ τ̂ E to τ E < τ̂ E , or vice versa. However, as β → 1, we have that
(21) is equivalent to
© ¡ ¢
ª
¡ ¢
¡ D
¢
and
τ − τ E AH > GD
if τ E ≥ τ̂ E ⇔ X = max π τ E , n − 1/2 = π τ E
if

τ E < τ̂ E

⇔

© ¡ ¢
ª
X = max π τ E , n − 1/2 = n − 1/2 ≡ λ

and

³

´
τ D − τ̂ E AH > GD
∗

so that for β suﬃciently large, at the point of a possible switch, τ E = τ̂ E , we have θ = θ . This
completes the proof.¥

7.2

Proof of Lemma 16

Suppose that the bureaucratic wage is given by w̃E in (33). Then the incentive compatibility constraint
(28) of the bureaucrats inspecting low-skill producers is satisfied even when the producers oﬀer a bribe
as large as their income AL . Holding τ fixed, a decrease in w from w̃E will allow bureaucrats to accept
bribes, and thus reduce government revenues to zero. Therefore, it cannot be optimal. Increasing w is
also not beneficial for the rich.
Condition (31), on the other hand, ensures that the poor choose to pay taxes. Holding w fixed at
w̃E , increasing taxes would induce the poor not to pay taxes and is therefore not beneficial. Reducing
taxes is also not beneficial. Given (33) and (34), it is also straightforward to verify that the utility of
the rich is decreasing in G, so that this variable is set equal to zero.
This argument shows that (33) and (34) gives a stationary point of the optimization problem of the
rich, since the rich will not find it beneficial to change either one of x or w by itself. To complete the

48

proof, we need to show that it is also not beneficial to change x and w simultaneously. We will do this
by showing that the payoﬀ function of the rich is strictly quasi-concave. Consider the problem of the
rich if they do not pay taxes. Clearly, constraints (31) and (32) in equilibrium hold as equalities. We
can thus solve out for the tax rate from the government budget constraint as
τ=

xw + K + G
.
(n − x) AL

Substituting this expression into (31), we obtain
w=

K +G
,
[q0 / (1 − q0 )] (n − x) p (x) − x

(61)

provided that w ≥ (1 − q0 ) AL /q0 (which will be true in equilibrium). Now, substituting (61) in the
objective function of the rich (30), and observing that this is maximized at G = 0, we can represent the
problem of the rich as the following single dimensional maximization problem
maxU (x) = AH −
x

K
.
(n − x) − (1 − q0 ) x/q0 p (x)

If this problem is strictly quasi-concave, it must have a unique solution. Corresponding to this
unique x, there will be unique levels of τ and w, since these variables are defined uniquely by the
previous equalities. To check that this function is indeed strictly quasi-concave, note that
U 0 (x) = −

1 + (1 − q0 ) /q0 p (x) − (1 − q0 ) [p0 (x) x] /q0 [p (x)]2
[(n − x) − (1 − q0 ) x/q0 p (x)]

2

K.

For U (x) to be strictly quasi concave, it
n is suﬃcient that its second derivative is negative
o when
U 0 (x) = 0. For this, it is suﬃcient for − [p (x)]2 + (1 − q0 ) p (x) /q0 − (1 − q0 ) [p0 (x) x] /q0 to be
strictly decreasing in x. It can be easily verified that this is always the case since p (x) is increasing and
concave in x. This completes the proof that (33) and (34) is optimal for the rich when they prefer not
to pay taxes. ¥

49

Appendix B: Data Sources and Definitions
Our dataset builds on the cross-country dataset compiled by Persson and Tabellini (2003) (henceforth
PT). Our sample of “stable democracies” consists of countries with an average Polity score greater than
or equal to 5 over the period 1991-1998. We also report results with a sample containing all democracies
(defined as countries with average Polity score greater than 0 over the period 1991-1998). With the
exception of the average government wage to per capita GDP (which comes from the World Bank), all
our variables are from PT’s dataset. These variables are the following:
Central government expenditures as a percentage of GDP: constructed using the item
Government Finance-Expenditures in the IFS, divided by GDP at current prices and multiplied by 100.
Source: IMF-IFS CD-Rom and IMF-IFS Yearbook.
Consolidated central government expenditures on social services and welfare as percentage of GDP: from the GFS Yearbook, divided by GDP and multiplied by 100. Source: IMF-GFS
Yearbook 2000 and IMF-IFS CD-Rom.
Log GDP per capita: per capita real GDP defined as real GDP per capita in constant dollars
(chain index) expressed in international prices, base year 1985. Data through 1992 are taken from the
Penn World Table 5.6, while data on the period 1993-98 are computed from data taken from the World
Development Indicators, the World Bank. These later observations are computed on the basis of the
latest observation available from the Penn Word Tables and the growth rates of GDP per capita in the
subsequent years computed from the series of GDP at market prices (in constant 1995 U.S. dollars) and
population, from the World Development Indicators.
Sources: Penn World Tables - mark 5.6 (PWT), available on
http://datacentre2.chass.utoronto.ca/pwt/docs/topic.html.
The World Bank’s World Development Indicators, available on
http://www.worldbank.org.
Polity: score for democracy, computed by subtracting the AUTOC score from the DEMOC score,
and ranging from +10 (strongly democratic) to -10 (strongly autocratic). AUTOC (DEMOC) is
the index of autocracy (democracy), derived from codings of the competitiveness of political participation, the regulation of participation, the openness and competitiveness of executive recruitment, and
constraints on the chief executive.
Source: Polity IV Project (http://www.cidcm.umd.edu/inscr/polity/index.htm).
Age structure variables: percentage of population between the ages of 15 and 64 in the total
population and percentage of population over the age of 65 in the total population.
Source: World Development Indicators CD-Rom 1999.
Average government wage relative to per capita GDP: mean value of the average government
wage to per capita GDP between 1991 and 2000. It is computed as the average of the two data points
available for the periods 1991-95 and 1996-2000. When data for one of the two periods are not available,
only the available time period is used. The variable is calculated by dividing the average government
wage by the GDP per capita figure. The average government wage is calculated as the total central
government wage bill divided by the number of employees in total central government. The total central
government wage bill is the sum of wages and salaries paid to central government employees, including
armed forces personnel. The number of employees in total central government is the sum of total civilian
central government and the Armed Forces.
Source: Schiavo-Campo, de Tommaso and Mukherjee (1997), Table A-3,
http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default.

50

References
1. Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 52, 1199-1226.
2. Acemoglu, Daron (2007) “An Economic Model of Populism,” in progress.
3. Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2001) “Ineﬃcient Redistribution,” American
Political Science Review, 95, 649-662.
4. Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006a) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, New York; Cambridge University Press.
5. Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006b) “Persistence of Power, Elites and
Institutions,” NBER Working Paper, No. 12108.
6. Acemoglu, Daron and Thierry Verdier (1998) “Property Rights, Corruption and the
Allocation of Talent: A General Equilibrium Approach,” Economic Journal, 108, 13811403.
7. Acemoglu, Daron and Thierry Verdier (2000) “The Choice Between Market Failures and
Corruption,” American Economic Review, 90(1), 194-211.
8. Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton (1990) “Government Domestic Debt and the Risk of
Default: A Political-Economic Model of the Strategic Role of Debt,” in Capital Markets
and Debt Management, R. Dornbusch and M. Draghi, eds., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
9. Alesina, Alberto (1988) “Credibility and Political Convergence in a Two-Party System
with Rational Voters,” American Economic Review, 78(4), 796-805.
10. Alford, Robert R. and Roger Friedland (1985) Powers of Theory. Capitalism, the State
and Democracy, New York; Cambridge University Press.
11. Austen-Smith, David (1987) “Interest Groups, Campaign Contributions, and Probabilistic Voting,” Public Choice, 54, 123-139.
12. Baron, David P. (1994) “Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters,”
American Political Science Review, 88, 33-47.
13. Barro, Robert (1999) Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-country Empirical
Study, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
51

14. Beck, Linda J. (1997) “Senegal’s "Patrimonial Democrats": Incremental Reform and
the Obstacles to the Consolidation of Democracy,” Canadian Journal of African Studies/Revue Canadienne des Études Africaines, 31(1), pp. 1-31.
15. Becker, Gary S. and Casey Mulligan (2003) “Deadweight Costs and the Size of Government,” Journal of Law and Economics, 46, 293-340.
16. Bénabou, Roland (2000) “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,” American Economic Review, 90(1), 96-129.
17. Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1997) “An Economic Model of Representative
Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 85-114.
18. Boone, Catherine (1990) “State Power and Economic Crisis in Senegal,” Comparative
Politics, 22(3), 341-357.
19. Centeno, Miguel (2002) Blood and Debt: War and Nation-State in Latin America, University Park, PA.; Pennsylvania State University Press.
20. Coate, Stephen and Stephen Morris (1995) “On the Form of Transfers to Special Interests,” Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), 1210-1235.
21. Coate, Stephen and Stephen Morris (1999) “Policy Persistence,” American Economic
Review, 89(5), 1327-1336.
22. Cukierman, Alex, Sebastian Edwards and Guido Tabellini (1992) “Seigniorage and Political Instability,” American Economic Review, 82(3), 537-555.
23. Debs, Alexandre (2006) “The Wheel of Fortune: Agency Problems in Dictatorships,”
MIT mimeo.
24. Dixit, Avinash (2002) “Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An Interpretative Review,” Journal of Human Resources, 37(4), 696-727.
25. Dixit, Avinash K., Gene Grossman and Elhanan Helpman (1997) “Common Agency and
Coordination: General Theory and Application to Government Policy Making,” Journal
of Political Economy, 105(4), 752-769.
26. Egorov, Georgy and Konstantin Sonin (2005) “Dictators and Their Viziers: Agency
Problems in Dictatorships,” New Economic School, Moscow, mimeo.
52

27. Epstein, Stepan (2000) Freedom and Growth. The Rise of States and Markets in Europe,
1300-1750, London; Routledge.
28. Etzioni-Halevy, Eva (1983) Bureaucracy and Democracy, London; Routledge.
29. Evans, Peter B. (1989) “Predatory, Developmental, and Other Apparatuses: A Comparative Political Economy Perspective on the Third World State,” Sociological Forum,
4(4), 561-587.
30. Evans, Peter B. (1992) “The State as Problem and Solution: Predation, Embedded
Autonomy, and Structural Change,” in Stephan Haggard and Robert R. Kaufman (eds.),
The Politics of Economic Adjustment: International Constraints, Distributive Conflicts
and the State, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
31. Evans, Peter B. (1995) Embedded Autonomy, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
32. Fiorina, Morris P. and Roger G. Noll (1978) “Voters, Legislators and Bureaucracy: Institutional Design in the Public Sector,” American Economic Review, 68(2), 256-260.
33. Fudenberg, Drew and Jean Tirole (1991) Game Theory, Cambridge; MIT Press.
34. Gay, Robert (1990) “Popular Incorporation and Prospects for Democracy: Some Implications of the Brazilian Case,” Theory and Society, 19(4), 447-463.
35. Geddes, Barbara (1991) “A Game Theoretic Model of Reform in Latin American Democracies,” American Political Science Review 85(2), 371-92.
36. Glazer, Amihai (1989) “Politics and the Choice of Durability,” American Economic Review, 79(5), 1207-1213.
37. Golden, Miriam A. (2003) “Electoral Connections: The Eﬀects of the Personal Vote on
Political Patronage, Bureaucracy and Legislation in Postwar Italy,” British Journal of
Political Science, 33, pp. 189-212.
38. Gomes, Armando and Philippe Jehiel (2005) “Dynamic Processes of Social and Economic
Interactions: On the Persistence of Ineﬃciencies,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(3),
626-667.
39. Gramsci, Antonio (1971) Selections from the Prison Notebooks, New York; International
Publishers.
53

40. Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1996) “Electoral Competition and Special
Interest Politics,” Review of Economic Studies, 63(2), 265-286.
41. Hassler, John, José V. Rodrìguez Mora, Kjetil Storesletten and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2003)
“The Survival of the Welfare State,” American Economic Review, 93(1), 87-112.
42. Herbst, Jeﬀery I. (2000) States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority
and Control, Princeton NJ; Princeton University Press.
43. Kohli, Atul (2004) State-Directed Development: Political Power and Industrialization in
the Global Periphery, New York; Cambridge University Press.
44. Levi, Margaret (1989) Of Rule and Revenue, Berkeley and Los Angeles CA; University
of California Press.
45. Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2001) “Provision of Public Goods under Alternative Electoral Systems” American Economic Review, 91(1), 225-239.
46. Migdal, Joel (1988) Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State
Capabilities in the Third World, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
47. Miliband, Ralph (1969) State in Capitalist Society, New York, Basic Books.
48. Osborne, Martin J. and Al. Slivinsky (1996) “A Model of Political Competition with
Citizen-Candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 65-96.
49. Perotti, Roberto (1996) “Growth, Income Distribution, and Democracy: What the Data
Say,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1(2), 149-87.
50. Persson, Torsten, Gérard Roland and Guido Tabellini (2000) “Comparative Politics and
Public Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(6), 1121-1161.
51. Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic Eﬀect of Constitutions, Cambridge MA; The MIT Press.
52. Persson, Torsten and Lars E. O. Svensson (1989) “Why a Stubborn Conservative would
Run a Deficit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(2), 325-345.
53. Poulantzas, Nicos (1978) Political Power and Social Classes, London, Verso.

54

54. Rauch, James and Peter B. Evans (2000) “Bureaucratic Structure and Bureaucratic
Performance in Less Developed Countries,” Journal of Public Economics, 75, 49-71.
55. Robinson, James A. (2001) “When is a State Predatory?,” Unpublished manuscript,
Harvard University.
56. Robinson, James A. and Ragnar Torvik (2005) “White Elephants,” Journal of Public
Economics, 89, 197-210.
57. Rodrik, Dani (1995) “The Political Economy of Trade Policy,” in G. Grossman and K.
Rogoﬀ (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, Amsterdam; North-Holland.
58. Roett, Riordan (1999) Brazil: Politics in a Patrimonial Society, Westport, CT: Praeger.
59. Rothstein, Bo and Eric M. Uslaner (2005) “All for All: Equality, Corruption, and Social
Trust,” World Politics, 58(1), 41-72.
60. Saint-Paul, Gilles (1996) “Exploring the Political Economy of Labour Market Institutions,” Economic Policy, 11(23), 265-315.
61. Schiavo-Campo, Salvatore, Giulio de Tommaso and Amitabh Mukherjee (1997) “An
International Statistical Survey of Government Employment and Wages,” The World
Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 1806.
62. Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny (1994) “Politicians and Firms,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 109(4), 995-1025.
63. Tabellini, Guido and Alberto Alesina (1990) “Voting on the Budget Deficit,” American
Economic Review, 80(1), 37-49.
64. Therborn, Göran (1980) What Does the Ruling Class Do When it Rules? State Apparatuses and State Power under Feudalism, Capitalism and Socialism, London; Verso.
65. Ticchi, Davide and Andrea Vindigni (2005) “Endogenous Constitutions,” University
Pompeu Fabra, Working Paper 896.
66. Tilly, Charles (1990) Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990-1990, Cambridge
MA; Blackwell.
67. Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder (2001) “Bureaucratic Corruption and the
Rate of Temptation: Do Wages in the Civil Service Aﬀect Corruption, and by How
Much?,” Journal of Development Economics, 65(2), 307-331.
55

68. Weyland, Kurt (1996) “Obstacles to Social Reform in Brazil’s New Democracy,” Comparative Politics, 29(1), 1-22.
69. Wilson, John D. (1990) “Are Eﬃciency Improvements in Government Transfer Policies
Self-Defeating in Political Equilibrium,” Economics and Politics, 2, 241-258.
70. World Bank (2004) Doing Business in the World: Understanding Regulation, World
Bank, Oxford University Press.

56

Table 1. The Relationship Between Bureaucratic Wage and Government Expenditures
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Dependent variable is government expenditures
as a percentage of GDP
Average government wage to per capita GDP

-4.96
(1.01)

Log of per capita real GDP

-3.63
(1.07)

-3.66
(1.03)

-1.82
(0.85)

4.19
(1.63)

2.04
(2.18)

-0.90
(2.29)

1.7
(1.05)

0.17
(1.11)

Polity

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Dependent variable is government expenditures on
social services and welfare as a percentage of GDP
-3.91
(0.65)

-2.85
(0.56)

-2.84
(0.56)

-0.80
(1.08)

4.02
(0.9)

2.91
(1.27)

0.24
(1.13)

0.84
(0.54)

0.01
(0.33)

Percentage of population between
15 and 64 years old

-0.69
(0.37)

-0.24
(0.16)

Percentage of population over 65 years old

1.95
(0.28)

1.28
(0.22)

R2
Number of observations

0.23
51

0.31
51

0.34
51

0.57
51

0.3
46

0.5
46

0.52
46

0.77
46

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. The sample consists of countries with an average polity index for the period 1991-98 greater than or equal to 5. The dependent
variable in columns (1)-(4) is central government expenditures as a percentage of GDP for the period 1991-98. The dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) is consolidated
central government expenditures on social services and welfare as a percentage of GDP for the period 1991-98. Average government wage to per capita GDP is the ratio of
the total central government wage bill to the number of central government employees for the period 1991-2000. The log of per capita real GDP is the natural log of the real
GDP per capita in constant 1985 dollars, averaged for the period 1992-98. All data are from Persson and Tabellini (2003) except the average government wage to per capita
GDP, which are from the World Bank.

Government Expenditure as % of GDP
-10
0
10
20

Redistribution and Public Sector Relative Wage: Unconditional Relationship
Hungary

Netherlands
Italy

Belgium

Israel

France
Sweden
Bulgaria
Portugal
Slovak
Uk
Republic
Denmark
Norway
PolandAustria
Finland
Ireland
Czech Republic
Spain
New
Zeland

Botswana
Greece

Romania Germany
Latvia
South Africa
Estonia

Nicaragua

Uruguay
Sri Lanka
Switzerland
Australia
Canada Turkey
Pakistan
Mauritius
USA
Venezuela
South Korea
Ecuador

Fiji
Malaysia
Chile
Bolivia
Philippines

Honduras
Thailand

India

-20

Argentina
El Colombia
Salvador

-2

-1
0
1
2
Average Government Wage to Per Capita GDP

3

coef = -4.9601277, (robust) se = 1.0127675, t = -4.9

Figure 1. The figure reports the fitted values of the unconditional relationship between average government
wage to per capita GDP and central government expenditures as percentage of GDP for the sample of
countries with an average polity index for the period 1991-98 greater than or equal to 5 (see text for details).

Hungary
Netherlands
BulgariaRepublicItaly
Slovak
Israel
Romania
Belgium
Poland
France Botswana
Nicaragua
Sweden
Portugal
Estonia
Sri Lanka
Czech Republic
Fiji
Latvia
South Africa
Uk
Austria
Denmark
Norway
Ireland
Finland
Spain
New Zeland
Pakistan

Honduras

Greece

Uruguay
Turkey
Germany
Bolivia
Philippines
El Salvador Switzerland
Mauritius
Australia
South Korea
Venezuela
Ecuador
Canada
Colombia
Argentina
USA

Chile
Malaysia
India
Thailand

-20

Government Expenditure as % of GDP
-10
0
10
20

Redistribution and Public Sector Relative Wage: Conditional Relationship

-2

-1
0
1
2
Average Government Wage to Per Capita GDP

3

coef = -3.6604963, (robust) se = 1.0318145, t = -3.55

Figure 2. The figure reports the fitted values of the conditional relationship between average government
wage to per capita GDP and government expenditures as percentage of GDP for the sample of countries with
an average polity index for the period 1991-98 greater than or equal to 5. The control variables are the log of
per capita real GDP and the average polity index (see text for details).

