                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CONTRACTUAL FRICTIONS AND GLOBAL SOURCING

                                             Pol Antràs
                                          Elhanan Helpman

                                        Working Paper 12747
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12747


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




We thank Morten Olsen for excellent research assistance. Helpman thanks the National Science Foundation
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing
Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 12747
December 2006
JEL No. D23,F10,L23

                                               ABSTRACT

We generalize the Antras and Helpman (2004) model of the international organization of production
in order to accommodate varying degrees of contractual frictions. In particular, we allow the degree
of contractibility to vary across inputs and countries. A continuum of firms with heterogeneous productivities
decide whether to integrate or outsource the production of intermediate inputs, and from which country
to source them. Final-good producers and their suppliers make relationship-specific investments which
are only partially contractible, both in an integrated firm and in an arm's-length relationship. We describe
equilibria in which firms with different productivity levels choose different ownership structures and
supplier locations, and then study the effects of changes in the quality of contractual institutions on
the relative prevalence of these organizational forms. Better contracting institutions in the South raise
the prevalence of offshoring, but may reduce the relative prevalence of FDI or foreign outsourcing.
The impact on the composition of offshoring depends on whether the institutional improvement affects
disproportionately the contractibility of a particular input. A key message of the paper is that improvements
in the contractibility of inputs controlled by final-good producers have different effects than improvements
in the contractibility of inputs controlled by suppliers.

Pol Antràs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Littauer Center 319
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
pantras@fas.harvard.edu

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu
1       Introduction
Insights from neoclassical trade theory and new trade theory have improved our understanding of
the structure of foreign trade and investment. Recent developments in the world economy have
sparked, however, an increased interest in new theoretical approaches designed to better understand
the evidence about firms that organize production on a global scale. These developments include
the growing role of multinational corporations in the global economy,1 their engagement in more
complex integration strategies,2 and the growing share of intermediate inputs in trade flows.3
    Although traditional theories allow for trade in intermediate inputs and for the emergence
of international production networks,4 they cannot explain some newly observed phenomena.5
First, while the traditional approaches assume that firms are (for the most part) symmetrically
structured within industries, the data exhibit substantial within-industry heterogeneity, both in
the size distribution of firms and in their participation in foreign trade.6 Second, in developing
global sourcing strategies firms decide on where to locate the production of diﬀerent parts of their
value chains and also on the extent of their control over these activities. Which activities should they
locate in the home country and which should they oﬀshore? If they choose to oﬀshore, should they
engage in foreign direct investment (FDI) and import intermediate inputs within their boundaries
or should they outsource the production of intermediates to independent foreign suppliers? As
is well known from the work of Coase (1937), Williamson (1975, 1985), and Grossman and Hart
(1986), these questions cannot be answered in a complete-contracting framework of the type used
in traditional theories of international trade.
    In Antràs and Helpman (2004) we developed a simple two-country Ricardian model of inter-
national trade in order to address some of these issues. In our model, firms in the North develop
diﬀerentiated products. Then they decide whether to integrate the production of intermediates or
outsource them. In either case firms have to decide in which country to source these inputs, in the
high-cost North or the low-cost South. Production entails relationship-specific investments by both
the final-good producers (or product developers) and their suppliers, and we assumed that the na-
ture of these investments does not enable the parties to specify them in an enforceable contract. As
in the work of Grossman and Hart (1986), we envisioned a world in which incomplete contracting
creates ineﬃciencies even when the production of intermediate inputs is carried out by integrated
suppliers. The key diﬀerence between integration and outsourcing is that only the former gives the
final-good producer property rights over the fruits of the relationship-specific investments.
    1
     The gross product (value-added) of multinational firms is roughly 25 percent of world GDP (UNCTAD, 2000).
Leaving out the value-added generated by parent firms, about 10 percent of world GDP is accounted for by foreign
aﬃliates, and this ratio has been increasing over time.
   2
     See UNCTAD (1998) and Feinberg and Keane (2003).
   3
     See for instance Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001) and Yeats (2001). Feenstra and Hanson (1996) estimate that the
share of imported intermediates increased from 5.3% of total U.S. intermediate purchases in 1972 to 11.6% in 1990.
Campa and Goldberg (1997) find similar evidence for Canada and the U.K., but not for Japan.
   4
     See Helpman and Krugman (1985, Chapters 11-13) and Jones (2000).
   5
     See Helpman (2006) for a review of the newly observed phenomena and theoretical attempts to explain them.
   6
     See Bernard and Jensen (1999) or Bernard et al. (2003) for evidence on heterogeneity in the exporting decision,
and Bernard, Redding and Schott (2005) for evidence on heterogeneity in the importing decision.


                                                         1
     Our model focused on the choices between integration and outsourcing and between domes-
tic sourcing and foreign sourcing. In particular, we described an equilibrium in which firms with
diﬀerent productivity levels choose among the four feasible organizational modes: domestic out-
sourcing, domestic integration, foreign outsourcing (and thus imports of intermediate inputs at
arm’s length), and foreign integration (and thus FDI and intrafirm imports of inputs). We then
studied the eﬀects of variations in country and industry characteristics on the relative prevalence
of these organizational forms.
     In this paper we generalize the Antràs and Helpman (2004) model to accommodate varying
degrees of contractual frictions.7 In particular, we adopt the formulation of partial contracting
from Acemoglu, Antràs and Helpman (2006). Final-good producers and their suppliers undertake
a continuum of relationship-specific activities aimed at producing an intermediate input used in
the production of the final good. A fraction of these activities is ex-ante contractible while the rest
cannot be verified by a court of law and therefore are noncontractible. Both parties are bound to
perform their duties in the contractible activities, but they are free to choose how much they invest
in the noncontractible activities. Moreover, a party can withhold its noncontractible services at the
bargaining stage over the division of surplus if it is not satisfied with the outcome. Every party’s
expected payoﬀ in the bargaining game determines its willingness to invest in the noncontractible
activities. Suppliers of intermediate inputs do not expect to receive the full marginal return from
their investment in noncontractible activities, and therefore tend to underinvest in these activities
relative to a complete-contracting benchmark. The larger the fraction of noncontractible activities
is, the larger the distortions in production are.
     We allow the degree of contractibility to vary across inputs and countries.8 As in Antràs and
Helpman (2004), we describe equilibria in which firms with diﬀerent productivity levels choose
diﬀerent ownership structures and supplier locations. We then study the eﬀects of changes in the
quality of contracting institutions on the relative prevalence of these organizational forms.
     We begin the analysis with a closed economy in which an organizational choice boils down to
outsourcing versus integration. We show that, as in our previous work, the relative importance of
the inputs provided by diﬀerent parties is a crucial determinant of the “make-or-buy” decision.9 In
particular, regardless of the degree of contractibility of the inputs, integration is profit-maximizing
if and only if the production process is suﬃciently intensive in the input provided by the final-good
producer. The new interesting result is that the degree of contractibility of diﬀerent inputs plays
a central role in the integration decision. Improvements in the contractibility of an input provided
by the final-good producer encourage outsourcing while improvements in the contractibility of
   7
     Using data on the activities of U.S. multinational firms, Yeaple (2006) presents evidence supporting some salient
cross-industry implications of our model. In particular, he finds that the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S.
imports (a measure of the relative prevalence of FDI over foreign outsourcing) is higher in industries with high R&D
intensity and high productivity dispersion. Although the generalized model developed in this paper also implies
a positive correlation between the share of intrafirm trade and productivity dispersion, it implies a more nuanced
correlation with R&D intensity.
   8
     But we maintain the standard assumption that the set of available contracts does not vary with firm boundaries.
   9
     See also Grossman and Hart (1986) and Antràs (2003, 2005).



                                                          2
an input provided by a supplier encourage integration. This contrasts with the transaction-costs
literature (e.g., Williamson, 1975, 1985), where any type of contractual improvement tends to favor
outsourcing.
    We next extend the analysis to a two-country world in which final-good producers can contract
with suppliers in their home country, North, or a foreign country, South. Wages are higher in
North, but North has better contracting institutions in the sense that larger fractions of activities
are contractible in North. Although final-good producers always locate in North and make their
investments there, we allow the contractibility of these investments to be a function of the location
of suppliers. This reflects the notion that certain clauses of a contract may be harder to enforce
when the contract governs an international transaction or when one of the parties resides in a
country with weaker contracting institutions.
    Having constructed equilibria in which firms with diﬀerent productivity levels sort into diﬀerent
organizational forms, we proceed to study the eﬀects of improvements in contractibility on the
relative prevalence of these organizational forms. We first derive the result that improvements in
contractibility in South raise the share of Northern firms that oﬀshore the production of intermediate
inputs. In contrast, improvements in contractibility in North reduce the share of oﬀshoring firms.
These results are in line with recent arguments that the quality of contracting institutions impacts
comparative advantage (see Helpman (2006) for a summary); the work of Nunn (2006) provides
empirical support.10
    We also show, however, that the eﬀect that changes in contractibility have on the relative
prevalence of particular organizational forms depends importantly on the nature of the contrac-
tual improvements. In particular, better contracting in South, which raises oﬀshoring, may reduce
the relative prevalence of FDI if the institutional improvement aﬀects disproportionately the con-
tractibility of inputs provided by the final-good producer. And better contractibility in South may
reduce the share of firms engaged in oﬀshore outsourcing when the contractual improvements are
biased toward inputs provided by suppliers rather than the final-good producer. One has to be
mindful of the impact that improvements in legal systems have on the contractibility of specific
inputs when predicting the prevalence of particular organizational forms.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops our model of the firm in the
presence of partial contracting. Section 3 studies the make-or-buy decision in a closed economy.
Section 4 extends the analysis to a two-country world. Section 5 concludes.


2        Technology and Investment
In this section we generalize the model of the firm that we developed in Antràs and Helpman (2004)
in order to accommodate varying degrees of contractual frictions. For this purpose we first focus
on a single firm that produces a brand of a diﬀerentiated product, for which it faces a demand
    10
    Nunn’s (2006) estimates suggest that the impact of cross-country variation in contracting institutions on trade
flows is of the same order of magnitude as the impact of cross-country variation in human capital.



                                                        3
function
                                      q = Ap−1/(1−α) ,             0 < α < 1,

where q is quantity, p is price, A measures the demand level, and α is a parameter that controls
the demand elasticity; the larger α is the larger the elasticity of demand 1/ (1 − α) is. As is well
known, this form of demand results from constant elasticity-of-substitution preferences for brands
of a diﬀerentiated product. This demand function yields revenue

                                                  R = A1−α q α .                                    (1)

    Output q is produced with two inputs, headquarter services Xh and an intermediate input Xm ,
using a Cobb-Douglas production function
                            µ        ¶ηh µ        ¶ηm
                                Xh           Xm
                      q=θ                                ,       0 < η h < 1, η m = 1 − η h ,
                                ηh           ηm

where θ represents productivity, which may vary across firms, and η h is a parameter that measures
the technology’s headquarter intensity. As in Antràs and Helpman (2004), both inputs are brand-
specific. That is, Xh and Xm have to be designed to precisely fit the needs of this brand; otherwise
the services derived from the inputs equal zero. Moreover, an input designed to fit this brand
cannot be usefully employed in the production of other brands of the product.
   We follow Acemoglu, Antràs and Helpman (2006) in assuming that each one of the specialized
inputs is produced with a set of activities indexed by points on the interval [0, 1], according to the
Cobb-Douglas production function
                                             ∙Z   1                ¸
                                Xj = exp              log xj (i) di ,      j = h, m,
                                              0

where xj (i) is the investment in activity i for input j. Investment in activities is input-specific:
they can be used only to produce the input for which they were designed. We assume that activities
                                        £      ¤
connected with input j in the range 0, µj , 0 ≤ µj ≤ 1, j = h, m, are contractible, in the sense
that the characteristics of these activities can be fully specified in advance in an enforceable ex-ante
contract. The remaining activities (µj , 1] are not contractible.
    The final-good producer has to supply headquarter services and she has to hire a supplier for
the intermediate input. The supplier of Xm can be the firm’s employee or an outside agent. At this
point we put aside the question of whether the firm integrates the production of the intermediate
input or outsources it; we will deal with this question later. For now note that in either case
there is an agency problem, because by assumption the firm needs a supplier. The organizational
form determines (i) fixed costs, to be specified later; (ii) variable costs of investment cj per unit
xj (i) for j = h, m and i ∈ [0, 1], where ch is borne by the final-good producer while cm is borne
by the supplier; (iii) the fractions of contractible activities µj , j = h, m; and (iv) the fraction
β h ∈ (0, 1) of the revenue that the final-good producer obtains at the bargaining stage, and the


                                                             4
fraction β m = 1 − β h of the revenue that the supplier of Xm obtains. We will discuss the details of
alternative organizational forms in due course.
    The timing of events is as follows:

  1. The final-good producer enters the industry and finds out her productivity level θ.

  2. The final-good producer chooses to leave the industry or stay and produce.

  3. If she chooses to stay, the final-good producer chooses an organizational form.
                                                            h         µ
  4. The final-good producer commits to invest {xhc (i)}i=0   in the contractible activities of head-
     quarter services and she oﬀers potential suppliers a contract, which stipulates the supplier’s
                                                                                             µm
     required investment in the contractible activities of the intermediate input {xmc (i)}i=0    and
     an upfront payment of τ m to the supplier, which can be positive or negative.

  5. A large pool of potential suppliers can earn income wm , and they are willing to accept the
     firm’s contract if the payoﬀ from supplying Xm is at least as large as wm . This payoﬀ consists
     of the upfront payment τ m plus the fraction β m of the revenue that they expect to receive at
     the bargaining stage, minus the cost of the inputs {xm (i)}1i=0 . Potential suppliers apply for
     the firm’s contract and the firm chooses one supplier.

  6. The supplier and the final-good producer simultaneously choose their investment levels xj (i) =
                                               £     ¤
     xjc (i) in the contractible activities i ∈ 0, µj , j = h, m, as specified in the contract, and both
     sides choose independently their remaining investment levels xmj (i), i ∈ (µm , 1], j = h, m, in
     the noncontractible activities.

  7. Output                 ⎛         hR                  i ⎞ηh ⎛    hR              i ⎞ηm
                                         1                              1
                                exp     0    log xh (i) di        exp 0 log xm (i) di
                      q = θ⎝                                ⎠ ⎝                        ⎠            (2)
                                              ηh                          ηm

     is sold and the resulting revenue is distributed between the final-good producer and the
     supplier in proportions β h and β m , respectively. (We will discuss the details of the bargaining
     later on.)

We seek to characterize a symmetric subgame perfect equilibrium (SSPE) of this 7-stage game.
   To characterize an SSPE of this game first consider stage 6, in which the final-good producer
and the supplier each choose their investment levels in the noncontractible activities. Using the
revenue function (1), the final-good producer’s problem is
                                                                  Z   1
                                                     1−α α
                                   max            β hA   q − ch           xh (i) di,
                                {xh (i)}1i=µ                      µh
                                              h




                                                         5
subject to equation (2), xj (i) = xjc (i) for the contractible activities, and given investment levels
xm (i) in the supplier’s noncontractible activities. Similarly, the supplier’s problem is
                                                                                 Z   1
                                                            1−α α
                                        max          β mA           q − cm               xm (i) di,
                                    {xm (i)}1i=µ                                  µm
                                                m


subject to equation (2), xj (i) = xjc (i) for the contractible activities, and given investment levels
xh (i) in the firm’s noncontractible activities. The Nash equilibrium of this noncooperative game
yields                                µ         ¶
                                         β j ηj
                       xj (i) = xjn ≡             αR, for i ∈ (µj , 1], j = h, m,                  (3)
                                          cj
for the noncontractible activities. It follows that the investment in noncontractible activities is
                                                     ⎡                              ⎤
                                                            X       Z µ
                                          −αη −αη
                xj (i)1−αω = αθα A1−α ηh h η m m ⎣exp           αη      log x (i) di⎦               (4)
                                                                                 =h,m          0
                    µ            ¶1−αωk µ            ¶αωk
                        β j ηj              β k ηk
                ×                                           ,       for i ∈ (µj , 1], j, k = h, m, k 6= j,
                         cj                   ck
                                                  P
where ω = η (1 − µ ) for = h, m, and ω =             =h,m ω . Note that ω h measures the importance
of the noncontractible activities of headquarter services in the production of the final good; it
represents the elasticity of output with respect to xhn . Similarly, ωm measures the importance of the
noncontractible activities of the intermediate input in the production of the final good; it represents
the elasticity of output with respect to xmn . These measures of the impact of the noncontractible
activities on the production of the final good play an important role in our applications of the model.
From the definition of ω , noncontractible activities of input are more important the larger the
weight η of input is in the production function and the smaller the fraction of contractible
activities µ is. That is, ω results from an interaction of technological features with contracting
frictions.
    For stage 5 of the game to generate a non-empty set of applicants for the supply of Xm the
final-good producer needs to oﬀer a contract that satisfies the suppliers’ participation constraint,
which is                                     Z              1
                                       β m R − cm               xm (i) di + τ m ≥ wm ,                       (5)
                                                        0

where the left-hand side represents a supplier’s payoﬀ from forming a relationship with the final-
good producer and the right-hand side represents his outside option before he forms this relation-
ship. In this participation constraint the investment levels in the noncontractible activities satisfy
                                                                                      £     ¤
equation (4); the investment levels in the contractible activities are xjc (i) for i ∈ 0, µj , j = h, m,
as specified in the contract; and revenue R and output q are given by (1) and (2), respectively.
    In stage 3 the final-good producer chooses the contract to maximize her payoﬀ
                                                            Z       1
                                             β h R − ch                 xh (i) di − τ m ,
                                                                0


                                                                        6
subject to (1), (2), the participation constraint (5), and the incentive compatibility constraints (4).
As long as there are no constraints on the upfront payment τ m , the participation constraint is
satisfied with equality at the solution to this problem. Therefore we can solve the upfront payment
τ m from the participation constraint treated as an equality and substitute the result into the final-
good producer’s objective function. Under these circumstances the final-good producer’s choice of
contractible investments is the solution to
                                                 Z 1                Z 1
                         max         π ≡ R − ch      xh (i) di − cm     xm (i) di − wm ,
                     {xh (i)}1i=0 ,{xm (i)}1i=0                    0                      0


subject to the incentive compatibility constraints (4) and the revenue and output equations (1) and
                                    £     ¤
(2). The solutions of xj (i) for i ∈ 0, µj , j = h, m, yield the contractible investment levels xjc (i)
        £     ¤
for i ∈ 0, µj , j = h, m. Using the first-order conditions of the maximization problem together
with (3) they can be expressed as
                                                P                  µ        ¶
                                      1−α           =h,m β   ω         ηj                    £     ¤
                   xj (i) = xjc ≡                                               αR,   for i ∈ 0, µj , j = h, m.   (6)
                                                1 − αω                 cj
Comparing this equation with (3) we obtain:11

Lemma 1 For every input j = h, m, investment in contractible activities is larger than investment
   in noncontractible activities, i.e., xjc > xjn , for j = h, m.

      Evidently, when investment in contractible activities exceeds investment in noncontractible
activities the investment levels do not maximize overall profits, because the two types of investment
are equally costly. Moreover, the relative investment levels in the contractible activities, xhc /xmc =
(η h /ch ) / (η m /cm ), are profit maximizing, while the relative investment levels in the noncontractible
activities, xhn /xmn = (β h /β m ) (η h /ch ) / (η m /cm ), are not. The latter results from the fact that
each party’s return on its investment in noncontractible activities depends on its bargaining share
β j , and these shares are not necessarily equal. If they are equal, there is no distortion in the
relative investment in noncontractible activities. Finally, note that the optimal investment levels
                                               ¡       ¢
for a profit-maximizing firm are xj (i) = η j /cj αR for j = h, m. Therefore in the equilibrium the
noncontractible activities are underinvested and the contractible activities are overinvested relative
to the revenue level R.
      This characterization of the contractible investment levels yields
                                    µ        ¶1+ αµj ηj µ        ¶ αµk ηk
                                        ηj        1−α       ηk      1−α
                       xjc = Kc                                             ,    for j, k = h, m and k 6= j,      (7)
                                        cj                  ck

where
               µ         P                   ¶ 1−αω ∙                  µ        ¶αωm µ        ¶ ¸ 1
                   1−α       =h,m β     ω       1−α
                                                       α 1−α −αη h −αηm β m η m        β h η h αωh 1−α
        Kc =                                         αθ A   ηh    ηm                                   .
                         1 − αω                                           cm             ch
  11
       For a derivation of the profit function and proof of Lemma 1, see the Appendix.


                                                                       7
This implies that the final-good producer’s profits are

                                                     π = ZΘ − wm ,                                            (8)

where Θ = θα/(1−α) is an alternative measure of productivity, and
                                    ⎡                                ³                       ´1−αω ⎤ 1−α
                                                                                                      1
                                                            m αω h
                                                                          P
                               ⎢                       β αω
                                                         m βh         1−α      =h,m β    ω         ⎥
                                    −αη −αη
                 Z = (1 − α) A ⎣αα ch h cm m                                  1−αω                 ⎦          (9)
                                                                       (1 − αω)


is a derived parameter which is proportional to the demand level; it depends on the costs of inputs,
on the bargaining shares, and on the importance of contractual frictions for headquarter services
and intermediate inputs. As expected, the profits of the final-good producer are higher the higher
the demand level A is, the lower the costs of inputs ch and cm are, and the less attractive the
suppliers’ outside option wm is. In addition, her profits are lower the larger ω h or ω m is, which
implies that her profits are higher the larger the fraction of contractible activities in headquarter
services and/or in intermediate inputs is. These results are summarized in12

Proposition 1 The profits of the final-good producer are decreasing in input costs cj , j = h, m,
declining in the outside option of suppliers, wm , and increasing in the shares of contractible activities
µj , j = h, m.

    Bearing in mind that β m = 1 − β h , note that profits are not monotonic in β h , rather they
are smallest when the revenue share of the final-good producer equals zero or one, and profits are
higher for intermediate values. So consider the shares β h and β m that maximize profits. To find
them, we maximize
                                           ⎛                ⎞1−αω
                                                  X
                                    m αω h ⎝
                               β αω
                                 m β        1−α  h    β ω⎠        ,
                                                                =h,m

subject to the constraint β h = 1 − β m , and β h ∈ (0, 1). The solution to this problem is unique; it
is given by
                                            p
                          ωj (1 − αωk ) −    ω h ωm (1 − αωh ) (1 − αω m )
               β ∗j   =                                                           for j, k = h, m, k 6= j;   (10)
                                              ωj − ωk

and it implies that (β ∗h − β ∗m ) (ω h − ωm ) ≥ 0, with strict inequality holding when ω h 6= ω m . That
is, the final-good producer wants to give the supplier less than half the revenue if and only if
the noncontractible activities in m are less important than the noncontractible activities in h.
Moreover, β ∗j is increasing in ω j and declining in ωk , k 6= j, and β ∗h = β ∗m = 1/2 for ωh = ω m . In
other words, the final-good producer wants to give the supplier lower shares of the revenue the less
important noncontractible activities in m are and the more important noncontractible activities in
 12
      For proofs of Propositions 1, 2, and 3, see the Appendix.


                                                            8
                                      β h*


                                     1


                                  β hV
                                                             •
                                  β hO




                                                                                           ηh
                                     0             η hL     η hc       η hH 1



                               Figure 1: Bargaining shares and headquarter intensity

                    ¡       ¢
h are. Since ω j = 1 − µj η j , it also implies that the final-good producer’s optimal β ∗h is increasing
in ηh , declining in µh , and increasing in µm . Finally, profits are rising with β j for 0 < β j < β ∗j and
declining with β j for β ∗j < β j < 1. These results are summarized in

Proposition 2 The optimal shares β ∗h and β ∗m have the following properties:
(i) (β ∗h − β ∗m ) (ω h − ωm ) ≥ 0, with strict inequality for ω h 6= ωm , and β ∗h = β ∗m = 1/2 for ωh = ω m .
(ii) β ∗h is increasing in η h , declining in µh , and increasing in µm .
(iii) Profits are rising with β j for 0 < β j < β ∗j and declining with β j for β ∗j < β j < 1, j = h, m.

We will use these results in the following analysis.


3         The Make-or-Buy Decision
We now consider the tradeoﬀ between integration and outsourcing; that is, whether to make the
intermediate input in-house or outsource it to an outside supplier. In this section we focus on the
case in which both choices are made in the same country, say the home country of the final-good
producer. In this event input costs do not depend on the organizational form, nor do the degrees
of contractual friction.13 Moreover, the outside option of suppliers, wm , does not depend on the
make-or-buy decision. Under the circumstances we can focus on diﬀerences in the revenue shares
β j . In view of part (iii) of Proposition 2 the final-good producer prefers organizational forms with
β h closer to β ∗h .
    13
         One could, of course, allow µm to vary with the internalization decision, but we prefer to avoid this complication.




                                                                 9
    Figure 1 depicts β ∗h as a function of η h . In view of part (ii) of Proposition 2 this is an increasing
function, and it is easy to verify that β ∗h approaches 0 when ηh → 0 and β ∗h approaches 1 when
η h → 1, as shown in the figure.
    Now consider what determines the share β h under outsourcing and integration. In stage 7 of
the game the investment levels xh (i) and xm (i) are predetermined and therefore so are the input
levels Xh and Xm of headquarter services and components. At this stage the supplier and the
final-good producer bargain over the distribution of revenue R that they will receive when the final
goods are sold in the market. Under outsourcing, Xm belongs to the supplier, while Xh belongs
to the final-good producer. If the bargaining fails, output q equals zero and so does revenue.
Moreover, given the high specificity of these inputs, which have no value outside the relationship,
the outside option of every player equals zero. We assume that the parties engage in generalized
Nash bargaining with a bargaining weight β ∈ (0, 1) for the final-good producer and 1 − β ∈ (0, 1)
for the supplier. Therefore the solution to the bargaining game, which gives every player his/her
outside option plus the bargaining weight times the ex-post gains from the relationship, delivers
the final-good producer the payoﬀ 0 + β (R − 0 − 0) = βR . Namely, it gives her the fraction β
of the revenue. By similar reasoning the supplier gets (1 − β) R. It follows from this analysis that
under outsourcing the final-good producer gets the fraction

                                                 β hO = β

of the revenue, while the supplier gets the fraction β mO = 1 − β.
    Next consider integration. Under this arrangement the supplier is the final-good producer’s
employee and therefore the supplier does not own the intermediate input. As a result the outside
option of the supplier equals zero. Following Grossman and Hart (1986), we assume that in the
absence of the supplier’s cooperation the final-good producer, who owns both Xh and Xm , cannot
produce as eﬃciently with these inputs on her own as she can with the cooperation of the supplier.
In particular, we assume that the final-good producer can produce on her own only a fraction
δ ∈ (0, 1) of the output that she can produce with the cooperation of the supplier, i.e., δq instead
of q, where q is given in (2). In these circumstances the revenue is δ α R instead of R, where
R = A1−α q α is the revenue generated by q (see (1)). It follows that now the outside option of
the final-good producer is not zero but δ α R, and this outside option is smaller the larger is the
eﬃciency loss from the departure of the supplier. As a result, the final-good producer’s payoﬀ from
bargaining is δ α R + β (R − δ α R − 0) = β hV R, where

                                          β hV = β + (1 − β) δ α

is the share of the revenue accruing to the final-good producer. The supplier obtains the revenue
share β mV = 1 − β hV . Evidently, β hV > β = β hO , which means that the final-good producer gets a
larger share of the revenue under integration than under outsourcing. In what follows, our analysis
proceeds under the assumption that β hV > β hO .


                                                    10
    Figure 1 depicts the revenue shares β hO and β hV and the headquarter intensities ηhL and η hH
for which each one of these shares maximizes profits. Part (iii) of Proposition 2 implies that all
firms with intensity below η hL prefer to outsource and all firms with intensity above η hH prefer to
integrate. By continuity, firms with intensity slightly above η hL also prefer to outsource and firms
with intensity slightly below ηhH also prefer to integrate. And we show in the Appendix that a
unique critical intensity level exists between η hL and η hH , denoted in the figure by η hc , at which
a firm is just indiﬀerent between outsourcing and integration. Firms with headquarter intensity
below η hc outsource and those with intensity above η hc integrate.14 This result is similar to our
result in Antràs and Helpman (2004).
    In order to study the impact of the quality of legal systems on industrial structure we need to
understand how contractual frictions aﬀect the make-or-buy decision. To this end first consider an
improvement in contracting for intermediate inputs, reflected in an increase in µm , the fraction of
contractible activities in the manufacturing of components. Part (ii) of Proposition 2 implies that
this raises the optimal revenue share β h . In Figure 1 this translates into an upward shift of the β ∗h
curve. As a result, the critical intensity levels η hL and η hH decline. We show in the Appendix that
the critical intensity level η hc also declines.15 The implication is that in response to improvements
in contracting possibilities for components, more firms, i.e., firms with a larger range of headquarter
intensities, choose to integrate. The reason is that with better contracting in intermediate inputs,
final-good producers are less dependent on the power of the incentives they can oﬀer suppliers,
and for this reason outsourcing – which gives the suppliers stronger incentives than integration –
becomes less attractive.
    Importantly, the opposite happens when contracting improves in headquarter services. In this
case part (ii) of Proposition 2 implies that the optimal revenue share β h declines for every firm
and the cutoﬀ η hc rises.16 As a result firms with a larger range of headquarter intensities choose
outsourcing over integration. The reason is that with better contracting in headquarter services it
becomes more important to give suppliers better incentives, because contractual frictions now play
a relatively more important role in components. In response more firms choose outsourcing, which
gives the suppliers more powerful incentives.
    These results are summarized in the following:

Proposition 3 Let fixed and variable costs be the same under integration and outsourcing. Then:
(i) There exists a unique headquarter-intensity cutoﬀ η hc ∈ (0, 1) such that profits are higher under
   14
      The last statement follows from the fact that the critical value η hc is unique, as we show in the Appendix.
Note that at this critical value profits (8) are the same when the firm outsources or integrates, which means that
the value of Z is the same under both organizational forms. Let Z (β h , η h ) be the value of Z when the final good
producer receives a fraction β h of the revenue and headquarter intensity is η h . Then the definition of β ∗h implies that
Z (β hO , η hL ) > Z (β hV , η hL ) and Z (β hO , η hH ) < Z (β hV , η hH ). For this reason the continuity of the function Z (·)
implies that there exists a critical value η hc ∈ (η hL , η hH ) such that Z (β hO , η hc ) = Z (β hV , η hc ). The uniqueness of
η hc results from the fact that the ratio Z (β hO , η h ) /Z (β hV , η h ) is declining in η h .
   15
      This stems from the fact that the ratio Z (β hO , η h ) /Z (β hV , η h ) (defined in the previous footnote), which is
declining in η h at η h = η hc , also is declining in µm at η h = η hc .
   16
      The last result stems from the fact that the ratio Z (β hO , η h ) /Z (β hV , η h ), which is declining in η h at η h = η hc ,
is increasing in µh at η h = η hc .


                                                                11
outsourcing for ηh < η hc and higher under integration for ηh > η hc .
(ii) The cutoﬀ η hc is higher the larger µh is and the smaller µm is.

This proposition implies that whenever sectors diﬀer by headquarter intensity and organizational
choices do not aﬀect fixed and variable costs, the make-or-buy decision does not depend on a firm’s
productivity, only on its sectoral aﬃliation. All firms in low headquarter intensity sectors choose
outsourcing and all firms in high headquarter intensity sectors choose integration. Moreover, the
fraction of sectors that choose integration is larger the larger is the fraction of contractible activities
in components and the smaller is the fraction of contractible activities in headquarter services.
    We next examine the impact of fixed costs on the make-or-buy decision of firms with diﬀerent
productivity levels. To this end suppose that there are diﬀerent fixed costs of running an inte-
grated or an outsourcing enterprise, which we denote by FV and FO , respectively. Under these
circumstances we can replace the profit function (8) with

                                        π i = Zi Θ − wm − Fi ,       for i = O, V,                                   (11)

where i represents the organizational form, and Zi is the derived parameter Z when evaluated at
β h = β hi and the industry’s η h . At this point we take variable costs ch and cm to be the same for
both organizational forms, and therefore for a given industry, Zi varies only with β hi . Proposition
3 implies that ZO > ZV for η h < η hc and ZO < ZV for η h > η hc .
    Following Antràs and Helpman (2004), we now assume that integration involves higher fixed
costs than outsourcing. Two opposing forces determine these costs. On the one hand managerial
overload is larger in an integrated enterprise, because management has to pay attention to many
more tasks. On the other hand there are economies of scope in management. If the managerial
overload imposes larger costs than the costs saved due to economies of scope then FV > FO . In the
opposite case FV < FO .
    For concreteness we assume FV > FO . Under the circumstances profits from outsourcing
are higher than profits from integration in all sectors with η h < η hc , independently of a firm’s
productivity level. The profit function π O is depicted in Figure 2; it has an intercept at minus
wm + FO and a constant slope ZO . The resulting profits are negative for Θ < Θ. For this reason
only firms with higher productivity manufacture in this industry. We also depict in this figure the
profit function from integration, π V ; it has a lower intercept because FV > FO and a lower slope
because ZV < ZO . This shows that in industries with low headquarter intensity all profitable firms
outsource.
    Figure 3 depicts the two profit functions π O and π V in a sector with high headquarter intensity.
Now the fixed costs still give outsourcing an advantage, as they did in the low headquarter intensity
sector. But this is partly oﬀset by lower-power incentives to the supplier, which helps the final-good
producer (i.e., ZV > ZO ). As a result, outsourcing dominates integration only for low-productivity
firms, those with Θ < ΘO .17 It follows that firms with productivity below Θ do not produce, those
  17
       Note that in sectors with η h close to η hc the cutoﬀ ΘO is strictly above Θ, but in sectors with η h close to 1 it


                                                             12
         πi

                                               πO


                                              πV


        0        •                                     Θ
                 Θ
− wm − FO
− wm − FV




  Figure 2: Profit function in a sector with η h < ηhc




            πi
                                         πV
                                              πO


                               •




            0        •                             Θ
                 Θ             ΘO
  − wm − FO



  − wm − FV




  Figure 3: Profit function in a sector with η h > ηhc




                          13
with productivity between Θ and ΘO outsource, and firms with productivity above ΘO integrate.
   Our results on the choice of organizational forms by firms with diﬀerent productivity levels are
summarized in

Proposition 4 Let variable costs be the same under integration and outsourcing and let fixed costs
be higher under integration. Then:
(i) In every sector there exists a cutoﬀ Θ such that firms with productivity below Θ do not produce.
(ii) In a sector with ηh < η hc , all firms with productivity above Θ outsource.
(iii) In a sector with ηh > η hc , there exists a cutoﬀ ΘO such that all firms with productivity above
this cutoﬀ integrate. If this cutoﬀ is above Θ, then all firms in the productivity range (Θ, ΘO )
outsource.

This proposition shows how fixed-cost diﬀerences between organizational forms interact with pro-
ductivity diﬀerences across firms in shaping sectoral make-or-buy decisions. In economies with
higher fixed costs of integration, high-productivity firms integrate and low-productivity firms out-
source in sectors with high headquarter intensity. In sectors with low headquarter intensity all
firms outsource.
    Now consider the impact of contractual frictions on the relative prevalence of integration and
outsourcing. Evidently, this analysis applies only to sectors with η h > η hc , in which the two
organizational forms coexist. As in Antràs and Helpman (2004), we measure the prevalence of an
organizational form by the fraction of firms that adopt it.
    For this purpose let the cumulative distribution function of productivity be G (Θ). Then in
sectors with ΘO > Θ the fraction of firms that integrate is

                                                           1 − G (ΘO )
                                                 σV =                  .
                                                            1 − G (Θ)

Next suppose that Θ is distributed Pareto with shape parameter κ, so that18
                                           µ          ¶κ
                                               Θmin
                           G (Θ) = 1 −                      for Θ ≥ Θmin > 0 and κ > 2.                             (12)
                                                Θ

Then                                                        µ        ¶κ
                                                                Θ
                                                   σV =                   .
                                                                ΘO
It follows that the share of integrating firms is larger the larger the ratio Θ/ΘO is. From the
definition of these cutoﬀs we find that

                                                           wm + FO
                                                      Θ=           ,
                                                             ZO
can be below Θ. In the latter case all profitable firms in the industry integrate.
  18
     There is a productivity distribution of θ, say Gθ (·), and this distribution induces a distribution of Θ = θα/(1−α) ,
G (·). When θ is distributed Pareto with the shape parameter k then Θ is also distributed Pareto with the shape
parameter κ = kα/ (1 − α) .


                                                            14
                                                          FV − FO
                                                 ΘO =             .
                                                          ZV − ZO
Therefore σ V is larger the larger the ratio ZV /ZO is. We show in the Appendix that this ratio is
decreasing in µh and increasing in µm . As a result, the share of outsourcing firms, which equals
1 − σ V , is increasing in µh and declining in µm . We therefore have

Proposition 5 Let variable costs be the same under integration and outsourcing and let fixed costs
be higher under integration. Then in sectors with η h > η hc in which ΘO > Θ the share of outsourcing
firms is increasing in µh and declining in µm .

It follows from this proposition that larger contractual frictions in headquarter services encourage
integration and larger contractual frictions in components encourage outsourcing. For this reason
overall improvements in the quality of the legal system, which raise the fraction of contractible
activities in both headquarter services and components, may raise the relative prevalence of inte-
gration or outsourcing.19 A key insight from this proposition is that contractual improvements per
se do not bias the industrial structure toward outsourcing, because the diﬀerential impact of the
improvement on contractual frictions in the two inputs plays an important role.
     Note that Proposition 5 describes the impact of variations in contractual frictions on the preva-
lence of outsourcing even when there are general equilibrium eﬀects, as long as the general equilib-
rium feedbacks do no impact the relative cost ratio (wm + FO ) / (FV − FO ), because the unit costs
ch and cm do not aﬀect the ZV /ZO ratio, nor does the demand level A. It is therefore evident that
this proposition holds in the general equilibrium of a one-factor economy, in which the fixed costs
Fi , i = O, V , and wm are proportional to the price of the factor. In fact, in this case we can think
of wm as the factor price.20


4        Foreign Sourcing
Next consider foreign sourcing. We assume that the final-good producer is located in North, which
is a high-cost country. But North has good contracting institutions so the fraction of activities
that are contractible is larger in North. Now a firm is not required to source the intermediate
    19
      To clarify this point, let λ be an index of the quality of a country’s legal system and let µi (λ), i = O, V , be
increasing functions of this index. Then the marginal eﬀects µ0i (λ), i.e., the slopes of these functions, can diﬀer
substantially. We have no theory to tell how they diﬀer, and it is clear from our analysis that there are diﬀerences
that lead to a rise in the prevalence of outsourcing and other diﬀerences that lead to a rise in the prevalence of
integration. Moreover, the shift in industrial structure may depend on sectoral characteristics, such as headquarter
intensity. We show in the Appendix an example with µi (λ) = λ for i = O, V , in which the ratio ZV /ZO is rising in
λ for η h = 0.4 and declining in λ for ηh = 0.5, where both these η h ’s are above η hc .
   20
      In our analysis we have assumed that FV > FO . Suppose instead that the fixed costs of outsourcing are higher
than the fixed costs of integration. In this case we obtain the following results. First, in every sector there exists a
cutoﬀ Θ such that firms with productivity below Θ do not produce. Second, in a sector with η h > η hc , all firms with
productivity above Θ integrate. Third, in a sector with η h < η hc there exists a cutoﬀ ΘV such that all firms with
productivity above this cutoﬀ outsource, and if ΘV >Θ, then all firms in the productivity range (Θ, ΘV ) integrate.
Finally, in an industry in which some firms integrate and some firms outsource, we find that the share of outsourcing
firms is increasing in µh and declining in µm , just as in Proposition 5. Hence, the eﬀect of contractual frictions on
the relative prevalence of integration or outsourcing is independent of the ranking of fixed costs.


                                                          15
input in its home country; it has a choice to source it in North or South. Unlike North, South
is a low-cost country, but its contracting institutions are weaker and therefore smaller fractions of
activities are contractible there. In what follows we denote with the superscript N variables that
are aﬃliated with North and superscript S variables that are aﬃliated with South. Our assumption
can therefore be represented by µN           S
                                      j > µj for j = h, m.
     In addition we assume that the final-good producer has to produce headquarter services in
North, but she can produce intermediate inputs in North or South, with cSm < cN          m . In either case,
i.e., independently of whether she produces components in North or South, she has the option
to do so in-house or to outsource. When she chooses integration in South she engages in foreign
direct investment (FDI). When she chooses outsourcing in South she engages in an arm’s-length
transaction. In the former case there is intrafirm imports of components; in the latter case there is
arm’s-length imports of components.
     To simplify the analysis we assume that the revenue shares β hi , i = O, V , are the same in North
and South. As a result we can characterize the relative size of the cutoﬀ η hc , which now depends
on whether components are produced in North or South. The cutoﬀ η N          hc is defined in the same way
as before; it represents the headquarter intensity at which the final-good producer is indiﬀerent
between outsourcing and integration when the variable costs and fixed costs are the same in both
cases, and the contractual frictions µN  j , j = h, m, are those prevailing in North. In other words, η hc
                                                                                                           N

solves ZO  N = Z N , where in computing these Zs we use equation (9) evaluated at Northern variable
                 V
costs. We have shown in the appendix that the ratio ZO      N /Z N does not depend on the variable costs
                                                                  V
and that it declines in η h . As a result the solution to η Nhc  is unique.
     We now define analogously η Shc as the headquarter intensity measure at which ZO        S = Z S , where
                                                                                                   V
  S
Zi represents the derived parameter Z in equation (9) evaluated at the unit cost of headquarter
services in North, cN                                                 S
                      h , the unit cost of components in South, cm , the Southern measure of contrac-
tual friction for headquarter services, µSh , and the Southern measure of contractual frictions for
components, µSm . Now too the cutoﬀ ηShc does not depend on unit costs and the ratio ZO             S /Z S is
                                                                                                         V
declining in ηh . As a result, the cutoﬀ η Shc is unique. The implication is that in industries with
η h < η Shc we have ZOS > Z S , and in industries with η > η S we have Z S < Z S . It then follows that
                             V                           h      hc           O      V
among the firms who choose to oﬀshore the production of intermediate inputs, those with ηh < η Shc
prefer to outsource, and those with η h > η Shc prefer to integrate, unless the fixed costs of integration
and outsourcing are not the same.
     Note that the ratio ZO S /Z S diﬀers from Z N /Z N only as a result of the diﬀerence between µS and
                                V                O    V                                                j
  N
µj for j = h, m. In the previous section (see Appendix for a formal proof), we have established
that ZO /ZV is decreasing in µm and increasing in µh . As a result, the lower contractibility of
components in South, µSm < µN                                        S  S
                                   m , tends to make the ratio ZO /ZV higher than the ratio ZO /ZV .
                                                                                                      N    N

On the other hand, our formulation implies that foreign sourcing also reduces the contractibility of
headquarter services even though these are produced in North, µSh < µN          h . The idea is that, as in
Antràs (2005), all parts of a contract governing an international transaction are relatively harder to
enforce. The lower contractibility of headquarter services associated with oﬀshoring tends to make


                                                     16
the ratio ZOS /Z S lower than the ratio Z N /Z N . Overall, whether Z S /Z S is higher or lower than
                 V                        O    V                       O   V
ZON /Z N depends on the relative magnitude of µN − µS and µN − µS . Because it seems natural
       V                                           h     h        m     m
that the contractibility of an intermediate input is disproportionately aﬀected by the contracting
institutions of the country in which this input is produced, in the remainder of the paper we focus
on situations in which the diﬀerence µN      S                                   N    S
                                       h − µh is low relative to the diﬀerence µm − µm . This allows
us to establish the following result:

Proposition 6 When µN        S                            N     S
                       h − µh is suﬃciently smaller than µm − µm , the cutoﬀ η hc is higher when
components are produced in South than when they are produced in North; that is, η Shc > η N
                                                                                          hc .


This proposition implies that when weak institutions in South have a stronger eﬀect on the con-
tractibility of components than headquarter services, then more sectors find outsourcing advanta-
geous when they oﬀshore than when they do not.21 A direct corollary of this proposition is

Corollary 1 When µN        S                            N    S
                     h − µh is suﬃciently smaller than µm − µm , the slopes of the profit functions
    satisfy:
    (i) ZOS > Z S and Z N > Z N for η < η N .
                V       O      V      h    hc
    (ii) ZOS > Z S and Z N < Z N for η N < η < η S .
                 V       O      V      hc    h     hc
    (iii) ZOS < Z S and Z N < Z N for η > η S .
                  V       O      V      h   hc


   We are now ready to characterize the joint oﬀshoring and make-or-buy decisions. For this
purpose we assume, as we did in the previous section, that the fixed costs of integration are higher
than the fixed costs of outsourcing. Moreover, we assume that the fixed costs of oﬀshoring are
higher than the fixed costs of producing at home. In addition, we make the somewhat stronger
assumption
                         FVS + wmS
                                   > FOS + wm
                                            S
                                               > FVN + wmN
                                                            > FON + wm N
                                                                         .

In this ordering the fixed costs of doing business in South are substantially higher than the fixed
costs of doing business in North, and this diﬀerence overwhelms the South’s cost advantage in wm .
The resulting profit functions are

                              π i = Zi Θ − wm − Fi , i = O, V, and            = N, S.                            (13)

   As in Antràs and Helpman (2004) it is now useful to study the equilibrium in sectors that diﬀer
by headquarter intensity, η h .

4.1    Low Headquarter Intensity Sector
First consider an industry with headquarter intensity η h smaller than η N
                                                                         hc . From Corollary 1 this
implies ZO > ZV for = N, S. Given that the overall fixed costs of integration wm + FV are
  21
    Formally, the result follows from the fact that ZO /ZV is declining in η h and µm and increasing in µh for = N, S.
Hence, by the implicit function theorem, η hc is increasing in µh and decreasing in µm . For µN    S
                                                                                              h −µh suﬃciently smaller
than µN     S                        N      S
      m − µm , we thus have that η hc < η hc .



                                                         17
                                     π ij
                                                                         π OS
                                                                                π ON


                                                              •




                                     0         •                                       Θ
                                              Θ               Θ ON
                           − wmN − FON



                            − wmS − FOS



                    Figure 4: Profits from outsourcing when η h < η N       S    N
                                                                    hc and ZO > ZO


higher than the overall fixed costs of outsourcing wm + FO , it follows that in an industry with this
headquarter intensity outsourcing dominates integration in North as well as in South, independently
of a firm’s productivity level, i.e., π O > π V for = N, S and all Θ. Under the circumstances the
eﬀective choice is between outsourcing at home and outsourcing in South. Since the fixed costs of
outsourcing in South are higher than the fixed costs of outsourcing in North, there is a tradeoﬀ
between these two organizational forms only if ZO   S > Z N ; otherwise outsourcing in South dominates
                                                          O
outsourcing in North. But the slope diﬀerential between the two profit functions from outsourcing
is driven by two considerations. On the one hand the variable unit costs of producing components
are lower in South, i.e., cN     S                    S             N
                           m > cm , which raises ZO relative to ZO . On the other hand contractual
frictions are higher in South, i.e., µN        S                                  S
                                        j > µj for j = h, m, which reduces ZO relative to ZO . In
                                                                                                   N

other words, the marginal profitability from higher productivity can be higher or lower in South
depending on diﬀerences in unit costs and in contractual frictions.22 In industries with ZO      S < ZN ,
                                                                                                      O
all firms outsource in North. In industries with ZO     S > Z N , high-productivity firms outsource in
                                                               O
South.
    Figure 4 depicts the tradeoﬀ for ZO   S > Z N . Firms with productivity below Θ lose money either
                                               O
way, and they do not produce. Firms with productivity between Θ and ΘN           O outsource in North,
                                        N
and those with productivity above ΘO outsource in South. This sorting pattern is similar to Antràs
and Helpman (2004), except that now the case ZO      S < Z N can also arise, in which all firms outsource
                                                          O
in North. Note also that in the case depicted in the figure it is possible that all firms will outsource
in South if Θ > ΘN O ; otherwise the two organizational forms coexist in the industry.
    We now calculate the fraction of firms that outsource in South–that is, the fraction of firms
 22                                                                                                          S    N
    In Antràs and Helpman (2004) we had no diﬀerences in contractual frictions, as a result of which we had ZO > ZO .
There the assumption was µj = 0 for j = h, m, and = N, S.




                                                         18
that oﬀshore–assuming the Pareto distribution of productivity (12). This fraction is given by
                                                          µ        ¶κ
                                                              Θ
                                               σ SO   =                 ,
                                                              ΘN
                                                               O

where
                                                       N + FN
                                                      wm    O
                                               Θ=         N
                                                              ,                                        (14)
                                                        ZO
and                                        ¡       ¢ ¡        ¢
                                          FOS + wm
                                                 S − F N + wN
                                                        O   m
                                   ΘN
                                    O   =         S − ZN
                                                                .                                      (15)
                                                 ZO    O

It follows from these equations that σ SO is larger the larger the ratio ZO S /Z N is. Naturally, this ratio
                                                                                O
is larger the larger the unit cost advantage of the South cSm /cN   m  is. Moreover,   from Proposition 1,
the ratio ZO S /Z N is larger the larger is the fraction of contractible activities in South, either µS or
                 O                                                                                     m
  S                                                                                 N      N
µh , and the smaller is the fraction of contractible activities in North, either µm or µh . In summary,
we have

Proposition 7 Consider an industry with ηh < η N         hc . Then no firm integrates and there exists a
cutoﬀ Θ given by (14) such that firms with productivity Θ < Θ do not produce. In addition:
(i) If ZOS < Z N then all firms with Θ > Θ outsource in North.
               O
(ii) If ZOS > Z N then there exists a cutoﬀ ΘN given by (15) such that all firms with Θ > ΘN
                  O                                O                                                     O
                                                                   ¡       ¢
outsource in South, and if ΘN   O >  Θ then all firms   with  Θ  ∈  Θ, Θ N outsource in North.
                                                                         O
(iii) If ΘNO >  Θ   then the fraction of oﬀshoring   firms   is larger the larger are the fractions of con-
tractible activities in South and the smaller are the fractions of contractible activities in North.

A key implication of this proposition is that lower contractual frictions in South encourage oﬀ-
shoring, while lower contractual frictions in North discourage oﬀshoring.
    Although our emphasis in this paper is on the roles played by contractual frictions, it is use-
ful to note that two additional sectoral characteristics also aﬀect the extent of foreign sourcing:
productivity dispersion and headquarter intensity. As to productivity dispersion, Helpman, Melitz
and Yeaple (2004) show that it varies substantially across sectors. We have a natural measure of
dispersion, embodied in the shape parameter κ of the Pareto distribution; productivity dispersion
is larger the smaller this parameter is. It is evident from the formula for the share of oﬀshoring
             ¡       ¢κ
firms, σ SO = Θ/ΘN O , that this share is declining in κ. Therefore, oﬀshoring is more prevalent in
sectors with more productivity dispersion.
    Next consider the impact of ηh on the extent of foreign sourcing. In Antràs and Helpman (2004)
we found that oﬀshoring is less prevalent in sectors with higher headquarter intensity. This is easily
generalized in the current model, in which contractual frictions vary across inputs and countries.
Suppose that contractual frictions vary across inputs but not across countries, i.e., µN     S
                                                                                       m = µm = µm




                                                          19
                                     π ij
                                                                                 π OS
                                                                                    π VN

                                                                                     π ON
                                                                      •



                                                       •
                                            Θ
                                     0      •                                               Θ
                                                       Θ ON          Θ VN
                           − wmN − FON
                           − wmN − FVN

                            − wmS − FOS



                                                                     ¡           ¢
        Figure 5: Profits from outsourcing and integration when η h ∈ η N      S       S    N
                                                                        hc , η hc and ZO > ZV


and µN    S
     h = µh = µh , but µh diﬀers from µm .
                                          23 Then


                                                 S     µ         ¶α(1−ηh )
                                                ZO         cN
                                                            m
                                                 N
                                                   =                         .
                                                ZO         cSm

Since unit variable costs of components are lower in South, it follows that this ratio is lower in sectors
that are more headquarter intensive. Moreover, since σ SO is increasing with the ratio ZO      S /Z N , we
                                                                                                    O
conclude that outsourcing in South is less prevalent in sectors that are more headquarter intensive.
    A novel feature of the more complex model is that this result may not hold when contractual
frictions vary across countries. To illustrate, consider the case in which µN           N     S
                                                                               m = µh = µh = 1 and
µSm = 0. That is, there are no contractual frictions in North, there are no contractual frictions in
headquarter services in South, but no activities of components are contractible in South. Moreover,
let α = 0.4, β hO = 0.2, and cN     S                              S   N
                                m /cm = 1.1. Then the ratio ZO /ZO is declining in η h . However,
replacing the revenue share β hO = 0.2 with β hO = 0.5 implies that the ratio ZO     S /Z N is increasing
                                                                                          O
in η h .

4.2      Medium Headquarter Intensity Sector
                                            ¡          ¢
We next consider an industry with η h ∈ η N          S
                                              hc , η hc . Corollary 1 implies that in such an industry
outsourcing dominates integration in South, because ZO     S > Z S , but in North integration dominates
                                                                  V
outsourcing for high-productivity firms, because ZVN > ZO     N . Figure 5 presents the profit functions

πN         N
 O and π V , which describe the tradeoﬀs in the make-or-buy decision of firms who choose to
manufacture components in North; the fixed costs are higher for integration while the marginal
profits from higher productivity are also higher from integration. The figure shows a cutoﬀ Θ below
which firms lose money either way, and therefore they do not produce. Firms with productivity
 23
      Recall that in Antràs and Helpman (2004) µm = µh = 0 for            = N, S.


                                                           20
     ¡        ¢
Θ ∈ Θ, ΘN   O make higher profits from outsourcing, and firms with productivity above ΘO make
                                                                                                       N

higher profits from integration. Naturally, if the fixed costs of integration are very low, such that
ΘNO < Θ, then some low-productivity firms choose not to produce and all those who produce
integrate.
    Figure 5 also shows a profit function from outsourcing in South, π SO .24 The fixed costs of
outsourcing in South are higher than the fixed costs of integration in North. As a result, integration
in North dominates outsourcing in South for all Θ whenever ZO          S ≤ Z N . In other words, if the impact
                                                                             V
on profitability of the less favorable contractual environment in South is large enough, relative to the
South’s unit cost advantage cSm /cN                       S         N
                                    m , so as to yield ZO ≤ ZV , then no firm in this industry oﬀshores.
Instead the figure shows profits from outsourcing in South for ZO           S > Z N , which means that the
                                                                                    V
South’s unit cost advantage is large relative to its disadvantage in the contractual environment.
But the figure exhibits a case in which the ratio ZO   S /Z N > 1 is not too large, so that the cutoﬀ, ΘN ,
                                                            V                                               V
at which profits from integration in North just equal profits from outsourcing in South, is larger
                                                                                                      ¡       ¢
than ΘN O . In this event firms with productivity below Θ do not produce, those with Θ ∈ Θ, ΘO
                                                                                                           N
                                                          ¡            ¢
outsource in North, those with productivity Θ ∈ ΘN            O , ΘV
                                                                      N integrate in North, and those with

higher productivity levels outsource in South. Also note that if ZO          S /Z N is higher, so as to imply
                                                                                  V
       ¡        ¢
ΘNV  ∈   Θ, Θ N , then no firm integrates in North. In this case a cutoﬀ exists between Θ and ΘN
              O                                                                                              O
such that firms between Θ and this cutoﬀ outsource in North and firms above this cutoﬀ outsource
in South.
    We now focus on the case depicted in Figure 5, in which all three organizational forms that are
                                                      ¡             ¢
feasible for a headquarter intensity level of η h ∈ ηN          S
                                                         hc , η hc coexist, i.e., outsourcing in North, inte-
gration in North, and outsourcing in South. We wish to study the prevalence of these organizational
forms. The share of firms that outsource in South is
                                                     µ      ¶
                                                S       Θ κ
                                              σO =                ,                                       (16)
                                                       ΘN V

where Θ is again given by (14) and
                                             ¡       ¢ ¡        ¢
                                            FOS + wm
                                                   S − F N + wN
                                                          V   m
                                     ΘN
                                      V   =         S − ZN
                                                                  .                                          (17)
                                                   ZO    V
                                                          ¡ S      ¢ N
It follows that this share is larger the larger the ratio ZO  − ZVN /ZO  is. From Proposition 1 we
have that ZO is increasing in µj for j = h, m, while Zi is increasing in µN
             S                   S                       N
                                                                           j for j = h, m, i = O, V .
In addition, the Zs corresponding to a particular sourcing location are not a function of the degree
of contractibility in the other country. We can thus conclude that oﬀshoring, which takes the
form of outsourcing in our middle headquarter intensity sector, is more prevalent the better the
contractual environment in South is and the worse the contractual environment in North is.
  24
    Since outsourcing in South dominates integration in South, we do not show the profit function from integration
in South.




                                                       21
    The share of firms that outsource in North is
                                                               µ          ¶κ
                                                                   Θ
                                                σN
                                                 O   =1−                       ,                                   (18)
                                                                   ΘN
                                                                    O

where
                                                             FVN − FON
                                                 ΘN
                                                  O =                  .                                           (19)
                                                             ZVN − ZON


Evidently, this share does not depend on contractual frictions in South (µSm or µSh ). As a result,
the share of firms that integrate in North, given by
                                                    µ        ¶κ       µ        ¶κ
                                                        Θ                 Θ
                                           σN
                                            V   =                 −                 ,                              (20)
                                                        ΘN
                                                         O                ΘN
                                                                           V

or simply σ N          N     S
             V = 1 − σ O − σ O , varies inversely with the share of firms that outsource in South and
is thus decreasing in µSm and µSh .
     The eﬀect of Northern contracting institutions on the shares σ N          N
                                                                       O and σ V is more complicated.
First note that σ N                              N   N                                  N
                  O is decreasing in the ratio ZV /ZO , which in turn is increasing in µm and decreas-
ing in µNh . Hence, unlike in our low headquarter intensity sector, an improvement in contracting
institutions in North does not always lead to more firms outsourcing in North. The nature of this
contracting improvement in North is important for the direction of the eﬀect: better contractibility
in headquarter services leads to relatively more outsourcing in North, but better contractibility in
components leads to relatively less outsourcing. Finally, because both σ N          S
                                                                           O and σ O are decreasing in
µNm , we conclude that the share of firms integrating in North is higher the higher the contractibility
of components is in North. Interestingly, however, an improvement in the contractibility of head-
quarter services in North, which reduces foreign oﬀshoring, does not always lead to an increase in
the share of firms integrating in North.25
     We can summarize our results for the intermediate-headquarter-intensity sector as follows:
                                                    ¡          ¢
Proposition 8 Consider an industry with η h ∈ η N            S
                                                      hc , η hc . Then no firm integrates in South and
there exists a cutoﬀ Θ given by (14) such that firms with productivity Θ < Θ do not produce. In
addition, there exist two thresholds ΘN         N                                            N
                                       V and ΘO , defined by (17) and (19), such that if ΘV > ΘO >
                                                                                                     N

Θ then:
                                  ¡       ¢                                                   ¡ N N¢
(i) Firms with productivity Θ ∈ Θ, ΘN   O outsource in North, those with productivity Θ ∈ ΘO , ΘV
integrate in North, and firms with higher productivity outsource in South.
(ii) The fraction of oﬀshoring firms is larger (where oﬀshoring takes the form of outsourcing)
and the fraction of firms that integrate in North is smaller the larger the fractions of contractible
activities are in South. The fraction of firms that outsource in North is not aﬀected by contractual
frictions in South.
(iii) The fraction of oﬀshoring firms is smaller and the fraction of firms that source in North is larger
  25
     The reason is that this type of contracting improvement improves the profitability of integration in North relative
to oﬀshoring, but it reduces its profitability relative to outsourcing in North.


                                                             22
                                     π ij                                π VS
                                                                            π OS
                                                                            π VN
                                                                 •          π ON

                                                         •
                                                    •
                                            Θ
                                     0       •                                     Θ
                                                   Θ ON Θ VN    Θ OS
                           − wmN − FON
                           − wmN − FVN
                           − wmS − FOS

                            − wmS − FVS



   Figure 6: Profits from outsourcing and integration when ηh > η Shc : four organizational forms


the larger the fractions of contractible activities are in North. A disproportionate improvement in
the contractibility of components in North may reduce however the share of firms that outsource in
North, while a disproportionate improvement in the contractibility of headquarter services in North
may reduce the share of firms that integrate in North.

As in the low headquarter intensity sector, we find in this case too that oﬀshoring declines with
contractual frictions in South and rises with contractual frictions in North. The main diﬀerence
with the previous case is that the share of firms that outsource in North is now independent of
contractibility in South and it no longer unambiguously increases when contacting institutions
improve in North. Evidently, these diﬀerences stem from the fact that under the conditions of this
proposition, oﬀshoring competes with integration in North rather than with outsourcing in North.26

4.3    High Headquarter Intensity Sector
Propositions 7 and 8 imply that in sectors with headquarter intensity ηh < ηShc , no foreign direct
investment takes place; there can be integration in North but not in South. It follows that oﬀshoring
via integration can emerge only in sectors with relatively high headquarter intensity. So consider
a sector with ηh > ηShc . Corollary 1 implies that in such a sector the marginal profitability of
integration is higher than the marginal profitability of outsourcing in each one of the countries,
i.e., ZV > ZO for = N, S. In this case all four organizational forms may coexist in equilibrium:
outsourcing in North, integration in North, outsourcing in South, and integration in South (FDI).
                                                                                              ¡      ¢
This is illustrated in Figure 6. Firms with Θ below Θ do not produce, those with Θ ∈ Θ, ΘN        O
                                        ¡         ¢                                         ¡        ¢
outsource in North, those with Θ ∈ ΘN           N integrate in North, those with Θ ∈ ΘN , ΘS
                                           O , ΘV                                               V  O
  26                        S
    Note that as long as ZO   > ZVN low enough fixed costs of outsourcing in South lead to an equilibrium in which
low-productivity firms outsource in South and high-productivity firms outsource in North, with no firm integrating.
In this type of equilibrium oﬀshoring competes with outsourcing in North, just as it does in sectors with ηh < η N
                                                                                                                 hc .




                                                         23
outsource in South, and those with Θ > ΘSO integrate in South, i.e., they engage in foreign direct
investment. Naturally, we can change the assumptions on fixed costs or the ranking of the marginal
profits Zij to eliminate one or more of the regimes in this case too. But their ranking by productivity
will not be aﬀected.
    We next study the determinants of the relative prevalence of diﬀerent organizational forms in
an equilibrium in which all four forms coexist. Our first observation is that the shares of firms that
outsource in North or integrate in North are given as before by (18) and (20), respectively. (Recall
that these expressions were derived for intermediate headquarter intensity sectors.) Because the
thresholds ΘN            N
               V and ΘO are also defined as before, by (17) and (19), respectively, we conclude that
the eﬀects of changes in contractibility on the shares σ N           N
                                                            O and σ V are identical to those in sectors
            ¡ N S¢
with η h ∈ η hc , η hc , as summarized in Proposition 8.
    It remains to discuss how the degree of contractibility of diﬀerent inputs in diﬀerent countries
aﬀects the relative prevalence of firms that outsource in South or engage in FDI there. A direct
corollary of Proposition 8 is that the overall share of firms that oﬀshore, given by
                                                            µ          ¶κ
                                                                Θ
                                        σ SO   + σ SV   =                   ,                      (21)
                                                                ΘN
                                                                 V

is larger the larger contractibility is in South, and is lower the larger contractibility is in North.
     How is the decrease in the share of firms that oﬀshore distributed between firms that outsource
and firms that engage in FDI when contractibility improves in North? To answer this question,
note that                                          µ     ¶
                                              S      Θ κ
                                             σV =           ,                                       (22)
                                                     ΘSO
where Θ is given by (14) and
                                                        FVS − FOS
                                           ΘSO =                  .                                (23)
                                                        ZVS − ZOS

                                                                   ¡         ¢
It thus follows that the share σ SV is larger the larger the ratio ZVS − ZO S /Z N is. Evidently, the
                                                                                O
share of firms that do FDI falls as a result of increases in µN
                                                              j  for j = N, S. Moreover, the fraction
of oﬀshoring firms that do FDI is given by
                                                             µ         ¶κ
                                            σ SV                 ΘN
                                                                  V
                                                    =                       ,                      (24)
                                        σ SO + σ SV              ΘSO
                                                          ¡         ¢ ¡          ¢
which from (17) and (23) is an increasing function of ZVS − ZO     S / Z S − Z N . We can thus con-
                                                                          O    V
clude that an improvement of contractibility in North increases the prevalence of FDI relative to
foreign outsourcing. Given that the share of firms engaged in FDI is negatively aﬀected by such
an improvement in contractibility in North, we also conclude that the share of firms that out-
source falls. In sum, larger contractibility in North is associated with lower shares of both types of
oﬀshoring firms, with the decrease falling disproportionately on firms that outsource.
    We noted above that an improvement in contracting institutions in South increases the share of


                                                        24
firms that oﬀshore. We next want to study the eﬀects of this change on the relative prevalence of
the two distinct types of oﬀshoring: outsourcing and FDI. In doing so, it is important to distinguish
between improvements in the contractibility of components and improvements in the contractibility
of headquarter services.
    Consider the former first. Remember that the share of firms that do FDI, σ SV , is increasing in
          ¡         ¢                                ¡            ¢ ¡         ¢
the ratio ZVS − ZO S /Z N , which we can write as Z S /Z S − 1 / Z N /Z S . We have established
                         O                              V   O          O    O
above that both ZO S and the ratio Z S /Z S are increasing in µS . As a result, the share of firms that
                                     V   O                     m
do FDI is increasing in the contractibility of components in South.
    The eﬀect of µSm on σ SO is more complicated. From (21) and (22) we obtain
                                                       µ        ¶κ       µ         ¶κ
                                                           Θ                 Θ
                                            σ SO   =                 −                  .
                                                           ΘN
                                                            V                ΘSO

A larger contractibility of components in South makes foreign outsourcing relatively more profitable
than integration in North (Θ/ΘN      V falls), but it also decreases the profitability of outsourcing in
                                 S
South relative to FDI (Θ/ΘO falls). The balance of these two eﬀects is in general ambiguous,
and we cannot rule out that increases in µSm actually reduce the share of firms that outsource in
South. Moreover, although the above discussion might have suggested that an improvement in
the contractibility of components in South has a disproportionately large eﬀect on FDI relative to
outsourcing, it is possible to generate numerical examples in which the ratio σ SV /σ SO is actually
decreasing in µSm .27
     We finally study the eﬀects of an improvement in the contractibility of headquarter services in
South on the share of firms that outsource in South and the share of firms that engage in FDI. As
                                                                   ¡        ¢
noted above, the fraction of oﬀshoring firms that do FDI, σ SV / σ SV + σ SO , is an increasing function
    ¡         ¢ ¡            ¢                                ¡           ¢ ¡               ¢
of ZVS − ZO S / Z S − Z N . Rewriting this expression as Z S /Z S − 1 / 1 − Z N /Z S , shows that
                    O      V                                     V   O               V    O
it is decreasing in µSh . As a result, we conclude that an improvement in the contractibility of head-
quarter services in South increases the share of firms oﬀshoring there, with a disproportionately
positive eﬀect on the share of firms that outsource in South. As a matter of fact, the dispropor-
tionate eﬀect may be large enough to generate a negative relationship between µSh and the share of
firms that engage in FDI.
     The results we obtained for the high-headquarter-intensity sector can be summarized as follows

Proposition 9 Consider an industry with η h > η Shc . Then there exists a cutoﬀ Θ given by (14)
such that firms with productivity Θ < Θ do not produce. In addition, there exist three thresholds
ΘN     N        S                                               N     N
  V , ΘO and ΘO , defined by (17), (19) and (23), such that if ΘV > ΘO > Θ then:
                                 ¡      ¢                                              ¡ N N¢
(i) Firms with productivity Θ ∈ Θ, ΘN O outsource in North, those with productivity Θ ∈ ΘO , ΘV
                                               ¡        ¢
integrate in North, those with productivity Θ ∈ ΘN    S
                                                 V , ΘO outsource in South, and firms with higher
   27
      For example, assume that α = 0.5, cN       N        S    S
                                            h = cm = 1, ch = cm = 0.7, η = 0.5, β O = 0.3, β V = 0.5, µh
                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                              µSh = 0.3,
                                                                                                                        
and µN m  = 1. In  this case ZV
                               S
                                 > ZO
                                     S
                                       > ZV
                                           N
                                             > Z N
                                                 O for µS
                                                        m  = 0.5 and µS
                                                                      m = 0.7, and the ratio   ZV
                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                   − Z S
                                                                                                       O   /  Z O − ZV
                                                                                                                      N

                  S                     S                               S
is lower when µm = 0.7 than when µm = 0.5. Hence, an increase in µm can reduce the fraction of oﬀshoring firms
that engage in FDI.



                                                                25
productivity integrate in South.
(ii) The fraction of oﬀshoring firms is larger and the fraction of firms that integrate in North is
smaller the larger are the fractions of contractible activities in South. The fraction of firms that
outsource in North is not aﬀected by contractual frictions in South. A disproportionate improvement
in the contractibility of components in South may reduce the share of firms that outsource in South,
while a disproportionate improvement in the contractibility of headquarter services in South may
reduce the share of firms that integrate in South.
(iii) The fractions of oﬀshoring firms, both oﬀshore outsourcing firms and firms engaged in FDI,
are smaller and the share of firms that source in North is larger the larger are the fractions of
contractible activities in North. A disproportionate improvement in the contractibility of components
in North may, however, reduce the share of firms that outsource in North, while a disproportionate
improvement in the contractibility of headquarter services in North may reduce the share of firms
that integrate in North. Moreover, the fraction of outsourcers among the set of oﬀshoring firms is
larger the smaller the fractions of contractible activities µN       N
                                                             h and µm in North are.


An important implication of this proposition is that a better contractual environment in South
or a worse contractual environment in North do not equally encourage oﬀshore outsourcing and
FDI; they tend to encourage oﬀshore outsourcing relatively more, except in cases in which the
contractual improvement in South aﬀects disproportionately the production of components.


5    Concluding Comments
In this paper we have generalized the global sourcing model of Antràs and Helpman (2004) to
accommodate varying degrees of contractual frictions. In the model, a continuum of firms with
heterogenous productivities decide whether to integrate or outsource intermediate inputs and in
which countries to source the inputs. Final-good producers and their suppliers make relationship-
specific investments which are only partially contractible, both in an integrated firm and in an
arm’s-length relationship. The degree of contractibility can vary across countries and inputs.
    Our model generates equilibria in which firms with diﬀerent productivity levels chose diﬀerent
ownership structures and supplier locations. Assuming a Pareto distribution of productivity, we
studied the eﬀects of changes in the quality of contractual institutions on the relative prevalence
of these organizational forms. We have shown that an improvement in contractual institutions in
South raises the prevalence of oﬀshoring, but it can reduce the relative prevalence of either FDI
or oﬀshore outsourcing if it aﬀects disproportionately the contractibility of headquarter services
or components, respectively. This result embodies one of the major messages of the paper: the
relative prevalence of alternative organizational forms depends not only on cross-country diﬀerences
in contractibility, but also on the degree to which contractual institutions are biased toward inputs
controlled by the final-good producer or other suppliers.
    Although our model is partial equilibrium in scope, it can be embodied in a general equilibrium
framework. Such an analysis might shed light on the sources of international income diﬀerences and

                                                 26
their relationship to the structure of contractual frictions and the resulting trade and investment.
Acemoglu, Antràs and Helpman (2006) provide a first step in this direction by analyzing the impact
of contractual frictions on technology choice and the resulting productivity levels, but their model
does not feature trade in intermediate inputs nor foreign direct investment. For this reason it cannot
address the issues discussed in this paper. It is necessary to integrate the choice of technology with
the choice of organizational form in order to obtain a unified theory which is suitable for the study
of links between the quality of contractual institutions, productivity, and trade and investment.




                                                 27
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman (2006), “Contracts and Technology Adop-
   tion,” forthcoming American Economic Review.

Antràs, Pol (2003), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    118:4, pp. 1375-1418.

Antràs, Pol (2005), “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle,” American Economic Review,
    95:4, pp. 1054-1073.

Antràs, Pol, and Elhanan Helpman (2004), “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy 112:3,
    pp. 552-580.

Bernard, A.B., J. Eaton, J.B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003), “Plants and Productivity in Inter-
    national Trade,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 4, September, pp. 1268-1290.

Bernard, A.B., and J.B. Jensen (1999), “Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Eﬀect, or
    Both?” Journal of International Economics, 47(1), 1-25.

Bernard, A.B., Stephen Redding, and Peter K. Schott (2005), “Importers, Exporters, and Multi-
    nationals: A Portrait of Firms in the U.S. that Trade Goods,” NBER Working Paper 11404.

Campa, Jose M., and Linda S. Goldberg, “The Evolving External Orientation of Manufacturing:
   A Profile of Four Countries.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 3
   (July 1997): 53-81.

Coase, Ronald H. (1937), “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, 4:16, pp. 386-405.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson (1996), “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage
    Inequality,” American Economic Review 86:2, pp. 240-245.

Feinberg, Susan E., and Michael P. Keane (2003), “Accounting for the Growth of MNC-Based
    Trade Using a Structural Model of U.S. MNCs,” mimeo, Yale University.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
    Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94:4, pp. 691-719.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 98:6, pp. 1119-1158.

Helpman, Elhanan (2006), "Trade, FDI, and the Organization of Firms," Journal of Economic
    Literature, XLIV:3, pp. 589-630.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul R. Krugman (1985), Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cam-
    bridge: MIT Press.


                                              28
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R.Yeaple (2004), “Exports versus FDI with
    Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review, 94:1, pp. 300-316.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi (2001) “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Special-
   ization in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 54 (June): 75-96.

Jones, Ronald W. Jones (2000), Globalization and the Theory of Input Trade, Cambridge: MIT
    Press.

Melitz, Marc J. (2003), “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71:6, pp. 1695-1725.

Nunn, Nathan (2006), “Relationship Specificity, Incomplete Contracts and the Pattern of Trade,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics (forthcoming).

Yeats, Alexander J. (2001), “Just How Big Is Global Production Sharing?” In Sven W. Arndt and
    Henryk Kierzkowski, eds., Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the World Economy,
    Oxford University Press.

UNCTAD (1998), World Investment Report: Trends and Determinants, New York and Geneva:
   United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

UNCTAD (2000), World Investment Report: Cross-border Mergers and Acquisitions and Devel-
   opment, New York: United Nations.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1975), Markets, Hierarchies: Analysis, Antitrust Implications, Free Press:
    New York.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, Free Press: New York.

Yeaple, Stephen R. (2006), "Oﬀshoring, Foreign Direct Investment, and the Structure of U.S.
    International Trade," Journal of the European Economic Association, 4:2-3, pp. 602-611.




                                              29
Appendix
A.1     Derivation of the Profit Function (8) and Proof of Lemma 1
We discuss in this appendix properties of the solution to the final-good producer’s optimization
problem                                     Z 1                Z 1
                      max       π ≡ R − ch      xh (i) di − cm     xm (i) di − wm ,
                  {xh (i)}1i=0 ,{xm (i)}1i=0                       0                          0

subject to the incentive compatibility constraints (4) and the revenue and output equations (1) and
(2). First note from (3) that
                                                                           ⎛                           ⎞
                                      X                                                 X
                             R−                c (1 − µ ) x       n    = ⎝1 − α               β ω ⎠ R.
                                      =h,m                                             =h,m


Therefore the maximization problem can be expressed as
                                               ⎛                            ⎞
                                                            X                           X          Z     µ
                     µ
                       max        µ
                                      π ≡ ⎝1 − α                   β ω ⎠R −                    c             x (i) di − wm ,   (A1)
                      h ,{x (i)} m
             {xh (i)}i=0   m    i=0                         =h,m                        =h,m         0


subject to
                                      ⎛        ⎡                                              ⎤⎞       1

                                                        X              Z    µ
                                                                                                     1−αω

                             R = ⎝K1 ⎣exp                        αη             log x (i) di⎦⎠                ,                (A2)
                                                        =h,m            0

where                                                                   µ             ¶αωm µ                 ¶αωh
                                                    −αη h −αηm              β m ηm                 β hηh
                        K1 = ααω θα A1−α η h             ηm                                                         .
                                                                              cm                     ch
This representation of the revenue is obtained by substituting (4) into (2) and the result into (1).
The first-order conditions (6) follow directly from this problem.
   To prove Lemma 1, note from (3) and (6) that xjc > xjn if and only if
                                                            P
                                                   1−α           =h,m β         ω
                                                                                    > βj .
                                                            1 − αω

But, since β ∈ (0, 1) for = h, m, the left-hand side is larger than 1 while the right-hand side is
smaller than 1, implying xjc > xjn .
   Using the expression for R from (A2), the first-order conditions (6) can be expressed as
                             P                     µ        ¶
                     1−α          =h,m β       ω       ηj        ¡    αµ η αµ η ¢ 1
             xjc =                                              α K1 xhc h h xmcm m 1−αω ,                    for j = h, m.
                             1 − αω                    cj

The solution to this system of equations yields (7).




                                                                   30
   Next, from (A1) we have
                            ⎛                        ⎞
                                           X                     X          Z       µ
                       π = ⎝1 − α               β ω ⎠R −                c               x (i) di − wm .
                                         =h,m                    =h,m           0


Substituting (6) into this expression yields
                                                µ         P                     ¶
                                                    1−α        =h,m β       ω
                              π = (1 − α)                                               R − wm .
                                                          1 − αω

Using (A2) together with (7) yields (8).

A.2     Proof of Proposition 1
To prove Proposition 1, first note from (8) that profits are trivially a decreasing function of input
costs and the outside option of suppliers. To show that profits are decreasing in ωj , j = h, m,
requires more involved arguments. For this purpose first note that π is decreasing in ωj if and only
if                                            ³                   ´1−αω
                                       m αω h
                                                     P
                                  β αω
                                    m βh       1−α      =h,m β  ω
                            πω ≡                       1−αω
                                               (1 − αω)
is decreasing in ω j . Taking logarithms of both sides and diﬀerentiating, we obtain
                                       µ         P                 ¶
          ∂ ln π ω                         1−α       =h,m β    ω            α [1 − αβ m ω m − β h (1 − αωm )]
                   = α ln β h − α ln                                   +                 P                    .
           ∂ω h                                  1 − αω                            1−α      =h,m β ω

Moreover,
                          ∂ 2 ln π ω     α2 [1 − αβ m ω m − β h (1 − αω m )]2
                                     = −  ³      P              ´2            < 0,
                             ∂ω 2h
                                           1−α       =h,m β ω      (1 − αω)

because

                      1 − β m αω m − β h (1 − αω m ) ≥ 1 − αωm − β h (1 − αωm )
                                                              = (1 − β m ) (1 − αωm ) > 0.

Therefore                                                   ¯
                                       ∂ ln π ω   ∂ ln π ω ¯¯
                                                <              = g (ω m ) ,
                                        ∂ω h       ∂ω h ¯ωh =0
where                                      µ                 ¶
                                               1 − αβ m ωm           α [1 − αβ m ω m − β h (1 − αω m )]
             g (ωm ) ≡ α ln β h − α ln                           +                                      .
                                                 1 − αω m                      1 − αβ m ωm
Next note that
                                       α2 (1 − β m ) [1 − β m αω m − β h (1 − αωm )]
                      g 0 (ω m ) = −                                                 < 0,
                                               (1 − αβ m ω m )2 (1 − αω m )


                                                          31
which implies
                                  ∂ ln π ω
                                           < g (0) = α ln β h + α (1 − β h ) < 0.
                                   ∂ωh
The last inequality results from the fact that ln β h + 1 − β h is maximized at β h = 1, in which case
g (0)|β h =1 = 0. Yet β h ∈ (0, 1), and therefore we have the inequality.
    We have thus proved that profits are declining in ωh , and therefore they are rising in µh (because
ω h = (1 − µh ) η h ). Symmetric arguments show that profits are also declining in ωm and therefore
increasing in µm .
    Note finally that the only channel through which the parameters ω h and ω m aﬀect profits is
through the function Z in (9). Hence, it is also the case that Z is increasing in µh and µm .

A.3    Characterization of β ∗j and Proof of Proposition 2
In order to characterize β ∗j , note that substituting β k = 1 − β j into
                                                   ⎛                   ⎞1−αω
                                                              X
                                           m αω h ⎝
                                      β αω
                                        m βh       1−α               β ω⎠
                                                              =h,m


and computing the partial derivative with respect to β j yields an expression which is proportional
to the polynomial
                        (ωj − ωk ) β 2j − 2ω j (1 − αω k ) β j + ωj (1 − αωk ) .

Equating this polynomial to 0 yields the solution (10). First note that this solution can be expressed
as                             £p                    p              ¤
                q                 ωj (1 − αω k ) − ω k (1 − αω j )
            ∗
         β j = ωj (1 − αω k )                                           for j, k = h, m, k 6= j,
                                              ωj − ωk
                       p                 p
and that for k 6= j, ω j (1 − αω k ) > ω k (1 − αω j ) if and only if ωj > ω k . Under the circum-
stances β ∗j > 0 for j = h, m, and since β ∗h + β ∗m = 1, it also implies β ∗j < 1. Second note that the
second root of the quadratic equation from which β ∗j has been solved is
                                          p
                       ω j (1 − αωk ) +    ω h ωm (1 − αωh ) (1 − αω m )
            β ∗j   =                                                        for j, k = h, m, k 6= j,
                                            ωj − ωk

and this root is larger than 1, because ω j (1 − αω k ) > (ω j − ωk ). It follows that profits are rising
with β j for 0 < β j < β ∗j and declining with β j for β ∗j < β j < 1.
    To prove Proposition 2 first note that L’Hôpital’s rule implies β ∗j → 1/2 when ωj → ωk for
k 6= j. Second,
                                                                       p
    (β ∗h − β ∗m ) (ω h − ω m ) = ω h (1 − αω m ) + ω m (1 − αω h ) − 2 ω h ω m (1 − αω h ) (1 − αω m )
                                  hp                    p               i2
                                =     ωh (1 − αω m ) − ωm (1 − αωh ) ≥ 0,                              (A3)

                                                                            p                 p
with strict inequality holding when ω h 6= ω m , because in this case        ωh (1 − αω m ) 6= ω m (1 − αω h ).

                                                         32
Moreover,       hp                                i
                                  p
                  ω h (1 − αωm ) − ω m (1 − αω h ) (ω h − ωm ) > 0 for ω h 6= ω m .

Next diﬀerentiate (A3) to obtain

                                                        µ                 ¶s
                                   ∂ (β ∗h − β ∗m )         β ∗h − β ∗m        ω m (1 − αω m )
                                                    =                                          .
                                        ∂ω h                ωh − ωm            ωh (1 − αω h )

The previous arguments then establish that the right-hand side is strictly positive. It follows that
β ∗h is strictly increasing in ω h . A symmetric argument implies that β ∗m is strictly increasing in ωm .
Therefore β ∗h is strictly declining in ωm .

A.4    Determinants of the Make-or-Buy Decision and Proof of Proposition 3
To formally prove Proposition 3, we need to study the properties of the ratio ZV /ZO . From (9),
we have
               µ               ¶αωm /(1−α) µ            ¶αωh /(1−α) Ã              P                !(1−αω)/(1−α)
        ZV         1 − β hV                      β hV                      1−α         =h,m β V ω
           =                                                                       P                                .
        ZO         1 − β hO                      β hO                      1−α         =h,m β O ω


It is useful to work with the following monotonic transformation of ZV /ZO :
                      µ        ¶                  µ               ¶          ¶    µ
                          ZV                           1 − β hV         β hV
         (1 − α) ln                 = αω m ln              + αωh ln
                          ZO                           1 − β hO         β hO
                                                                µ                                     ¶
                                                                  1 − α (β hV ω h + (1 − β hV ) ω m )
                                      + (1 − α (ω h + ω m )) ln                                         .               (25)
                                                                  1 − α (β hO ω h + (1 − β hO ) ωm )

     We will first prove that ln (ZV /ZO ) is an increasing function of ω h and a decreasing function of
ω m . This will immediately imply that ZV /ZO is increasing in ηh and µm and decreasing in η m and
µh .
     Let us start with the eﬀect of ωm . Straightforward diﬀerentiation of (25) delivers


                                        µ              ¶           µ                             ¶
          ∂ ln (ZV /ZO )                    1 − β hV         1 − α (β hV ω h + (1 − β hV ) ω m )
  (1 − α)                = α ln                     − α ln
               ∂ω m                         1 − β hO         1 − α (β hO ω h + (1 − β hO ) ωm )
                                                   (1 − αωh ) α (1 − α (ω h + ωm )) (β hV − β hO )
                                     +                                                                            .
                                       (1 − α (β hO ωh + (1 − β hO ) ω m )) (1 − α (β hV ω h + (1 − β hV ) ω m ))

To show that ∂ ln (ZV /ZO ) /∂ωm < 0 we will proceed in two steps. We will first show that
∂ 2 ln (ZV /ZO ) /∂ω 2m < 0 and then that, when evaluated at ω = 0, ∂ ln (ZV /ZO ) /∂ωm is nega-
tive.




                                                                 33
   Step 1: Simple though cumbersome diﬀerentiation delivers

          ∂ 2 ln (ZV /ZO )                                       (1 − αω h ) (β hV − β hO ) α2
(1 − α)                         = −
                ∂ω 2m                (1 − α (β hO ωh + (1 − β hO ) ω m ))2 (1 − α (β hV ω h + (1 − β hV ) ω m ))2
                                    ×g (α, β hV , β hO , ω h , ω m ) ,

where

  g (α, β hV , β hO , ω h , ωm ) = β hV + β hO + 2αωh − β hV αω m − 2β hV αω h − αβ hO ω m − 2αβ hO ω h
                                      +2β hV αβ hO ωm − 2β hV αβ hO ω h − 2α2 ωm ω h + 3β hV α2 ω m ω h
                                      +3α2 β hO ω m ωh − 4β hV α2 β hO ωm ωh − β hV α2 (ωh )2 − α2 β hO (ωh )2
                                      +4β hV α2 β hO (ωh )2 .

The function g (·) is somewhat complex, but we can show that it only takes positive values in the
relevant domain. To see this note that

∂g (·)
       = −α (β hV (1 − αωh ) (1 − β hO ) + β hO (1 − β hV ) (1 − αω h ) + 2αωh (1 − β hO ) (1 − β hV )) < 0,
∂ω m

and thus it suﬃces to check that g (α, β hV , β hO , ω h , 1) is positive. But this follows from

g (α, β hV , β hO , ω h , 1) = (1 − α) (β hV − β hO + 2β hO (1 − αω h ) + 2αωh (1 − β hV ))
                                  + (2β hV β hO (1 − αωh ) + β hV αωh (1 − β hO ) + ω h β hO α (1 − β hV )) α (1 − ω h ) ,

which indeed is a sum of positive terms.
    Step 2: Next we note that, when evaluated at ω m = 0, we have that ∂ ln (ZV /ZO ) /∂ωm < 0
if and only if
                           µ              ¶            µ                   ¶
                               1 − β hV                    1 − αβ hV ω h            α (1 − αω h )2 (β hV − β hO )
        h (β hO ) = α ln                      − α ln                           +                                     < 0.
                               1 − β hO                    1 − αβ hO ω h           (1 − αβ hO ω h ) (1 − αβ hV ω h )

But note that
                                     α (1 − αω h ) (αω h (1 − β hO ) + β hO (1 − αω h ))
                     h0 (β hO ) =                                                        > 0,
                                               (1 − β hO ) (1 − αβ hO ω h )2
and thus β hV = arg sup h (β hO ) (remember that β hO ≥ β hV is not possible). Finally, note that
h (β hV ) = 0, and thus it follows that h (β hO ) < 0 and ∂ ln (ZV /ZO ) /∂ω m < 0 for all ω m ∈ (0, 1).
This completes the proof that ZV /ZO is an decreasing function of ω m .
    The proof of ∂ ln (ZV /ZO ) /∂ωh > 0 is analogous, though we need not repeat all the steps. It




                                                                 34
suﬃces to note that letting β̂ hV = 1 − β hV and β̂ hO = 1 − β hO , we can write (25) as
                     µ        ¶                      Ã           !               Ã               !
                         ZV                              β̂ hO                       1 − β̂ hO
        (1 − α) ln                 = −αωm ln                         − αω h ln
                         ZO                              β̂ hV            1 − β̂ hV
                                                                            ³³
                                                                            ⎛        ´                ´⎞
                                                                      1 − α 1 − β̂ hO ω h + β̂ hO ωm
                                           − (1 − α (ωh + ω m )) ln ⎝       ³³       ´                ´⎠ ,
                                                                      1 − α 1 − β̂ hV ω h + β̂ hV ω m

where β̂ hO > β̂ hV . Notice that this expression is analogous to the one we used to prove that
∂ ln (ZV /ZO ) /∂ω m < 0, but with negative signs throughout. We can thus conclude that ZV /ZO is
increasing in ω h .

     Given these results we can conclude that ZV /ZO is increasing in η h and µm and decreasing in
η m . Next, we want to show that outsourcing is preferred to integration for a low enough η h , while
the converse is true for a high enough η h . This follows from noting that when ηh → 0, then ω h → 0
and                  µ     ¶          µ            ¶                  µ                      ¶
                       ZV                1 − β hV                       1 − (1 − β hV ) αω m
          (1 − α) ln         → αωm ln                + (1 − αω m ) ln                          .
                       ZO                1 − β hO                       1 − (1 − β hO ) αωm
Because β hV > β hO , using the fact that (1 − ax) xa/(1−a) is an increasing function of x for a ∈ (0, 1)
and x ∈ (0, 1), we can conclude that
                              µ                ¶αωm /(1−αωm ) µ                                  ¶
                                  1 − β hV                            1 − (1 − β hV ) αω m
                                                                                                     < 1.
                                  1 − β hO                            1 − (1 − β hO ) αω m

This implies that ZV /ZO < 1 and thus profits are higher under outsourcing in such a case (remem-
ber that fixed and variable costs are here assumed identical under integration and outsourcing).
Similarly, when η h → 1, then ω m → 0 and
                                  µ        ¶               µ          ¶                     µ                    ¶
                                      ZV                       β hV                              1 − αβ hV ω h
                (1 − α) ln                     → αω h ln                  + (1 − αωh ) ln                            .
                                      ZO                       β hO                              1 − αβ hO ω h

Again, using the fact that (1 − ax) xa/(1−a) is an increasing function of x for a ∈ (0, 1) and x ∈ (0, 1),
we can conclude that ln (ZV /ZO ) > 0 and profits are higher under integration in such a case.
   Given the monotonicity of ln (ZV /ZO ) and the two extreme cases ηh → 0 and η h → 1, we can
thus conclude that a unique headquarter- intensity cutoﬀ η hc ∈ (0, 1) exists, such that profits are
higher under outsourcing for η h < ηhc and higher under integration for η h > η hc .

     To prove part (ii) of Proposition 3 it suﬃces to use the implicit function theorem. The cutoﬀ
η hc is implicitly defined by ZV /ZO = 1. Since ZV /ZO is increasing in η h , decreasing in µh , and
increasing in µm , we can conclude that the cutoﬀ η hc is higher the larger µh is and the smaller µm
is.




                                                                     35
A.5     Numerical Example in Footnote 19
Remember that the ratio ZV /ZO is given by

              µ              ¶αωm /(1−α) µ          ¶αωh /(1−α) Ã         P                !(1−αω)/(1−α)
       ZV         1 − β hV                   β hV                   1−α       =h,m β V ω
          =                                                               P                                .
       ZO         1 − β hO                   β hO                   1−α       =h,m β O ω


Let α = 4/5, β hV = 1/2, β hO = 1/3, and µh = µm = λ = 1/4. Then we have that, when η h = 0.4,
we obtain ZV /ZO = 1.027, while when η h = 0.5, we have ZV /ZO = 1.193. If we raise λ to 1/2, we
instead obtain ZV /ZO = 1.03 when η h = 0.4, and ZV /ZO = 1.125 when η h = 0.5. Hence, the eﬀect
of λ (and thus overall contractibility) on the ratio ZV /ZO is ambiguous.




                                                         36
