NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION CASCADES:
EVIDENCE FROM AN EXPERIMENT WITH FINANCIAL MARKET PROFESSIONALS
Jonathan E. Alevy
Michael S. Haigh
John List
Working Paper 12767
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12767

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

Alevy is from the Department of Resource Economics at the University of Nevada - Reno, Haigh is
from the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission and List is from the Department of Economics
at the University of Chicago and NBER. John Di Clemente, former managing director of research
at the Chicago Board of Trade, authorized this study. Also special thanks to CBOT staff Dorothy
Ackerman Anderson, Frederick Sturm, and Keith Schap for their incredible support on site. Valuable
comments and suggestions were provided by seminar participants at Harvard University, University
of Chicago, University of Maryland, George Mason University, American University, University of
Nevada at Reno, University of Texas at Dallas, the NCR-134 Conference on Applied Commodity
Price Analysis, Forecasting and Market Risk Management (St. Louis, Missouri, April 2003), the Economic
Science Association International Conference, (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, July 2003), the Financial
Management Association Annual Meeting (New Orleans, October, 2004) and the University of Copenhagen
Workshop on Herding (Copenhagen, September, 2005). Nathan Berg, Liesl Koch, Michael Price,
Vernon Smith, Georg Weizsacker, and Anthony Ziegelmeyer provided useful comments on the manuscript.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not in any way reflect the views
or opinions of the U.S. CFTC. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Jonathan E. Alevy, Michael S. Haigh, and John List. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Information Cascades: Evidence from An Experiment with Financial Market Professionals
Jonathan E. Alevy, Michael S. Haigh, and John List
NBER Working Paper No. 12767
December 2006
JEL No. G11,G14,G28
ABSTRACT
Previous empirical studies of information cascades use either naturally occurring data or laboratory
experiments with student subjects. We combine attractive elements from each of these lines of research
by observing market professionals from the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) in a controlled environment.
As a baseline, we compare their behavior to student choices in similar treatments. We further examine
whether, and to what extent, cascade formation is influenced by both private signal strength and the
quality of previous public signals, as well as decision heuristics that differ from Bayesian rationality.
Analysis of over 1,500 individual decisions suggests that CBOT professionals are better able to discern
the quality of public signals than their student counterparts. This leads to much different cascade formation.
Further, while the behavior of students is consistent with the notion that losses loom larger than gains,
market professionals are unaffected by the domain of earnings. These results are important in both
a positive and normative sense.
Jonathan E. Alevy
University of Nevada - Reno
Department of Resource Economics
Mail Stop 204
1664 N. Virginia Street
Reno, Nevada 89557
jalevy@cabnr.unr.edu
Michael S. Haigh
U.S Commodity Futures Trading Commission
1155 21st Street NW
Washington, DC 20581
mhaigh@cftc.gov

John List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu

In economic and financial environments in which decision makers have imperfect
information about the true state of the world, it can be rational to ignore one’s own
private information and make decisions based upon what are believed to be more
informative public signals. In particular, if decisions are made sequentially and earlier
decisions are public information, “information cascades” can result. Information cascades
arise when individuals rationally choose identical actions despite having different private
information.1 Cascades may arise in myriad settings, including technology adoption,
medical treatment, and environmental hazard response. Arguably, however, the most
well-known herds or cascades occur in financial markets, where bubbles and crashes may
be examples of such behavior.2
Since the private information of cascade followers is not revealed, information
cascades can be suboptimal.

Moreover, because the small amount of information

revealed early in a sequence has a large impact on social welfare, cascades can be fragile,
with abrupt shifts or reversals in direction when new information becomes available
(Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992, 1998; hereafter BHW), Gale (1996),
Goeree et al. (2004)). Indeed, some argue that the volatility induced by herding behavior
can increase the fragility of financial markets and destabilize the broader market system
(Eichengreen et al. (1998), Bikhchandani and Sharma (2000), Chari and Kehoe (2004)).
Previous empirical approaches that examine cascade behavior can be divided into
two classes; regression-based tests that use naturally occurring data and laboratory
experiments that use data gathered from student subjects. In a review of the extant
regression-based results for herding in financial markets, Bikhchandani and Sharma
(2000) note the difficulty of controlling for underlying fundamentals, and argue that as a

1

result of this difficulty there is often “a lack of a direct link between the theoretical
discussion of herding behavior and the empirical specifications used to test for herding.”3
The laboratory environment, in contrast, allows one to control for public and private
information and thus to make explicit tests of theoretical predictions more easily. Yet an
important debate exists about the relevance of experimental findings from student
subjects for understanding phenomena in the field. For example, professional behavior in
the field might differ from student behavior in laboratory experiments due to training or
regulatory considerations, which may affect the development of decision heuristics, as
well as the overall naturalness of the experimental environment (see, for example,
Harrison and List (2004)). Locke and Mann (2005) argue that financial market research
that ignores the effect of professional expertise is likely to be received passively because
“ordinary” individuals, as opposed to professional traders, are too far removed from the
price discovery process. Bikhchandani and Sharma (2000, p. 13) also argue that “to
examine herd behavior, one needs to find a group of participants that trade actively and
act similarly.”
We find these arguments compelling and therefore combine the most attractive
aspects of these two classes of empirical research, that is, we observe professionals in a
controlled environment, and extend the literature in several new directions. First, we
compare the behavior of market professionals from the floor of the Chicago Board of
Trade (CBOT) with that of college students in an experimental setting in which the
underlying rationality of herd behavior can be identified.

Second, given the vast

normative implications of work that has established the importance of the domain of
earnings for decision making under risk (Kahneman and Tversky (1979), Shefrin and

2

Statman (1985), Odean (1998)), we examine the behavior of each group in the gain and
loss domain. We further examine whether, and to what extent, cascade formation is
influenced by both private signal strength and the quality of previous public signals, as
well as decision heuristics that differ from Bayesian rationality. Finally, within the group
of market professionals, we examine the extent to which differences in cascade formation
are associated with individual characteristics such as whether the participant is a day
trader.
Empirical findings gained from an examination of more than 1,500 individual
decisions lend some interesting insights into cascade behavior. A key finding is that
market professionals tend to make use of their private signal to a greater degree and base
their decisions on the quality of the public signal to a greater extent, than do students. As
a result, the professionals are involved in weakly fewer overall cascades and significantly
fewer reverse cascades (cascades that lead to inferior outcomes). This result is novel to
the literature and has important implications for financial markets.4 Further, while the
behavior of students is consistent with the notion that losses loom larger than gains,
market professionals are unaffected by the domain of earnings. This finding is consistent
with Locke and Mann (2005), Genesove and Mayer (2001), and List (2003, 2004), who
find, in varying environments, that market experience is associated with a decline in
deviations from classical assumptions.
Note that we observe behavioral differences not only across subject pools, but
also within the market professional group. For example, Bayesian play is correlated with
market experience and day traders are much more likely to join an informational cascade

3

than are non-day traders. Finally, we present data on the prevalence of non-Bayesian
decision heuristics, an area in which the two subject pools demonstrate similarities.
The remainder of the study is crafted as follows. Section II outlines the basic
theory and experimental design. Section III presents our empirical results. Section IV
considers implications of our results for financial markets and briefly discusses the use of
professionals in experimental practice more broadly. Section V concludes.
I. Theory and Experimental Design
Imitative behavior associated with herding has often been viewed as the product
of irrational decision-making (Keynes (1936); Shleifer and Summers (1990); Hirshleifer
(2001)). Alternatively, models such as Banerjee (1992), BHW (1992), and Welch (1992)
consider the conditions under which it is rational to join a cascade. The model we
present below, and the experimental environment we implement, is consistent with the
work of this second set of authors in that it is predicated on Bayesian updating of beliefs,
given private signals and a history of observable actions.5 The empirical investigation of
the cascade phenomenon raises interesting questions beyond whether agents update
information in a manner that is consistent with Bayes’ rule.6 Since the formation of
informational cascades is a social phenomenon, individual behavior may depend on how
agents view the rationality of others. Accordingly, we examine how our two subject
pools respond to uncertainty about the quality of information that arises due to potential
deviations from Bayesian rationality by others. We adopt two approaches. First, we use
a model in which the null hypothesis is that Bayesian rationality is universally applied
and is common knowledge. Second, we estimate a quantal response equilibrium (QRE)
model that assumes decision error (McKelvey and Palfrey (1998), Goeree et al. (2004a).

4

A. Theoretical Model and Predictions
Consider an environment in which there are two possible underlying states of
nature Ω = {A, B} , with the true state denoted by ω ∈ Ω . Each of a set of I = {1,2,.., n}
agents receives an independent private signal, si ∈ {a, b} , that is informative in the sense
that

Pr( A | a) > Pr( B | a)

and

Pr( A | b) < Pr( B | b) .

Signal precision, given by

Pr( s = ω | ω ) , is identical for all agents. After receiving their signal, each agent chooses
either A or B with their choice, ci . If ci = ω , individual i receives a reward normalized to
one. , If ci ≠ ω , individual i receives zero. Each individual receives their signal in an
exogenously determined choice order. Along with their private signal si , each agent
observes the history of choices, H i = {c1 ,..., ci −1 } . The prior probability of an underlying
state, given by Pr(ω = A) = p and Pr(ω = B) = 1 − p , is common knowledge. If all
individuals update beliefs according to Bayes’ rule and this updating is common
knowledge, the posterior probability Pr(ω | H i , si ) is easily derived. We demonstrate the
formation of an information cascade in this setting via a simple example, parameterized
with the probabilities from one of our experimental treatments.
Let Pr(ω = A) = Pr(ω = B) = p = 1 / 2 be the prior probability, with the precision
of the symmetric signal given by Pr(a | A) = Pr(b | B) = 2 / 3 , with complementary
probabilities Pr(b | A) = Pr(a | B) = 1 / 3 . Suppose that s1 = a . Bayes’ rule implies that

Pr(ω = A | s1 = a) =

Pr(a | A) Pr( A)
2
= .
Pr(a | A) Pr( A) + Pr(a | B) Pr( B) 3

(1)

5

An expected utility maximizer would therefore predict A as the state of nature since
expected profits for announcing A, π A , exceed those for announcing B, π B .7 If the
second subject also receives an a signal, updating according to Bayes’ rule yields
Pr(ω = A | H 2 = A, s 2 = a ) =

Pr(a | A) 2
4
= .
2
2
5
Pr(a | A) + Pr(a | B)

(2)

That is, two consecutive identical announcements yield a posterior probability of 0.80 in
favor of the indicated urn.8 As a result, the third decision maker should “follow the herd”
and choose ω = A regardless of her signal, as can be seen by examining the posterior in
which an opposing b signal is the private draw of the third player after two consecutive A
announcements:
Pr(ω = A | H 3 = A, A, s3 = b) =

Pr(a | A) 2 Pr(b | A)
2
= .
2
2
Pr(a | A) Pr(b | A) + Pr(a | B) Pr(b | B) 3

(3)

We classify a decision of this type—consistent with Bayesian rationality, but
inconsistent with one’s own private signal—as a cascade decision. In this example, the
decision maker in the third position reveals nothing about their private information and
thus the positive externality associated with learning from other’s choices is blocked by a
cascade. The analysis implies that, with this parameterization, public announcements are
uninformative whenever the number of public signals of one type exceeds the other by
two or more. As a result, if a cascade has not started, two consecutive low probability
draws can result in a reverse cascade whereby everyone rationally herds on the incorrect
state.
B. Experimental Design
Anderson and Holt (1997) present a seminal experimental investigation of
cascade formation using a subject pool of undergraduates. To ensure comparability of

6

our results to the extant literature, we use experimental protocols that are closely related
to those of their work.9 The parameterization in the example above is consistent with
their symmetric treatment (Pr(a | A) = Pr(b | B) ). The experimental sessions we conduct
comprise 15 rounds of the basic game for a group of either five or six players whose
choice order in each round — either first, second, third, …., sixth ― is determined by a
random draw.
A round begins with the experimental monitor selecting the state of nature with a
roll of a die that is unobserved by the subjects. Subjects gain information about the state
by drawing a single ball out of an unmarked bag into which the contents of the selected
urn have been transferred. The draw is made while the subject is isolated from the other
players. The monitor is informed of the choice of the state, and announces it publicly.
After all subjects have made their choices, the true state is revealed.
To provide exogenous variation in the informational content of the private signal
across treatments, we use two urn types. In the symmetric treatment, Urn A contains two
type-a balls and one type-b ball, while Urn B contains two type-b balls and one type-a
ball. To create the asymmetric treatment, we add four a balls to both urns, yielding 6 (5)
a signals and 1 (2) b signal in the A (B) state. This modification results in a significant
dilution of the strength of an a signal, the relative weakness of which can be observed in
Table I, which provides posterior probabilities for all possible signal histories for both the
symmetric and asymmetric urn types. As an example, the two-thirds probability that
arises after a single a draw in the symmetric treatment arises after four consecutive a
draws in the asymmetric setting.

One consequence of the change in signal strength is

7

that in the asymmetric treatment, a cascade on the B state should take place after one b
signal even with either one or two a signals in the game’s history.
The difference in signal strength across urn types allows us to investigate the
relationship between Bayesian updating and a choice heuristic based on a counting rule.
In the symmetric treatment, the optimal decision is always consistent with choosing the
state with the most informative signals. In the asymmetric case, four sequences violate
this counting rule in that it is optimal to choose B even when there are fewer b signals;
these noncounting rule sequences are (a, b) ∈ {(2,1), (3,1), (3,2), (4,2)} , as indicated by
bold type in Table I. Thus, the asymmetric treatment allows us to gain insights into the
extent to which decisions are better characterized as following a counting heuristic rather
than Bayesian updating.
To provide exogenous variation in the earnings domain, we randomly place
subjects in either a gain or a loss treatment for all 15 rounds.

The treatment is

implemented so that in gain (loss) space a correct (incorrect) inference about the
underlying state results in positive (negative) earnings of $1 for students and $4 for
market professionals.10 An incorrect (correct) choice in gain (loss) space results in no
earnings.

To generate similar monetary outcomes across treatments, in the loss

treatments, students and market professionals are, endowed with $6.25 and $25.00,
respectively.11 We believe that this is the first study to vary the gain/loss domain in
cascade games.
Experimental subjects in a particular session consist entirely of one of the two
subject types, students or market professionals. The experimental sessions with market
professionals are conducted at the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) and the student data

8

are gathered from undergraduates at the University of Maryland in College Park. The
CBOT (student) subject pool includes 55 (54) subjects recruited from the floor of CBOT
(the university). The resulting experimental design is a 2x2x2 factorial across urn type
(symmetric (S) or asymmetric (A)), domain type (gains (G) or losses (L)), and subject
type (college undergraduates (C) or market professionals (M)).

Each experimental

session consists of a group of either five or six participants making decisions within the
same treatment type over 15 rounds. Table II summarizes our experimental sessions.
II. Experimental Results

Table III, Panel A presents descriptive statistics from the experiment. We report
the rate of Bayesian decision making and the rate of cascade formation, with a Bayesian
decision defined assuming common knowledge of Bayesian rationality (no decision
error). Pooled, the 20 experimental sessions yield a total of 1,647 decisions, 1,284 (78%)
of which are consistent with a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.12 Cascade decisions (i.e.,
Bayesian decisions inconsistent with the private signal) occur in 15% of the choices. Of
these, just under one-quarter (55 out of 245) are “reverse” cascades, resulting in the
wrong inference about the underlying state.
Perhaps more revealing than the aggregate number of cascades is the proportion
of cascade decisions made when the opportunity arises. Recall that a cascade decision is
possible only when the private draw is inconsistent with the probability weight derived
from the choice history and one’s own private signal. In our data, cascade formation is
possible in 441 of the decisions, representing 27% of the total; cascades are realized in
245 (56%) of these cases. These results are presented in the potential and realized
cascades columns of Table III, Panel A.

9

Table III, Panel A also reports statistics disaggregated by subject and treatment
type. In aggregate, 81% (75%) of the students’ (market professionals’) decisions are
consistent with Bayesian Nash equilibrium. Decisions of individual subjects range from
38% to 100% Bayesian (these results are not shown to conserve space), and of the 14
subjects perfectly consistent with Bayesian rationality, 10 were students.13 In situations
in which Bayesian behavior requires that one ignore private information, fewer agents are
Bayesian: The final column of Table III, Panel A shows that 61% (49%) of students
(market professionals) ignore their signal when doing so leads to a cascade.
Interestingly, rates of cascade formation and Bayesian decision making are lower in the
asymmetric treatments for both subject pools.
The final set of descriptive statistics is presented in Table III, Panel B, which
displays results from the asymmetric treatments first pooled and then parsed by subject
pool and sequence type, where the type is either a counting rule or a noncounting rule
sequence.14 Table III, Panel B demonstrates that both Bayesian decision making and
cascade formation decline when the rules are not reinforcing:

The proportion of

Bayesian decisions by students (market professionals) declines from 76% (76%) to 49%
(42%), and the rate at which cascades obtain declines from 58 percent (55%) to 39%
(26%). These results suggest that the noncounting rule sequences pose a challenge for
both subject pools.15
To permit more formal inference, we apply a variety of parametric and nonparametric statistical techniques and group our results into five categories. Three of the
categories compare students and market professionals to consider differences in (1)
Bayesian decision making, (2) cascade formation, and (3) behavior across the gain/loss

10

domain. A fourth category concentrates on data from market professionals by making
use of additional demographic data collected during the experiment. The fifth category
considers the exogenous alteration of signal strength through the use of the symmetric
and asymmetric urns. Our analysis leads to the following insight:
RESULT 1: Market professionals are less Bayesian than students. Despite
this behavioral discrepancy, earnings are not significantly different across
subject pools.
To provide evidence of this result we employ both unconditional and conditional
statistical tests. When using unconditional tests, we account for the data dependencies
within an experimental session by using session-level aggregates to yield the most
conservative statistical tests. Our unconditional test used to support Result 1 is a nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test, which indicates that the rate of Bayesian decision
making differs across subject pools at a level of significance of p = 0.052.16
To complement this analysis, we employ conditional tests that recognize the panel
nature of our data; in particular, we use a random effects probit specification of the form
Bayeit = β`Xit + eit,

eit ~N[0,1],

(4)

where Bayeit equals unity if agent i is a Bayesian in round t under the assumption of no
decision error by preceding players, and zero otherwise, and Xit includes treatment effects
(gain, sym, and trader) and other variables predicted to influence play (order_x, diff, and
heurist).

The treatment variables are as defined above: gain equals one (zero) for

sessions in the domain of gains (losses), sym equals one (zero) for the symmetric
(asymmetric) sessions, and trader equals one (zero) for the market professionals
(students).

11

The remaining variables are defined as follows. The categorical variable order_x
(x=2,..,6) indicates the positional order in which the individual choice is made. The
posterior probability is incorporated in the variable diff, which is calculated as
Pr (ω = A | H , s ) − 0.5 and measures the accrued public and private information at the

disposal of each decision maker; note that diff, therefore, varies from zero to one-half,
increasing with evidence of the underlying state.17 The variable heurist is equal to one
(zero) for noncounting rule (counting rule) sequences. In a perfect Bayesian equilibrium,
the coefficients of these latter two variables should not differ from zero.
We specify eit = uit + αi, where the two components are independent and normally
distributed with mean zero: Var(eit) = σu2 + σα2. We estimate equation (1) using the
maximum likelihood approach derived in Butler and Moffitt (1982). Estimation of this
model is amenable to Hermite integration. To estimate the model, we use a 12 point
quadrature and the method of Berndt et al. (1974) to compute the covariance matrix.
Empirical results are reported in Table IV, which presents the marginal effects
associated with a change in each of the regressors computed at the overall sample
means.18 Concerning subject pool effects, results from both a likelihood ratio test and the
trader dummy variable in the pooled regression model (Panel 4a) support the nonparametric finding that market professionals are less Bayesian than students.19 The
estimated marginal effect in the pooled model suggests that traders are 6% less likely to
be Bayesian, and this effect is significant at the p < 0.05 level.
Despite the noisier environment (fewer professionals are Bayesian), market
professionals and students choose the correct underlying state at similar rates. Indeed,
using a Mann-Whitney U-test, we find that we cannot reject the homogenous null that

12

success rates are similar at conventional levels (p= 0.29), leading to the result that
earnings are similar across the subject pools. To dig a level deeper into this finding, we
estimate a model similar in spirit to equation (1), but make the dependent variable win be
dichotomous and equal to unity (zero) if the individual chooses correctly (incorrectly).
We also include an additional independent variable, round, to identify learning during the
course of the session; round is a time trend and increases from 1 to 15 within a session.20
The empirical results summarized in Table V support the nonparametric finding
concerning earnings and provide more formal evidence of the second half of Result 1. In
particular, the trader variable in Table V, Panel 5a is not significantly different from zero
at conventional levels (p = 0.27). This result suggests that traders and students choose
the correct urn at similar rates. The two groups differ in their temporal play, however, as
evidenced by the significant (insignificant) and positive marginal effect of round for the
traders (students), consistent with learning effects among traders.
Besides providing empirical support for Result 1, the models in Tables IV and V
reveal some of the important effects of the other independent variables. For example, the
diff and heurist coefficient estimates in the pooled model of Table IV indicate that a
marginal change in the posterior probability has a large positive effect (66%), while
decisions in the counting rule sequences are 23% less likely to be Bayesian than those in
which counting and Bayesian posterior imply the same result. Similar insights arise
when we split the sample by subject type, as summarized in Panels 4b and 4c of Table
IV. In addition, the effect of diff is statistically significant for both subject pools in the
Table V win models.

13

Interestingly, urn symmetry, as captured by the sym dummy variable, is not
significant for the market professionals in either model, implying that, for the traders, the
difference across urn types is captured by the counting rule distinction. In contrast, the
urn difference has a significant influence on students, who are much more likely to be
Bayesians in the symmetric treatment (see Table IV, Panel 4b).
A final important difference across subject pools is that the order_x variables
indicate a decline in Bayesian behavior among market professionals who choose in the
third through fifth positions. The magnitude of the effect is rather large, having from
one-third to two-thirds of the effect of the counting rule sequences as represented in the
heurist variable (Table IV, Panel 4c). In contrast, the students show no such effect. The
behavior reflected in this finding is consistent with the idea that the market professionals
recognize that no new additional information is added by choices once a herd has been
formed.
Given the significance of the diff and heurist variables, we explore the individual
data further in a QRE model, which examines the degree to which incentives affect error
rates in decision making. Following Anderson and Holt (1997), we focus on data from
our symmetric sessions and make use of the QRE model developed by McKelvey and
Palfrey (1995, 1998); (see also Goeree et al. (2004), Goeree, Holt, and Palfrey (2005)).
The QRE model assumes that the probability of choosing an urn is increasing in its
expected value. Given the positive and significant coefficient on the diff variable in
Table IV, the usefulness of such a model for both the students and market professionals
appears evident. For parsimony, we reserve detailed discussion of the QRE model for the
Appendix, However, we briefly describe the results below.

14

Table A1 in the Appendix reports estimates of the lambda parameter in the QRE
model.

The lambda parameter indicates the extent to which noise affects decision

outcomes; as λ → ∞ , the choice converges to the Bayesian outcome; as λ → 0 , the
decisions become purely random. Significant differences in lambda across the subject
pools are observed at choice orders one, two, and five as reflected in the p-values in
column “p” of Table A1. Particularly notable is the difference at choice order two, where
the students exhibit few errors. The differences in noise in the first two choice orders
lead to quite different behaviors in choice order three, despite the fact that estimates of
the lambda parameter are indistinguishable.
The lambda estimates imply that the two subject pools have similar deviations
from Bayesian rationality at choice order three. Thus, the market professionals’ tendency
to rely on their own signal due to errors in earlier rounds is as rational as the students’
decision to ignore theirs and join the cascade. Table A2 clarifies the meaning of this
result by examining in detail the impact of the noisy decision process on revealed public
information and choice probabilities for the first three rounds of play. For comparison,
we present the posteriors and choice probabilities assuming a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, as well as the actual individual decisions.
Consider the posterior probability for choice order three in Table A2, the first
choice at which a cascade may form in the symmetric treatment, when the signal history
is AAb (or BBa). In this case, the posterior probability of urn A has dropped from 0.67
for the most likely urn to 0.51 (0.59) for the market professionals (students). Thus, while
ignoring one’s private information is optimal for both groups, the noise in prior decisions
dilutes the strength of the signals, with the market professionals facing essentially a

15

random choice. The probability that urn A is chosen is 0.54 (0.83) for the market
professionals (students). The differences across the sequences in choice order three
highlights the fact that noise in the decision-making process dilutes the value of the
public signal.
Despite the evidence from the QRE estimation of the noisier environment for the
market professionals we find that the two groups do not differ significantly in their
earnings,. Further exploration into this observation leads to the following two results:
RESULT 2a: In aggregate, the rate of cascade formation is not significantly
different for students and market professionals; however market professionals
enter into fewer reverse cascades in the asymmetric treatments.
RESULT 2b: Market professionals are better able to discern the quality of
the signal associated with other players’ announcements than are students.
Evidence in favor of Results 2a and 2b follows from both nonparametric and parametric
statistical tests. Even though the rate at which cascades are realized is roughly 60% for
the students and only 50% for the market professionals (see Table III, Panel A), using a
Mann-Whitney test the homogeneous null cannot be rejected at conventional levels
(Mann-Whitney p=0.33).
While the rate of cascade formation indicates that there is only weak evidence that
students enter into a greater number of cascades than do professionals, there are
significant differences across subject pools in the rate of cascade formation in the
asymmetric urn treatment. Table III, Panel A reveals that in the asymmetric treatment
only 12% (8 of 66) of the cascades entered by market professionals are reverse cascades.
This is roughly half of the rate observed for students (25 of 99), a difference that is
statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level using a Mann-Whitney test.

16

To complement these nonparametric insights, we estimate models similar to
equation (1), but set the dependent variable equal to one when a cascade is formed and
zero otherwise. To conserve space, we do not formally tabulate these results since they
reinforce the nonparametric insights gained above. We find that in the model that pools
the symmetric and asymmetric data cascade formation is similar across the students and
market professionals. When we focus, instead, on reverse cascades and use only the data
from the asymmetric urn treatments, we find that students enter significantly more
reverse cascades than do professionals.
These results cannot be explained by our model of decision making based on
posterior probabilities derived from signals and actions. We therefore investigate the
hypothesis that market professionals use auxiliary information that the students ignore in
order to avoid reverse cascades. To do so, we augment the cascade formation model
discussed above by considering whether subjects use information specific to individuals
selecting prior to them in the current round.
Specifically, we construct two variables that each provides an indication of the
Bayesian decision making of subjects who preceded each player in a particular round:
othb_max (othb_min) measures the extent of previous Bayesian decisions by the most
(least) Bayesian players. For example, for player i whose choice order is x in round t, we
calculate othb_min as
⎡ t −1
⎢ ∑ baye jt
x
othb_min it = min ⎢ t =1
⎢ t −1
⎢⎣

⎤
⎥
∀ j : x jt < xit ⎥ .
⎥
⎥⎦

(5)

In this case, the proportion of Bayesian decisions for the individual with the lowest
proportion among all j agents preceding the current decision maker is used as the
17

independent variable, although the empirical results are robust to other specifications
including replacing the min operator with the mean or max. In the case of othb_max, we
simply replace “min” with “max” in equation (5). Note that these variables are calculated
for each t (round of the game) so that they include only those decisions that have already
occurred. The variables diff, heurist, and gain are also included, and are defined as in the
previous models.
Empirical results are presented in Table VI. Since the results across models yield
similar insights concerning the nature of interpreting signals, we focus on the othb_min
results. Although othb_min is insignificant in the pooled specification in Panel 6a, this
result masks a difference in how the two subject pools respond to the announcements of
others. Results in Table VI, Panel 6c suggest that cascade formation for the market
professionals is significantly and substantially associated with the quality of the others’
signals. The marginal effect of a higher minimum in the preceding players’ share of
Bayesian decisions is 47%, which is the largest of the variables that are statistically
significant and is an indication of the impact of the inferred signal quality on the
willingness to make a decision that relies on others. This variable is significant and
negative in the student sample (Panel 6b).
Using othb_max in the regression yields an insignificant effect for the students,
while the market professionals again respond positively, with a marginal effect of 57%
(detailed results omitted).21 We therefore conclude that the market professionals make
better use of available public information, incorporating evidence on others’ rationality in
their decision making in a way that is payoff relevant.22 Note also that, in contrast with

18

what we found with respect to all decisions (Table IV), the diff variable is not significant
for either group when we restrict our attention to the subset on cascade formation.
One may wonder whether the result on signal quality is due to market
professionals having a greater level of previous interaction with one another than
students, or, alternatively, whether there is evidence of learning in the experiment. To
explore this issue, we again examine changes in behavioral patterns during an
experimental session. The evidence is consistent with the view that market professionals
learn over these 15 rounds. Comparing behavior from the first and last three rounds of a
session, we find that market professionals: a) significantly reduce the rate at which they
join reverse cascades (from 13% to 2%), and b) increase the rate at which they join
cascades with good outcomes (from 24% to 46%).

Both results are statistically

significant in probit specifications that include the cascade type as the dependent variable
and the temporal variable along with the control variables as independent variables (full
results omitted to conserve space). By contrast, there are no significant changes in the
rate of cascade formation for either type of cascade for the student subjects.
Our final insight concerning the comparison between students and professionals
concerns the domain of earnings of the game:
RESULT 3: Bayesian behavior of the student population is affected by whether
earnings are in the gain or loss domain, while market professionals are unaffected.
Summary evidence in favor of this result can be found in Table III, Panel A, where we
observe that professionals exhibit a similar degree of Bayesian decision making across
the gain and loss domains (roughly 75%), whereas for students Bayesian play increases in
the loss domain. For example, considering the asymmetric treatments, we find that a
Mann-Whitney test indicates that college students are less Bayesian in the gain treatment

19

than in the loss treatment, while market professionals are unaffected by the domain of
earnings (students: p < 0.08; traders: p = 0.61).23
Empirical estimates in Table IV provide additional evidence of this result. In the
pooled data (Panel 4a), the dummy variable gain is not significant at conventional levels,
and it remains insignificant for the market professionals’ specification (Panel 4c). For the
students, however, the parameter estimate is both significant (p=0.028) and negative,
indicating a 6% increase in Bayesian behavior in the loss domain.

This result is

consistent with the notion that, for the student population, losses loom larger than gains.
This result is consonant with results in List (2003, 2004), who explore loss aversion in a
much different environment. Nevertheless, consistent with the notion that repetition
might attenuate such anomalies (see, for example, Knez et al. (1985); Coursey et al.
(1987)), analysis of the data from the student sessions provides some evidence that the
effect of the domain is mitigated via repetition.
While Results 1-3 highlight differences between the professional and student
subjects, we also find important differences within the group of market professionals that
are relevant for understanding their decision processes. We supplement our data with a
survey implemented at the end of the experimental session. Upon exploring these data
more closely, we find:
RESULT 4: Behavioral differences exist within the professional subject pool.
Evidence of this result can be obtained by augmenting equation (1) using the additional
demographic data collected from the CBOT floor personnel after the experiment. We
focus on data collected from a group of 28 of the 55 traders who reported information on
intensity (the average number of contracts traded per day), gender (one for female, zero

20

otherwise), yrs (years of experience), income, and overnight, (a dichotomous variable that
equals one if the trader takes overnight positions and zero otherwise). Panel A. of Table
VII reports on the Bayesian decision making and Panel B reports on the cascade
formation for these traders.
Concerning Bayesian decision making, we find that diff is not significantly
different from zero. Indifference to the magnitude of the posterior, for the Bayesian
models, does not occur elsewhere in our study, and as we discuss previously is consistent
with Bayesian rationality and inconsistent with theories of decision error. Variables that
are significant include heurist, intensity, and overnight. As with the previous results
reported in Table IV, heurist has a strong negative effect (-39.1%). Trading intensity
increases Bayesian behavior slightly (0.4%) and overnight trade has a significantly
negative impact on the rate of Bayesian decision making (-17.8%). The probit estimates
in Panel B reveal that day traders are much more likely to join an informational cascade,
as are traders with lower trading intensity, with marginal effects of -80% on overnight
and -2.9% on intensity.
For those making consequential trading decisions, the link between trading
intensity and Bayesian rationality is consistent with the empirical results of Locke and
Mann (2005), Genovese and Mayer (2001), and List (2003, 2004), who find similar
results in diverse settings that include financial, housing, and memorabilia markets. We
believe that the result on trading style is novel, and we offer some thoughts on its
implications in the discussion section below.
Results 1-4 highlight differences in cascade formation and Bayesian decision
making across subject types, and include the exogenous alteration of signal strength due

21

to urn type through the heurist variable. Our final result looks more closely at the impact
of signal strength:
RESULT 5: Deviations from Bayesian norms are greatest when the counting rule
and Bayesian updating make different predictions.
Our probit specifications reveal that when counting and Bayesian rationality yield
different predictions, both market professionals and students are less Bayesian. Table
VIII presents all of the observed signal patterns for the asymmetric treatment. Those in
which the counting rule and Bayesian posteriors yield different predictions are in bold
type. Statistical tests confirm what a visual scan of the data suggests: Bayesian behavior
is significantly reduced in the noncounting rule sequences.24

In fact, the four

noncounting rule sequences have lower rates of Bayesian decision making than any of the
other sequences, despite the fact that others have smaller diff values.
Figure 1 illustrates this insight by presenting the proportion of Bayesian decisions
for all observed histories of play as a function of the posterior probability. The noncounting rule sequences (square entries) are uniformly lower than the other choice
histories, represented as black diamonds. Compiling the results from Figure 1, we find
that Bayesian behavior occurs at a rate of 44% in the non-counting rule choice histories
and at a rate of 81% in the remaining choice histories in the asymmetric treatments.
There is an important difference in the rate of Bayesian behavior in noncounting rule
sequences that depends on whether one’s decision involves choosing to join a cascade.
The difference is best explained by considering whether individuals rely on their private
signal. Restricting attention to noncounting rule sequences, we find that individuals are
Bayesian in 31% of the cases when the decision involves choosing to enter a cascade.
Therefore, 69% follow their own signal. By contrast 74% of decisions are Bayesian

22

when there is no potential cascade and the decision is consistent with one’s private
information (see Table IX). Thus, when the signal history requires that Bayesian agents
ignore their own signal, agents generally fail to do so. As a result, the failure of cascade
decisions implies that 69% rely on their own information – a result statistically
indistinguishable from the 74% who rely on their own signal when doing so is optimal.
We conclude that for the noncounting rule sequences, a Bayesian perspective provides a
less accurate description of decision making than the simple rule of using private
information.
III. Discussion

Our cascade game data yield interesting evidence of heterogeneity both across the
two subject pools and within the market professional group.

Simple measures of

performance indicate that the students outperform the market professionals. Controlling
for learning about signal quality, however, makes clear that the market professionals use
a more sophisticated decision process, more finely parsing the quality of public
information and relying on their own signal more frequently.

Within the market

professional group, trading style has a strong effect on behavior, with those taking
overnight positions entering cascades much less frequently.
We view these results as having potentially interesting implications for financial
markets, although care must be taken with the interpretation, in part because of the fixed
payoff that subjects received in our experiment.25

However, fixed prices are not

irrelevant in financial markets as variability in order size means that prices need not
change with each transaction. Thus, it is reasonable to study cascade decisions occurring
at a constant price as well as those that lead to a change in price.

23

We believe it is plausible that the heterogeneity among traders regarding cascade
formation may be related to differences in their trading practices, including those around
fixed prices. Local floor traders who do not take overnight positions typically specialize
as market makers and are more likely to face situations in which herding, including
herding at a constant price, is part of their trading practice. This type of herding may
occur, for example, when several floor traders each take a portion of a large institutional
order. Manaster and Mann (1999) provide evidence that market makers are willing to
give up their advantage in executions, narrowing or eliminating the bid-ask spread, when
they have an informational advantage over the outside order. If information is dispersed
among traders heterogeneously, the situation is similar to the cascade environment we
study here. A crucial difference is that timing and transaction size in the market is
endogenous, and ultimately, of course, prices do change.26
Avery and Zemsky (1998) introduce flexible pricing into the BHW model and
find that for cascades to form, the value uncertainty, which we implement in our
experimental protocol, needs to be accompanied by event uncertainty (the possibility of a
change in asset value) and composition uncertainty (which implies that the distribution of
trader types is not common knowledge). Our results on the discernment of the quality of
public announcements suggest that experienced professionals are better able to estimate
the composition of the distribution of trader types, and so may act to mitigate price
bubbles and crashes.27 Clearly, while additional research regarding the impact of trader
specialization is warranted, our findings highlight the benefits of controlled
experimentation with nonstudent subject pools.

24

We believe that our findings may also shed light on other types of cascade
behavior. Consider Welch’s (1992) interesting model of initial public offerings (IPOs),
for example, which addresses cascade formation at a fixed price due to regulatory
requirements for IPOs. Welch finds that issuing firms have an interest in pricing to
generate an informational cascade in order to increase the probability of a successful
offering. Our results that emphasize the potential for cascade fragility arising from
variation in the ability to interpret signal quality may be important in this context. One
possible implication is that when underpricing of offerings is optimal in the Welch
model, heterogeneity in signal strength and interpretation might play an instrumental role
since reverse cascades in which no investment occurs will be fragile. The welfare
implications, however, are not immediately obvious given that the resulting cascades are
of shorter duration. Further, the importance of the effect may differ across firms or
industries depending on the economies of scale of the investment and thus the need to
have full or only partial subscription (Welch (1992), p. 709).
Both the differences due to specialization and the heterogeneity in signal quality
and processing abilities suggest fruitful directions for future research. How the
specialized skills of market participants interact in price discovery could be explored in
experiments that move towards a full market setting, but in which liquidity and
informational conditions are varied in a controlled manner.

A natural part of this

research program would be to extend the current environment to study the impact of
heterogeneity on the IPO model of Welch (1992).

In a recent study that provides

evidence from asset market experiments with student subjects Dufwenberg, Lundqvist,
and Moore (2005) find that mixed experience levels can reduce the incidence of bubbles

25

and crashes. Heterogeneous subject pools that include professionals would shed crucial
light on this issue, and help to identify the mechanisms underlying cascade formation and
fragility in settings that mix fixed and variable prices.
IV. Concluding Comments

In this study, we introduce market professionals from the CBOT floor to a
controlled experimental environment. Making use of information cascades games, we
report several insights. While student subjects more closely follow Bayes’ rule, they do
not perform significantly better than the market professionals along the important
dimension of earnings. This puzzle is explained by the fact that professionals are more
sophisticated in their use of public information, as manifested over the course of the
decision process: Market professionals are less Bayesian when making decisions later in
the choice order in a cascade game, consistent with recognizing that the quality of initial
announcements is variable, altering the payoffs of joining cascades.
While market professionals learn over the course of an experimental session to
account for the quality of others’ decisions, student subjects fail to do so. A further
insight is that market professionals are consistent in behavior over the gain and loss
domains, while in aggregate, students behavior is consistent with the notion of loss
aversion. Perhaps most provocatively for the operation of markets, we find an important
heterogeneity among the market professionals that depends on their trading style. In
summary, our data reveal that the decisions of market professionals are consistent with
behaviors that may mitigate informational externalities in market settings, and thus
reduce the severity of price bubbles due to informational cascades.

26

Besides revealing both positive and normative insights, our work also offers a
methodological contribution. For example, it highlights the potential for experiments
with students and professionals to be complementary inputs to research when field data is
suggestive but inconclusive. Indeed, in transferring the insights gained in the laboratory
with student subjects to the field, a necessary first step is to explore how market
professionals behave in strategically similar situations. In this spirit, we focus on the
representativeness of the sampled population to lend insights into which empirical results
are similar across subject pools. A related issue concerns the representativeness of the
environment, which also merits serious consideration. For example, before we can begin
to make reasonable arguments that behavior observed in the lab is a good indicator of
behavior in the field, we must explore whether the other dimensions of the laboratory
environment might cause differences in behavior, including the abstract task, the stakes,
the good, and the institution. While our research represents a necessary first step in the
discovery process, we hope that future efforts will explore more fully other potentially
important dimensions of the controlled laboratory experiment.

27

Reference List
Anderson, Lisa R., 1994, Information cascades, Dissertation, Universty of Virginia.
Anderson, Lisa R. and Charles A. Holt, 1997, Information cascades in the laboratory,
American Economic Review 87, 847-862.
Avery, Christopher and Peter Zemsky, 1998, Multidimensional uncertainty and herd
behavior in financial markets, American Economic Review 88, 724-748.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. 1992, A simple model of herd behavior, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107, 797-818.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.
Berkman, Henk, 1996, Large option trades, market makers, and limit orders, Review of
Financial Studies 9, 977-1002.
Berndt, Ernst, Bronwyn H. Hall, Robert E. Hall, and Jerry A. Hausman, 1974, Estimation
and inference in nonlinear structural models, Annals of Economic and Social
Measurment 3, 653-665.
Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, 1992, A theory of fads, fashion,
custom, and cultural change as informational cascades, Journal of Political
Economy 100, 992-1026.
Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, 1998, Learning from the
behavior of others: Conformity, fads, and informational cascades, Journal of

28

Economic Perspectives 12, 151-170.
Bikhchandani, Sushil and Sunil Sharma, 2000, Herd behavior in financial markets: A
review, IMF Working Paper 48.
Butler, John S. and Robert Moffitt, 1982, A computationally efficient quadrature
procedure for the one-factor multinomial probit model, Econometrica 50, 761764.
Celen, Bogachan and Shachar Kariv, 2004, Distinguishing informational cascades from
herding behavior in the laboratory, American Economic Review 94, 484-497.
Celen, Bogachan and Shachar Kariv, 2005, An experimental test of observational
learning under imperfect information, Economic Theory 26, 677-699.
Chamley, Christophe P. 2004, Rational Herds: Economic Models of Social Learning,
(Cambridge, U.K., Cambridge University Press).
Chamley, Christophe P. and Douglas Gale, 1994, Information revelation and strategic
delay in a model of investment, Econometrica 62, 1065-1085.
Chari, Varadarajan V. and Patrick J. Kehoe, 2004, Financial crises as herds: Overturning
the critiques, Journal of Economic Theory 119, 128-150.
Cipriani, Marco and Antonio Guarino, 2005a, Herd behavior and contagion in financial
markets, Working Paper, George Washington University.
Cipriani, Marco and Antonio Guarino, 2005b, Herd behavior in a laboratory financial
market, American Economic Review 95, 1403-1426.
29

Daniel, Kent., David Hirshleifer, and Avandihar Subrhamanyam, 2001, Mispricing,
covariance risk, and the cross-section of security returns, Journal of Finance 56,
921-965.
Devenow, Andrea and Ivo Welch, 1996, Rational herding in financial economics,
European Economic Review 40, 603-615.
Drehmann, Mathias, Jorg Oechssler, and Andreas Roider, 2005, Herding and contrarian
behavior in financial markets: An internet experiment, American Economic
Review 95, 1403-1426.
Dufwenberg, Martin, Tobias Lindqvist, and Evan Moore, 2005, Bubbles and experience:
An experiment, American Economic Review 95, 1731-1737.
Eichengreen, Barry, Donald Mathieson, Bankim Chandha, Anne Jansen, Laura Kodres,
and Sunil Sharma, 1998, Hedge funds and financial market dynamics, IMF
Occasional Paper 172.
Fama, Eugene F. 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance,
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 283-306.
Gale, Douglas, 1996, What have we learned from social learning?, European Economic
Review 40, 617-628.
Garber, Peter 2000, Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias, (MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.).
Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, 2001, Loss aversion and seller behavior:

30

Evidence from the housing market, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 12331260.
Gigerenzer, Gerd and David J. Murray, Cognition as Intuitive Statistics, (Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, N.J.).
Goeree, Jacob K., Charles A. Holt, and Thomas R. Palfrey, 2005, Regular quantal
response equilibrium, Experimental Economics 8, 347-367.
Goeree, Jacob K., Thomas R. Palfrey, Brian W. Rogers, and Richard D. McKelvey, 2004,
Self-correcting Information Cascades, Working Paper: California Institute of
Technology.
Harrison, Glenn and John A. List, 2004, Field experiments, Journal of Economic
Literature 42, 1009-1055.
Hirshleifer, David, 2001, Investor psychology and asset pricing, Journal of Finance LVI,
1533-1597.
Hirshleifer, David and Siew Hong Teoh, 2003, Herd behavior and cascading in capital
markets: A review and synthesis, European Financial Management 9, 25-66.
Huck, Steffen and Jorg Oechssler, 2000, Informational cascades in the laboratory: Do
they occur for the right reasons? Journal of Economic Psychology 21, 661-671.
Hung, Angela A. and Charles R. Plott, 2001, Information cascades: Replication and an
extension to majority rule and conformity-rewarding institutions, American
Economic Review 91, 1508-1520.

31

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk, Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Keynes, John M. 1936, The general theory of employment, interest and money,
(Macmillan, London).
Knez, Peter, Vernon L. Smith, and Arlington Willliams, 1985, Individual rationality,
market rationality, and value estimation, American Economic Review 75, 397402.
Koessler, Frederic and Anthony Ziegelmeyer, 2000, Tie-breaking rules and informational
cascades: A note, University Louis Pasteur Working paper .
Kubler, Dorothea and Georg Weizsacker, 2004, Limited depth of reasoning and failure of
cascade formation in the laboratory, Review of Economic Studies 71, 425-441.
Kubler, Dorothea and Georg Weizsacker, 2005, Are longer cascades more stable?
Journal of the European Economic Association 3, 330-339.
Lee, In H. 1998, Market crashes and informational avalanches, Review of Economic
Studies 65, 741-760.
List, John A. 2003, Does market experience eliminate market anomalies?, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118, 41-71.
List, John A. 2004, Neoclassical theory versus prospect theory: Evidence from the
marketplace, Econometrica 72, 615-625.
Locke, Peter R. and Steven C. Mann, 2005, Professional trader discipline and trade
32

disposition, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 401-444.
MacKay, Charles 1980, Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds
(Three Rivers Press, New York).
Manaster, Steven and Steven C. Mann, 1999, Sources of market making profits: Man
does not live by spread alone, Working paper, Texas Christian University.
McKelvey, Richard D. and Thomas R. Palfrey, 1995, Quantal response equilibria for
normal form games, Games and Economic Behavior 10, 6-38.
McKelvey, Richard D. and Thomas R. Palfrey , 1998, Quantal response equilibria for
extensive form games, Experimental Economics 1, 9-41.
Noth, Markus and Martin Weber, 2003, Information aggregation with random ordering:
Cascades and overconfidence, Economic Journal 113, 166-189.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of
Finance 53, 1775-1798.
Sgroi, Daniel, 2003, The right choice at the right time: A herding experiment in
endogenous time, Experimental Economics 6, 159-180.
Shefrin, Hersh M. and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early and
ride losers too long, Journal of Finance 40, 777-790.
Shleifer, Andrei and Lawrence H. Summers, 1990, The noise trader approach to finance,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 19-33.

33

Smith, Lones and Peter Sorenson, 2000, Pathological outcomes of observational learning,
Econometrica 68, 371-398.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
biases, Science 185, 1124-1131.
Vives, Xavier, 1996, Social learning and rational expectations, European Economic
Review 40, 589-601.
Welch, Ivo, 1992, Sequential sales, learning, and cascades, Journal of Finance 47, 695732.
Willinger, M. and Anthony Ziegelemeyer, 1998, Are more informed agents able to
shatter information cascades in the lab?, in P. Cohendet, Patrick Llerna, Hubert
Stahn, and Gisele Umbhauer eds.: The Economics of Networks: Interaction and
Behaviours, (Springer-Verlag, London).

34

Appendix: QRE Estimation Results

Results in Table IV lead us to investigate a modification of the quantal response
equilibrium (QRE) developed by McKelvey and Palfrey (1995, 1998). By accounting for
the noise associated with the probabilistic choice rule, the QRE yields alternative
measures of the public belief. Our approach invokes a rational expectations assumption
for the error distribution. There is mixed evidence for this assumption (see Goeree et al.
(2004b) and Kubler and Weizsacker (2004a, 2004b)), but several alternative
specifications yield similar insights (these results are available upon request).
Let the probability of choosing urn A be given by

(

)

(

)

pr (ci = A | H i , si ) = pr π iA + ε iA > π iB + ε iB = pr ε i > 1 − 2π iA ,
where π iA = pr ( A | H i , si ) * $W = $W − π iB , and ε i = ε iA − ε iB . For comparability across
subject pools we normalize so that $W = 1 for both subject pools. If the errors have an
extreme value distribution, then the conditional probability of the urn choice is given by
the logistic distribution yielding

pr (ci = A | H i , si ) =

1
1 + exp λi 1 − 2π iA λ1...i −1

( (

(

))) .

The lambda parameter indicates the extent to which noise affects decision outcomes. As

λ → ∞ , the choice converges to the Bayesian outcome; as λ → 0 , the decisions become
purely random. Note that the posterior probability that the urn is A, π iA , is a function of
the lambda estimates from previous choice orders, with (λ1...i −1 ) representing the vector
of previous estimates.
In our estimation, we follow Anderson and Holt (1997) and focus on the
symmetric data. The QRE results using these data are displayed in Tables X and XI. Our

35

results emphasize the fact that not only the numbers of each signal, but also the order in
which they are revealed have an important impact on behavior. For example, note the
posterior probability for order choice three in Table X, the first choice where a cascade
may form in the symmetric treatment, when the signal history is AAb (or BBa) (since the
AAb and BBa are symmetric, Table X reports the results from these sequences as one
choice history (AAb); all other symmetric choice sequences are treated similarly). In this
case the posterior probability of urn A has dropped from 0.67 for the most likely urn to
0.51 (0.59) for the market professionals (students). Thus, while ignoring one’s private
information is optimal for both groups, the noise in prior decisions dilutes the strength of
the signals, with the market professionals facing essentially a random choice with the
probability that urn A is chosen being

0.539 (0.833) for the market professionals

(students). In comparison the ABa sequence, which has an identical posterior probability
when there is no noise, the posterior 0.64 (0.65) for market professionals (students), and
the optimal decision is made uniformly by both subject pools. This difference across the
sequences in choice order three highlights the fact that noise in the decision making
process dilutes the value of the public signal.

36

Table I.
Posterior Probabilities: Symmetric (upper) and Asymmetric (lower) Urns
Entries represent the posterior probabilities for all possible sequences of draws for both symmetric (upper) and asymmetric (lower)
treatments based on choice histories (a, b). The prior probability of an urn is 0.5 in (0,0). Bold entries for the asymmetric urn are those
in which counting and the posterior probability make different predictions about the state.

b
a
0
1
2
3
4
5
6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0.500
0.500
0.670
0.545
0.800
0.590
0.890
0.633
0.940
0.675
0.970
0.713
0.980
0.749

0.330
0.333
0.500
0.375
0.670
0.419
0.800
0.464
0.890
0.509
0.940
0.554

0.200
0.200
0.330
0.231
0.500
0.265
0.670
0.302
0.800
0.341

0.110
0.111
0.200
0.130
0.330
0.153
0.500
0.178

0.060
0.059
0.110
0.070
0.200
0.083

0.030
0.030
0.060
0.036

0.020
0.015

Table II.
Experimental Design
Panel A (B) shows that Market Professionals (Students) are exposed to either the Symmetric or Asymmetric urn and play the game in
either the gain or the loss domain. The symmetric urn consists of three balls — two a and one b in Urn A, and one b and two a in Urn B.
The Asymmetric urn consists of seven balls — six a and one b in Urn A, and five a and two b in Urn B. The number of decisions is a
function of the number of players, the number of games, and the number of rounds in each game.

Symmetric Urn

Asymmetric Urn
Losses
Gains
Losses
Panel A: Ten Market Professional Sessions
3
1
3
3
5
5
One with 5, two with 6
6
225
75
255
270
$43.20
-$20.80
$39.06
-$22.89
Panel B: Ten Student Sessions
3
1
3
3
One with 5, two with 6
5
One with 5, two with 6
5
267
75
255
225
$11.61
-$2.80
$11.00
-$6.40
Gains

Number of Sessions
Participants in Session
Total Decisions
Average Earnings
Number of Sessions
Participants in Session
Total Decisions
Average Earnings

38

Table III.a. Disaggregated Decision Making across Treatments
Treatment

Bayesian

Cascades
(total)

Reverse
Cascades

Potential
Cascades

Realized
Cascades

0.033
55

0.268
441

0.556
245/441

.292
240
.172
46
.080
6
.451
115
.324
73

.608
146/240
.913
42/46
.833
5/6
.557
64/115
.480
35/73

1. Pooled Data
C&M
n=1647

Proportion
Number

0.780
1284

0.149
245

2. College Student Treatments (C)
C
n = 822
SGC
n = 267
SLC
n = 75
AGC
n = 255
ALC
n = 225

Proportion
Number
Proportion
Number
Proportion
Number
Proportion
Number
Proportion
Number

.814
669
.940
251
.960
72
.682
174
.764
172

.178
146
.157
42
.067
5
.251
64
.155
35

.045
37
.041
11
.013
1
.051
13
.053
12

3. Market Professional Treatments (M)
M
Proportion
.745
.120
.021
.244
.493
n = 825
Number
615
99
18
201
99/201
SGM
Proportion
.818
.098
.022
.142
.688
n = 225
Number
184
22
5
32
22/32
SLM
Proportion
.867
.147
.067
.213
.688
n = 75
Number
65
11
5
16
11/16
AGM
Proportion
.714
.133
.008
.275
.486
n = 255
Number
182
34
2
70
34/70
ALM
Proportion
.681
.133
.022
.307
.385
n = 270
Number
184
32
6
83
32/83
The Bayesian column represents the total number of decisions (and proportion) that were consistent with a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
Cascade decisions (those which are Bayesian but private information ignored) and reverse cascades (same as cascades but the wrong
inference of the underlying state takes place) occupy the next two columns. The potential cascades category represents the proportion
(and number) of cascades that could have occurred when it was possible to make one, and the realized cascades category represents the
proportion of those potential cascades that were actually realized. “n” = number of decisions. Treatment codes are S = symmetric, A =
asymmetric, G = gain, L = loss, C = college student, M = market professional.

39

Table III.b Decision Making by Counting Rule Predictions (Asymmetric Treatments)
1. Pooled Data
Bayesian
Cascades
Reverse
(total)
Cascades
C&M
Proportion
.709
.164
.033
n = 1005
Number
712
165
33
Count = Baye
Proportion
.759
.152
.024
n = 843
Number
640
128
20
Proportion
.444
.228
.080
Count ≠ Baye
Number
72
37
13
n = 162
2.College Student Treatments (C)
C
Proportion
.721
.206
.052
n = 480
Number
346
99
25
Count = Baye
Proportion
.760
.189
.036
n = 412
Number
313
78
15
Proportion
.485
.309
.147
Count ≠Baye
Number
33
21
10
n = 68
3. Market Professional Treatments (M)
M
Proportion
.697
.126
.015
n = 525
Number
366
66
8
Count = Baye
Proportion
.759
.116
.011
n = 431
Number
327
50
5
Proportion
.415
.170
.032
Count ≠Baye
Number
39
16
3
n = 94

Potential
Cascades
.339
341
.267
225
.716
116

Realized
Cascades
.477
165/341
.565
128/225
.313
37/116

.392
188
.325
134
.794
54

.527
99/188
.582
78/134
.389
21/54

.291
153
.211
91
.660
62

.431
66/153
.550
50/91
.258
16/62

The Bayesian column represents the total number of decisions (and proportion) that were consistent with Bayesian updating. Cascade
decisions (those which are Bayesian but private information ignored) and reverse cascades (same as cascades but the wrong inference of
the underlying state takes place) occupy the next two columns. The potential cascades category represents the proportion (and number) of
cascades that could have occurred when it was possible to make one, and the realized cascades category represents the proportion of those
potential cascades that were actually realized. “n” = number of decisions. Treatment codes are S = symmetric, A = asymmetric, G = gain,
L = loss, C = college student, M = market professional.

40

Table IV. Bayesian Decisions: Probit Model
Dependent 4a: Pooled Model (combining market
variable:
professionals and students)
baye
n = 1647
Pr(Baye=1)=.818
Ind.
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Variables:
Effect
Diff
0.655
5.53
0.000
Heurist
-0.232
-4.95
0.000
Gain
-0.030
-1.13
0.259
Sym
0.102
3.64
0.000
Trader
-0.060
-2.32
0.020
order_2
-0.023
-0.66
0.507
order_3
-0.041
-1.06
0.291
order_4
-0.120
-2.91
0.004
order_5
-0.035
-0.95
0.343
order_6
-0.040
-0.83
0.408
2
Log Likelihood: -766.487, Wald χ (10)
2
= 141.03, Prob > χ (10)
= 0.000

4b. Student Model
n = 822

4c. Market Professionals Model
n = 825

Pr(Baye=1)=.868
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
0.769
5.06
0.000
-0.161
-2.51
0.012
-0.060
-2.19
0.028
0.145
4.88
0.000
0.019
0.54
0.590
0.017
0.42
0.673
-0.052
-1.13
0.261
0.017
0.46
0.649
-0.035
-0.56
0.577
2
Log Likelihood: -328.95, Wald χ (10)

Pr(Baye=1)=.772
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
0.546
3.11
0.002
-0.284
-4.47
0.000
0.015
0.34
0.737
0.037
0.79
0.430
-0.084
-1.42
0.157
-0.120
-1.86
0.063
-0.205
-3.12
0.002
-0.107
-1.71
0.087
-0.080
-1.05
0.294
2
Log Likelihood: -427.283, Wald χ (10)

= 87.77, Prob > χ (29 ) = 0.000

= 68.91, Prob > χ (29 ) = 0.000

The dichotomous dependent variable in all three probit models (pooled, student, and market professional) is coded one for a decision consistent
with the Bayesian posterior and zero otherwise. Independent variables include diff, which is prob (urn = A) − .5 , where the prob (urn = A) is
the posterior probability arising from the combination of public and private information at the disposal of each decision maker. The variables
gain, sym, and trader (in the case of the pooled model) are dichotomous and distinguish the treatments. Heurist is a dummy variable equal to one
for the non-counting rule sequences and zero for all others. order_x (where x=2,..6) is a categorical variable indicating where in the round of play
the decision was made. The Wald statistic tests the null hypothesis that all coefficients are zero.

41

Table V. Winning Decisions: Probit Model
Dependent 5a: Pooled Model (combining market
variable:
professionals and students)
n = 1647
win
Pr(Win=1)=.702
Ind.
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Variables:
Effect
Diff
1.070
7.85
0.000
Heurist
-0.008
-0.19
0.846
Gain
0.083
2.65
0.008
Sym
-0.028
-0.81
0.418
Trader
-0.033
-1.10
0.272
Round
0.005
1.95
0.051
order_2
0.008
0.22
0.824
order_3
0.019
0.49
0.627
order_4
0.048
1.26
0.206
order_5
0.057
1.53
0.126
order_6
0.063
1.33
0.184
Log Likelihood: -964.06, Wald χ (211)

= 99.52, Prob > χ (211) = 0.000

5b. Student Model
n = 822

5c. Market Professionals Model
n = 825

Pr(Win=1)=.729
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
1.039
5.51
0.000
-0.009
-0.14
0.886
0.113
2.52
0.012
-0.013
-0.31
0.759
0.003
0.68
0.499
0.014
0.29
0.774
0.016
0.30
0.767
-0.001
-0.02
0.988
0.081
1.64
0.102
0.046
0.63
0.528
2
Log Likelihood: -462.25, Wald χ (10)

Pr(Win=1)=.670
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
1.053
5.55
0.000
-0.050
-0.31
0.754
0.158
1.26
0.207
-0.122
-0.86
0.388
0.022
2.06
0.040
0.008
0.05
0.960
0.073
0.45
0.656
0.293
1.79
0.074
0.010
0.62
0.534
0.192
0.96
0.337
2
Log Likelihood: -498.55, Wald χ (10)

2
= 54.39, Prob > χ (10)
= 0.000

2
= 48.30, Prob > χ (10)
= 0.000

The dichotomous dependent variable in all three probit models (pooled, student, and market professional) is coded one for a decision that correctly
predicts the underlying state and zero otherwise. Independent variables include diff, which is prob (urn = A) − .5 , where the prob (urn = A) is
the posterior probability arising from the combination of public and private information at the disposal of each decision maker. The variables
gain, sym, and trader (in the case of the pooled model) are dichotomous and distinguish the treatments. Heurist is a dummy variable equal to one
for the non-counting rule sequences and zero for all others. Round represents a time trend that increases from 1 to 16 with each completed play of
the cascade game. Order_x (where x=2,..6) is a categorical variable indicating where in the round of play the decision was made. The Wald
statistic tests the null hypothesis that all coefficients are zero.

42

Table VI. Cascade Formation: Probit Model
Dependent 6a: Pooled Model (combining market
variable:
professionals and students)
cascade
n = 416
Pr(Cascade=1)=.588
Ind.
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Variables:
Effect
Diff
0.861
0.75
0.453
Othb_min
-0.014
-0.09
0.924
Heurist
-0.354
-4.35
0.000
Gain
0.133
1.67
0.095
Sym
0.126
1.03
0.303
Trader
-0.111
-1.44
0.151
order_2
-0.146
-1.13
0.260
order_3
0.078
0.72
0.469
order_4
0.042
0.39
0.696
order_5
0.233
2.35
0.019
Log Likelihood: -245.22, Wald =
χ (210 ) 46.24, Prob > χ (210 ) = 0.000

6b. Student Model
n = 226
Pr(Cascade=1)=.676
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
-0.136
-0.08
0.939
-0.572
-2.54
0.011
-0.331
-2.49
0.013
0.021
0.19
0.846
0.389
4.09
0.000
0.064
0.39
0.696
0.167
1.24
0.214
0.048
0.33
0.744
0.169
1.21
0.225
Log Likelihood: -125.20, Wald =
χ (29) 27.78, Prob > χ (29) = 0.001

6c. Market Professionals Model
n = 190
Pr(Cascade=1)=.493
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
1.689
1.13
0.259
0.469
2.11
0.035
-0.394
-3.95
0.000
0.120
1.12
0.261
-0.200
-1.16
0.246
-0.332
-2.33
0.020
0.039
0.24
0.810
0.066
0.44
0.658
0.308
2.13
0.033
Log Likelihood: -111.06, Wald =
χ (29) 27.42, Prob > χ (29) = 0.0012

The dichotomous dependent variable in all three probit models (pooled, student, and market professional) is coded one for a cascade decision
and zero otherwise. Independent variables include diff, which is prob (urn = A) − .5 , where the prob (urn = A) is the posterior probability
arising from the combination of public and private information at the disposal of each decision maker. The variables gain and trader (in the case
of the pooled model) are dichotomous and distinguish the treatment/subject type. Othb_min is the proportion of Bayesian decisions by the
individual with the lowest proportion among all preceding the decision maker. The othb_min is calculated in each round of the game to include
only those decisions that have already occurred. Heurist is a dummy variable equal to one for the non-counting rule sequences and zero for all
others. Order_x is a categorical variable indicating where in the round of play the decision was made. Note: Because the othbys variable is not
applicable for those in the first round or first in choice order in subsequent rounds (they do not observe others’ decisions in the current round),
these observations are excluded. This results in the exclusion of 25 of the 441 potential cascades. The order_2 dummy variable is also excluded
and choice order two serves as the baseline to which others are compared. The Wald statistic tests the null hypothesis that all coefficients are
zero.

43

Table VII. Bayesian and Cascade Behavior of Traders
7a: Trader subset of CBOT Market Professionals
n = 227
Dependent Variable: Baye
Pr(Baye=1)=.745
Ind. Variables:
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
Diff
Heurist
Gain
Sym
order_2
order_3
order_4
order_5
order_6
Intensity
Gender
Experience (yrs)
Income
Overnight

0.467
-0.391
-0.023
0.009
0.061
-0.029
-0.095
-0.024
0.089
0.004
0.069
-0.001
0.013
-0.173

1.34
-3.05
-0.24
0.08
0.64
-0.28
-0.86
-0.22
0.67
2.44
0.58
-0.18
0.55
-2.03

0.181
0.002
0.81
0.938
0.523
0.778
0.392
0.828
0.504
0.015
0.561
0.859
0.582
0.042

7b.Trader subset of CBOT Market Professionals
n = 66
Dependent Variable: Casc
Pr(Casc=1)=.388
Marginal
z stat
P>|z|
Effect
3.710
0.001
0.163
0.498
n/a
-0.185
-0.219
0.474
0.229
-0.029
-0.955
0.011
0.394
-0.804

0.65
0.05
0.59
0.79
n/a
-0.48
-0.68
1.22
0.36
-1.91
-0.2
0.34
1.58
-2.24

0.517
0.997
0.552
0.432
n/a
0.629
0.498
0.221
0.721
0.056
0.838
0.735
0.115
0.025

Log Likelihood: -93.93, Wald χ (214 ) = 52.74, Prob

Log Likelihood: -15.62, Wald χ (213 ) = 34.20, Prob

> χ (214 ) = 0.0000, Pseudo R-squared = 0.22

> χ (213 ) = 0.0011, Pseudo R-squred = .52

The dichotomous dependent variable in panel a. is coded one for a decision consistent with the Bayesian posterior and zero otherwise. For
panel b. cascade formation is indicated by a one and cascade failure by a zero. Independent variables include diff, which is
prob (urn = A) − .5 , where the prob (urn = A) is the posterior probability arising from the combination of public and private
information at the disposal of each decision maker. The variables gain and sym are dichotomous and distinguish the treatments. Heurist is
a dummy variable equal to one for the non-counting rule sequences and zero for all others. Order_x (where x=2,..6) is a categorical
variable indicating where in the round of play the decision was made. Intensity reflects the level of trading intensity among participants,
measured as the number of contracts traded per day. Gender is 1 for female and zero for male. Experience (years) and income (dollars) and
overnight (one for holding overnight positions, zero for daytrader) are additional control variables.

44

Table VIII. Posterior Probability Urn is A and Proportion of Bayesian Decisions (Counting Rule Sequences in Bold)
a
b 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.33
0.20
0.11
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.85
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.89
1.00
1
0.55
0.38
0.23
0.13
0.07
0.04
0.76
0.56
0.72
0.64
0.95
0.63
2
0.59
0.26
0.15
0.08
0.42
0.87
0.63
0.69
0.79
0.46
3
0.63
0.18
0.46
0.30
0.84
0.58
0.30
0.52
4
0.67
0.51
0.34
0.76
0.76
0.29
5
0.71
0.55
0.87
0.78
6
0.75
0.80
The number of A and B signals are given in the first row and first column, respectively. The pairs of numbers within an (a,b) pair represent the
Bayesian posterior (upper number) and the proportion of Bayesian decisions (lower number and in italics). Those in bold type are the counting
heuristic sequences. Thus (2,1) has a posterior probability of 42% that the urn is A (diff=0.08). Forty-six percent made the Bayesian decision in this
case. By contrast the (2,0) sequence (in which diff=0.09) has a posterior probability of 0.59, and 87% of those decisions were Bayesian.

45

Table IX. Bayesian Behavior and Potential Cascade: By Counting Rule Sequences
No Potential
Potential
Total
Cascade
Cascades
All
Proportion
.82
.48
.70
n = 1005
Number
541/657
166/348
707/1005
Non-Counting
Proportion
.83
.57
.76
Rule
Number
512/618
128/225
640/843
n = 843
Counting Rule
Proportion
.74
.31
.41
n = 162
Number
29/39
38/123
67/1624
The proportion of Bayesian decisions both when a cascade is possible and when one is not for both counting rule
and non-counting rule sequences in the asymmetric treatments are provided in the table. When there is no
potential cascade the proportion of Bayesian decisions (.74) is the proportion in which one follows the private
signal. When there is a potential cascade (1-.31=.69) is the proportion of decisions that follow the private signal.

46

Table X. Lambda estimate for Quantal Response Equilibrium, Symmetric Gain treatment.
Choice Order
M
C
p

1
2
3
4
5

4.59
4.56
8.67
3.90
2.48

7.12
27.75
8.62
4.99
6.34

0.094
0.012
0.505
0.258
0.026

Columns M and C report the lambda parameter for market professionals and college students. Column p reports the one-tailed p-value for
the null hypothesis that the lambda parameter does not differ across the two groups.

47

Table XI. Posterior Probabilities and Choice Probabilities with QRE Decision Error for Both Market Professionals (M)
and College Students (C)
Choice Probability
Posterior Probability
pr (c = A | H , s, λ )
pr (ω = A | H , s, λ )
Decisions
M
C
M
C
M
C
Choice
History Bayes
QRE
Bayes
QRE
A
B
Proportion
A
B
Proportion
Order
& Signal
A
A
1
A
1.00
0.82
0.92
0.67
0.67
0.67
37
8
0.822
43
4
0.915
2
Aa
1.00
0.91
0.99
0.80
0.76
0.78
23
3
0.885
27
0
1.000
2
Ab
0.50
0.36
0.15
0.50
0.44
0.47
4
15
0.211
3
17
0.150
3
AAa
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.89
0.81
0.85
14
0
1.000
17
1
0.944
3
AAb
1.00
0.54
0.83
0.67
0.51
0.59
7
6
0.538
12
0
1.000
3
ABa
1.00
0.939 0.92
0.67
0.65
0.64
10
0
1.000
8
0
1.000
3
ABb
0.00
0.049 0.03
0.33
0.32
0.31
1
7
0.125
0
9
0.000
Calculations are for the first three choices of the symmetric gain treatment for market professionals (M) and college students (C), with the
choice probability and the posterior probability adjusted for decision error. For comparison, the probabilities assuming a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium (Bayes) and the actual decisions are also presented. Due to the symmetry of the treatment, the history and signal combination
also represents its complement. For example the row reporting history and signal “ABa” also includes the “BAb” sequences.

48

1

Herding is a more general phenomenon than an informational cascade though both result in

behavioral conformity. The homogeneity of a herd may arise through other than informational
means such as payoff externalities, preferences for conformity, or sanctions. A comprehensive
taxonomy of herd behavior is developed by Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003) and Smith and Sorenson
(2000). Devenow and Welch (1996) and Bikhchandani and Sharma (2000) also discuss
alternative sources of herd behavior and review the extant literature.
2

It has been argued, also, that information cascades can explain a large variety of social

behaviors such as fashion, customs, and rapid changes in political organization. Anderson
(1994), Banerjee (1992), Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch (1992, 1998), and Welch (1992)
discuss a variety of interesting examples. A number of historical anecdotes can be found in
MacKay (1980) and Garber (2000).
3

Fama (1998) discusses the interpretation of empirical results as evidence of irrational behavior.

4

Combined with the insights gained from the models of Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998),

Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrhamanyam (2001), and from Hirshleifer (2001), our results indicate
that the ability of the strength and weight of the evidence to have a differential impact on asset
pricing is a potentially powerful phenomenon.
5

As we discus below, our experimental environment makes use of a binary signal, binary state,

and fixed payoff regardless of the history of announcements. Avery and Zemsky (1998), Lee
(1998), Chari and Kehoe (2004), and Cipriani and Guarino (2005a) explore more general settings
in which variable pricing reduces but does not eliminate the potential for information cascades.
Chamley (2004) provides a comprehensive review of rational herding models.

6

The ability of humans to reason in a Bayesian manner seems to depend on how information is

presented. Studies that present base rates as percentages often show that we are poor “intuitive
statisticians” (Tversky and Kahneman (1974)).

Decisions tend to be more consistent with

Bayesian rationality when individuals experience probability distributions through repeated
exposure (see Gigerenzer and Murray (1987)). Our experiment is consistent with protocols that
have been shown to give Bayesian decision making its best chance.
7

In the gain treatments, π A − π B =

$W
after an initial a signal, where $W is the win amount.
3

Treatments over gains and losses yield identical predictions (i.e., expected losses are minimized
by picking the most probable urn).
8

A second A announcement could arise in this setting if the second subject receives a b signal.

We consider an announcement of A given the history Ab to be inconsistent with Bayesian
rationality, although alternative interpretations are possible. Since the posterior probability is 0.5
in this case, a tie-breaking rule must be invoked. We follow Anderson and Holt (1997) in
assuming that individuals who are indifferent announce their own signal. This is sensible if
individuals recognize the possibility of decision error in previous announcements. Alternative
tie-breaking rules include random choice as in BHW (1992) and a “nonconfident” rule in which
one ignores one’s own information (Koessler and Zieglemeyer (2000)). In our treatments the
Anderson and Holt rule is followed 81% of the time, with most of the deviations occurring in the
early rounds of play.
9

Our experimental instructions are available upon request. Note that Anderson and Holt (1997)

find that cascades form in roughly 70 percent of the rounds in which they are possible.

50

Deviations from Bayesian cascade formation occur most often when a simple counting rule gives
a different indication of the underlying state. Extensions to the experimental literature introduce
relevant complications to the cascade process that include costly information, endogenous
sequencing of choice order, collective decision making, expanded signal spaces, and payoff
externalities (Celen and Kariv (2004, 2005), Cipriani and Guarino (2005b); Drehmann,
Oechssler, and Roider (2005), Huck and Oechssler (2000), Hung and Plott (2001), Kubler and
Weizsacker (2004), Noth and Weber (2003), Sgroi (2003), Willinger and Ziegelmeyer (1998)).
10

CBOT officials suggest that designing a 30-minute game with an expected average payout of

approximately $30 is more than a reasonable approximation of an average trader’s earnings for
an equivalent amount of time on the floor. In our experiments the median earnings for the market
professionals are slightly in excess of this amount and therefore likely to be salient.
11

To ensure that subjects depart with positive money balances we have both subject pools

participate in other unrelated games during the experimental session.
12

In the discussion that follows we use the term “Bayesian decision” to mean that the decision is

consistent with the predictions of perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
13

Thirteen of the 14 who are perfectly consistent with Bayesian rationality are in the symmetric

urn treatment. One market professional is perfectly Bayesian in the asymmetric setting.
14

We will see below that there are differences between the symmetric and asymmetric

treatments even after controlling for the counting rule sequences. As a result, we do not pool the
symmetric results in this table.

51

15

Anderson and Holt (1997) find that the rate of Bayesian behavior in the noncounting rule

sequences is 50%, comparable to our student population rate of 49% and close to the pooled rate
of 44%.
16

There are 10 session-level observations for each subject pool as summarized in Table II.

17

The posterior, and thus the diff variable, remains constant once a cascade has formed, unless a

decision breaking the cascade is observed.
18

The alternative approach of computing the marginal effects for each observation and taking the

means yields very similar results. Results are also robust to the inclusion of a time trend for
round or time dummies (categorical time dummy variables for each round of play). We discuss
our evidence of learning further, below.
19

A Chow test rejects the null hypothesis of no differences across the subject pools at the p<

0.01 level.
20

We test several specifications of the model of Bayesian decision making for learning and find

no such effect.
21

We estimated six models that included variables designed to measure the quality of previous

agent’s decision-making on cascade formation. In addition to the three that used other Bayes
variables (othb_min, othb_max, and othb_mean) we considered whether individuals who had
previously revealed their private signal were followed when cascades were possible. These
other_reveal models also tested the min, max, and mean operators. In all six cases market
professionals followed those with higher levels of reliability into cascades. Among the students,
in five of six cases there was no significant effect of signal quality, with othb_min the sole
exception as reported in Table VI, Panel 6b.

52

22

Support for the significant differences between subject pools found in the parametric results is

also found in nonparametric (Mann-Whitney) tests.
23

Due to the small number of sessions at the individual treatment level, p-values for the Mann-

Whitney test are reported for observations aggregated at the individual participant level.
24

We use a Wilcoxon matched pairs test with the variable of interest equal to the proportion of

Bayesian decisions aggregated at the session level. The diff variable for the counting rule
sequences is in the range from 0.0 to 0.2, and all other sequences with diff variables in this range
are included for the paired comparison. Using data from the 12 asymmetric sessions we find that
the counting rule sequences reflect less Bayesian decision making despite roughly equivalent diff
scores at p<.01.
25

There is a long and important debate on the relevance of cascade models for financial markets

(Vives (1996)). Avery and Zemsky (1998) show that the introduction of variable prices to the
BHW model can eliminate informational cascades (herding in their terminology) under certain
conditions. Lee (1998), Chari and Kehoe (2004) and Cipriani and Guarino (2005a) demonstrate
the potential for informational cascades in the variable price setting by introducing transaction
costs, endogenous timing, and preference heterogeneity.
26

One mechanism through which cascades might arise is, in the jargon of the trading floor, when

local traders “lean on” large orders by trying to enter the market on the same side and at the same
price. Locals who trade alongside an institutional order accumulate a position knowing that they
can transact with the institution and avoid a loss. The decision process associated with deciding
to trade with the institution has the character of a fixed price cascade. In the context of option
markets Berkman (1996) discusses how market makers supply liquidity in the presence of large

53

fixed price orders. Chamley and Gale (1994) introduce endogenous timing in a cascade model
that predicts the least informed would trade later, and potentially face adverse prices.
27

Drehmann, Oechssler, and Roider (2005) test experimentally a version of the Avery and

Zemsky (1998) model that omits event and composition uncertainty and find behavior fairly
consistent with its predictions, though subject to decision error and contrarian behavior.

Figure 1: Counting Rule Heuristic Signal History and Bayesian Behavior
Proportion Bayesian

1
0.8
0.6
count =
baye
count not =
baye

0.4
0.2
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Diff: difference of posterior from 0.5

The proportion of Bayesian decisions for every realized posterior probability is presented as a
data point. The choice histories in which the counting rule and Bayesian posterior yield
different predictions are presented as dark squares. All other sequences are presented as black
diamonds. Note that the sequences in which Bayesian behavior and the counting rule

54

heuristic make different predictions have a uniformly lower proportion of Bayesian decisions
than the others.

55

