                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    BLACK YOUTH NONEMPLOYMENT:
                     DURATION AND JOB SEARCH


                         Harry-   J. Holzer


                      Working Paper No. 1276




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 198)4




This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on Inner—City Black
Youth Employment in August 1983. I would like to thank John Bound,
Richard Freeman, and Zv-i Griliches for their helpful comments. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #1276
                                                       February 1984




                          Black Youth Nonemployment:
                           Duration and Job Search


                                   ABSTRACT




     This paper analyzes reservation wages and durations of nonemployment for

young blacks and whites. Self—reported reservation wages are compared for

blacks and whites before and after controlling for indicators of labor de-nand

such as received wages, weeks worked, or other personal characterlstics. The

effects of these reservation wages on durations of nonemployment as well as on

subsequent wages are analyzed as well.

     The results show that young blacks seek jobs and wages which are

comparable to those of young whites, but which are higher relative to what

young blacks obtain. On the other hand, young blacks appear at least if not

more likely to take specific low—skill jobs, albeit teporariiy. These

reservation wages appear to have positive effects on nonemplcyment durations

and subsequent wages for both groups, and explain up to a third of the higher

nonemploynient durations of young blacks.




                                                       Harry J. Hoizer
                                                       Michigan State University
                                                       101 Marshall Hall
                                                       East Lansing, MI 48823
                                               —1—


 I. Introduction and Overview

          Total nonernployment is often decomposed for analytical purposes into two

components: the frequency with which spells are experienced; and the duration

of an average spell. The frequency is the total number of spells and reflects

the rate of turnover (i.e., quits and layoffs) out of employment; while duration

reflects the length of time      before     employment is gained or regained. While nst

analyses of the youth employment problem for blacks and whites in the past

decade have stressed job turnover and the frequency with which spells of
unemployment occur, some recent work by Clark and Summers shows that the dura-

tions of these spells are crucial components of observed unemployment rates for

youth and adults alike.

         This study    analyses the    lengthy durations of nonemployment spells that

are   observed   for young black males relative to those of young white males,

and focuses particularly on reservation wages as determinants of duration.

Reservation wages are defined as the lowest wages which individuals are

willing to accept for employment, and are stressed in the job search literature

as the key determinants of unemployment duration which are chosen by individuals

on the supply side of the labor rnrket. Of course, labor demand can affect the

durations of nonemployment for young blacks as well; the key determinants on

this side of the market include aggregate demand, skills, and discrimination.

The direct effects of these forces on duration for young blacks and whites are

also considered 'below,   as   are   the   effects of   low levels of demand on the choices
of reservation wages for each group.

         The importance of analyzing        durations    of nonem,ployment spells and reser—
                                         —2-


vation wages in studying black youth nonemployment (i.e., unemployment or time
out   of the labor   force) can be easily demonstrated. Clark and Summers   (1982)

point out that   the duration of   nonemployment is significantly longer for young

blacks   than for young whites. They also   find that differences in unemployment

and nonemployrnent rates between young blacks and   whites   primarily reflect dif-

ferences in probabilities of gaining employment among those without jobs rather

than differences in probabilities of becoaing nonemployed. Therefore, an abi—

lity to explain the lengthy durations of unemployment and nonemployment which

young blacks experience would also an an ability to explain much of the huge

rates of nonemployment for young blacks generally.

         As for the focus on reservation wages as a determinant of duration, this

has been motivated by the ccnflicting views on the relative willingness to work

among young blacks and whites which have appeared in recent studies by social

scientists as well as in the popular press. In a few studies, young blacks

appear to be more willing than young whites to accept certain low—wage jcb)

This was found to be true even a'ter controlling for personal and family

background characteristics. But elsewhere the reluctance of young blacks to

accept low—wage jobs which are considered "dead—end" or "menial" has been

stresseth This latter view emphasizes the development of a new consciousness

or a new set of expectations among blacks as a consequence of the Civil Rights

movement ; and, according to this vieI. jobs indicating low status to h1ch

blacks may have been relegated in large numbers historically are now shunned by

younger cohorts of blacks. The role of crime as a superior source of income

and/or status is also stressed in this literature.
                                        —3—


          Therefore this study analyses reservation wages, as indicators of

willingness to accept certain kinds of work, as well as durations of

nonemployment for young blacks and whites. Two jor issues are considered
                                               0'—
here:    (i) Potential differences invwages between young blacks and whites; and

(2) The effects of these reservation wages on durations of unemployment for

each. Self—reported reservation wages are      therefore   compared for blacks and

whites before and after controlling for various indicators of labor demand such
as received wages, weeks worked, and the   personal characteristics which deter-

mine them. The effects of these reservation wages on duration of nonemployment

spells as well as on subsequent wages are then analyzed. Some evidence is also

presnted on certain determinants of reported reservation wages, though a

complete, structural del of reservation wage formation is not atteed here.

The   data used in the analysis are taken from the Youth Cohort of the National
Longitudinal Survey (NLs)   and the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)

Survey of Inner—City Black Youth.

         There are four remaining sections in the paper. The first section pre-

sents a general framework for the analysis of nonemployment durations and reser-

vation wages which is used to derive the equations that are estimated below.

Some econometric issues which arise in the estinatior1 of these equations, and

the   data used for the estimation are also discussed here.

         The second section presents empirical evidence on reservation wages for

young blacks and whites. Summary    evidence   on various self—reported measures of

reservation wages and received wages is first presented. Differences in results

between various reservation wage measures are explained, and some evidence is
presented on the relationship between reservation wages, the characteristics of

jobs which individuals seek, and the kinds of low—wage, low-skill jobs which are

somewhat nore available for black   youth.   Equations in which these reservation

wages are estimated as functions of labor market characteristics and experiences

such as wages and weeks worked are also presented. Some of these equations are

then used to calculate racial differences in reported reservation wages when

controlling for labor market characteristics.

          The third section explores the effects of reported reservation wages on

subsequent labor market outcomes for young blacks and whites, such as

noneinployinent durations and wages received on the next job. Some separate wage

equations are aLso estimated for different categories of job ultimately

received. These equations not only estimate the extent to which differences in

reservation wages for blacks and whites explain their differences in

nonemployment rates; but they also show which of the various reported reer—

vation wages have   the st predictive power with regards to outcomes and      thereby

test    for the "validity" of these self-reported nasures.

          Finally, the fourth section sumirrizes the results presented earlier and

discusses implications for policy as well as the need for further research.

          As for the major empirical results contained here, these can be sum—

marized as follows:

          i) Reported reservation vases of young blacks for the jobs which they

areseeking as well as the jobs themselves, are fairly comparable to those of
young whites. But after controlling for labor market characteristics of indivi—
duals   such as received wages and weeks worked, the reservation wages, of   blacks
                                          —5—




appear to be high. The jobs which are sought also appear to be nre unrealistic
for blacks than for whites relative to those which are ultimately obtained.

          2) Reservation wages for specIfic, low—wage jobs are generally lower

for blacks than for whites, and   they   appear to be more comparable only after

controlling for weeks worked. Both blacks and whites demand compensating dif-

ferentials for jobs considered to be unpleasant or menial.

          3) The reservation wages of young blacks for the jobs which they are

seeking have significant positive effects on the nonemployment durations and

subsequent wages. Those of whites appear to have lesser effects on their dura-

tions of nonernployment but greater effects on their subsequent wages thant        those
of blacks. Thus the jobs sought and wages expected for them again appear to be

more frequently realized among w1ites than blacks.

          l) Reservation wage for specific., low—wage jobs often have significant

effects on wages subsequently received for both blacks and whites, e.pecially

when the jobs attained are low—wage laborer or service jobs.

         An overall picture emerges in which young blacks seek and aspire to jobs

and wages which are comparable to those of young whites, but these are less

realistic for the blacks. Whites with higher reservation wages are therefore

more likely to actually obtain higher wages while their black counterparts are

relatively more likely to gain longer spells      of nonemployment. Though   the

blacks   hesitate to take jobs which are "dead—end" or "menial," this is true of
whites as well. In fact, young blacks are re likely than young whites to
accept certain low—wage and low—skill    jobs,   but they appear to do so only   tem-

porarily while continuing to hope for better emrloyment. These better jobs
                                            —6-


which are sought by young blacks, and their reservation wages for these jobs,
thus appear to contribute sorwhat to durations of nonernployment, which are

already lengthy because of dernd—side factors.


I. Nonemployinent Durations and Reservation Wages: Models, Jta., and Econometric
      Issues

          In order to understand the relationship between nonemployment duration,

job search characteristics such as reservation wages and search effort, and

dennd re generally, the following identity is often used:

          (i) E(DN)t 1/Pt                         *p(Ac
where E(DN) is the expected duration of a completed spell of nonemployrnent

beginning in period t; ne,t is the transition probability——i.e., the probabi-

lity that    the individual will rve from    nonemployment to employment      within the
specified time       period; P(Off) is the probability of receiving a job offer; and

P(Ac            is   the conditional probability of accepting offers that are

received.

         The probability of receiving offers for a young black reflects, among

other things, the demand for his labor that exists in the labor market. Among

the   factors which shift this demand are the level of aggregate demand in the
individual's    area, which includes the business cycle arid the strength of the

local econon; these factors have heen shown to have strong effects on

employment     for both black and   vhite youth.2 A further effect on the      demand for
young black labor might be discrimination. Blacks may be                      as having

fewer skills than whites and therefore      might    face   eater difficulty in
obtaining eployment. Young blacks might.          also   have less access to various kinds
                                          —7—



of    employment than do young whites for the following reasons: 1) Blacks who

live in inner—city areas may have difficulty travelling to work in firms which

have located in the suburbs; 2) they might        have less information about ob
vacancies than do young whites; and 3)       they might have fewer "connections" in
firms where vacancies arise. Finally, an individual's actual skills may be an

important determinant of his probability of receiving offers in the labor

market.    While the demand shift factors determine the entiai probability of

receiving an offer, the probability of actually receiving one also depends on

the intensity of the individual's search effort.

          As for the probability of accepting offers, this depends exclusively on

the level of the individual's reservation wage relative to the offered wage.

Offer wages are embodied in a distribution f(w°) that is conditional on        having
received   an offer and that also reflects the demand shift factors mentioned
above. Jobs are accepted only when v0 >       r    where r are reservation wages.
Therefore, the expected duration of unemployment for an individual with search
effort SE1÷ and reservation wage wr is:
                                         1
(2)              E(DN).
                      i,t
                              (SE) • (l_F(wr,))
where     is .he function relating search effort to offer probabilities and F is tie
cumulative distribution function of offered wages.
          This   equation assumes, of course, that   reservation   wages and

search    effort viii remain constant over the entire expected duration of

nonernployuent. If this is not the case, the transition probabilities and

expected durations for subsequent periods viii change and will be reflected in
                                            -8-

the    observed durations of nonemployment.

          As for expected wages, these are also determined for a given offer wage

distribution and reservation wage in the following nRnner:

                            v •    f(w)dw
                       V
(3)       E(w).
                                f(w)dw
where each possibleWvage above the reservation wage is weighted by probability

of receiv.ng it. This weighted sum is divided by the sum   of   the weights so that

these weights add up to one.

          Having shown how reservation wages interact with offer probabilities and

offer   wages to determine expected durations of nonemployment and received wages,

the determinant of reservation wages can be briefly considered. It is fairly

standard in the job search literature to show that reservation wages are in part

determined by the following factors:

(14)      wr =   r   (, f(w),   y, d, H)

where y represents an individual's nonwage income sources, d represents his

discount rate, and H represents an individual's time horizon for working.3

Nonwage income raises reservation wages by lowering the costs of nonemployzient,

while greater demand—side factors and horizons raise reservation wages by

raising the expected benefits of demanding a higher wage for employment. Higher

discount rates should lover these expected benefits and therefore lower reser-

vation wages. With regards to the offer wage distribution f(w), it has been

shown that both the ran and variance of this distribution have positive effects

on reservation wages.

          This basic rde1 can be extended in a number of ways to rake it re
                                         —9--



relevant for white and black youth. For instnce, it can also be shown that, if

individuals do not have rational expectations with regard to offer probabilities

and offer wages, their subjective expectations will deterxriiné their reservation

wages rather than the actual demand side characteristics; and overly optimistic

expectations which slowly adapt over time aiy lead to high reservation wages.

Furthermore, reservation wages can vary across jobs for a particular individual

if the nonwage characteristics of these jobs vary; and if these nonwage charac-

teristics enter the individual's utility function) Thus the reservation wages

for    jobs with unpleasant characteristics may exhibit demands for "compensating
differentials."
          Models in which utility is maximized     instead   of income   also allow tastes

for    leisure to affect reservation wages as well. These models incorporate labor

supply as well as job search factors, and       can be used to explain search inten-
sity   and labor force participation.5 Thus the reservation wages of pecple who

are not always actively searching can be considered as well.

          Finally, these models often imply a declining reservation wage as the

spell of nonemployment proceeds, rather than the constant one assumed above.

This can be caused by a number of factors, which include: declining assets or

flows of outside income; declining marginal value of leisure; adapting

expectations;   and systematic search in which higher wage offers are pursued ear-
lier and lower ones later.
          The models of reservation wage formation and non employment duration

discussed here imply that a set of recursive equations could be estimated

empirically in which the demand for an individual's labor and        other   factors
                                             —10—


determine his reservation wage which, in turn, determine subsequent spells of

nonemployrient and subsequent wages. In particular, the following equations are

estin.ted here:

                            r
          DN
            t+n
                —DNtX             t

               =
(6)
                   w(x   Wr)

(7)       w = Vr(Xt)

where DNt+ is the      duration of    the completed spell of nonemployment from the

(1979) survey date onward and             is the subsequently received wage; w1' and is

the reservation at that time and St is a rasure of search effort; and the

   are the determinants of the dennd for an individual's labor.

         Except for these labor demand factors, other determinants of reser-

vations wages which are listed above are omitted from equation (7) For one

thing ny of these factors which we observe can be considered endogenous with

respect to reservation wages——e.g., many sources of nonvage income which range

from   government programs to illegal activities.       The same can be said about

preceding spells oP nonezployment.6 Including endogenous variables as deter-

minants in the ridel would lead either to serious biases or to identification

problems which would hopelessly complicate the analysis. For this and other

reasons, the goals of this      paper   are simpler: to compare reservation wages of

young blacks and whites relative to what is available for each, and to evaluate

the effects of these reservations on subsequent wages and spells for each group.

         However, certain determinants of reservation wages are examined below in
                                              —11—


order to explain differences in responses by the same individual to different

reservation wage questions. For instance, occupational expectations and hori—

zons are considered below through the use of summary        and tabular       evidence on

these factors. The effect of nonwage job characteristics are also considered,

since reservation wages are asked for various specific jobs in the surveys us'd

below. Some      outside   evidence on the role of nonwage income is also ientioned

below.

            It should also be noted here that Equation (5)       is   essentially a demand

function; and its identification is achieved in this recursive xdel by having

direct observations of the reservation wage rather than the received wage as the

independent variable in the duration equation. The reservation wage itself is a

function of the expected demand—side determinants of duration and subsequent

wages but not of duration or wages er Se; its exogeneity in Equations (5)and

(6)   is   thereby assured.

           Also, the above equations are   estimated   separately for blacks and whites

in all cases. Racial differentials in variables such as reservations wages,

when controlling for personal characteristics in X.., are obtained by using esti-

mated coefficients from eauations for whites with mean characteristics of blacks

to obtain predicted reservations wages for whites with the same characteristics

as blacks. The differences bteen these predicted asures and the actual ones

for blacks are considered estimates      of   the race effect.

            Most of the econometric issues associated with       estimating   Equations (5)

— () are      discussed below as the empirical results are presented. But a few of

the rre salient problems are briefly mentioned here, as well as the rthcds
                                              —12—


used for   dealing with them.
          For instance,   it is   crucially   important for a comparison   of reservation
wages   betwen blacks   and   whites that the determinants of the dend for an
individual's labor,     represented by X÷.     be reasonably complete. Ctherwise, unob-
served characteristics      which are   positively correlated with wages and employmnt

but negatively correlated with race will bias downwards any measure of the

black—white differential in reservation wages which        attempts to control for
dend     characteristics.

          To deal with this problem, various specifications of equation (7)         are

estimated. In some, the           reflect a set of specific deternüninats of wages and

employment. These include "hun capital" variables such as age, experience,

schooling, and "Knowledge of the World of Work;"7 background variables such as

household   income and the presence of a library card at home; and other indivi-
dual    characteristics such as region, urban residence, and Lmrital status But

since this set is bound to be incomplete, wages on xst recent job or weeks

worked in the previous year are used instead as controls in other equations.

The former can be considered a proxy for offer wages while the latter a proxy

for offer probabilities. Of course, received wages and weeks worked reflect

expected wages and durations which are themselves conditional on past reser-

vation wages. Therefore, these variables are instrumented on the exogenous

X.
     and appear only as predicted values in equation (7). These predicted values

enable    individuals who would otherwise report wages as missing due to        lack of

employment in the previous year to be included as e1l in these estimations.

But since the predicted variables are functions of the same underlying deter—
                                          —13—



minants, they are too highly correlated to be included together in any equ.tion
and they therefore appear separately in versions of equation CT). The

underlying t were used separately as well for purposes of identification. The

predicted wages are also used as controls in equation (6) for the offer wage

distribution. Weeks worked are not used here, s.nce wages are conditional as an

offer having been received; proxies for offer probabilities are therefore not

relevant here.

          As for equation (5) for durations of subsequent spells, the coefficient

on the reservation wage is likely to be downward biased by the positive correla-

tion of unobserved characteristics with reservation wage measures and their

negative correlations with durations of spells. In fact, this downward bias has

bee serious enough to produce theoretically incorrect negative coefficients on

reservation wages for whites in some versions of this equation. It should also

be pointed out that the source of heterogeneity in equation (5) is the correla-

tion of unobserved characteristics with reservation wages and durations, while

in equation (7) it is their correlation with reservation wages and race. Thus

the    controls which are appropriate in the two   equations r.y differ. In   fact, an
expanded   group of   X. variables described below are included directly in equation
(5),   and they are the rest successful in ridding this equation of the downward

bias. On the other hand, predicted wages and weeks worked were re successful

in dealing with unobserved racial differences in equation (7).      Therefore,   the

results reported below are sonetimes based on equations which use different

controls for labor denand; these are pointedout in each'case.

          A further source of downard bias in the estited coefficients on reser—
vation wages in equations (5) and (6) is the error that y exist in self—

reported reservation wage   measures.     This possibility could have very serious

implications for rrnich of the empirical work presented below, since differences

in mean reservation wages are an important finding which could be undermined if

the self—reported measures are not considered to be valid determinants of beha-

vior. In fact, several reservation wage measures are reported below which give

somewhat different results on relative reservation wages of blacks and whites.

But by estin.ting equations (5) and (6) separately for each of the reported

measures, their effects on behavior can be- tested and their "validity" or rela-

tive degrees of error thereby determined. This is done below in Section III.

        Finally, some potential selection biases are considered here. Since

spells of nonemployment observed prior or subsequent to the survey date exist only

for those who were nonemployed at that point in time, past completed spells for

the currently employed and nonemployed are missed Several issues are raised

here. For one thing, Akerlof    and    Main (1980) have shown that individuals with

multiple spells of nonemployment in a year account for a great deal of observed

nonemployment. The focus here on one spell per person thus abstracts from the
                                                 (1970)
issue of rrritiple spells. Furtherrxre, Kaitz has pointed out that omission of

past completed spells could bias the estimated mean durations of spells in

either direction: a "length" bias exists whereby short spells are less likely

to be observed than longer ones, creating an upward bias in mean duration; and

an "interruption" bias also   exists    whereby only a truncated part of any given

spell is observed, creating a downward bias. The issue is considered below by

comparing summary evidence or current spells with that of past spells that are
                                           —15—


calculated from retrospective ei:iployinent histories in the NLS    Surveys.
           Selection on employment can also bias the coefficients of any of the

estimated equations. Hecknan (1979) has shown that the correlation between the

error term and the regressors of an equation induced by sampling depends on the

correlation between the determinants of the sampling variable and those of the

dependent variable of the analysis. Since individuals with short spells are

more likely to be seen as being currently employed, spell duration can be con-

sidered a determinant of observed employment status; and since reservation wages

are the hypothesized determinants of this spell duration, they are determinants

of employment status as well. Thus the dependent variables of Equations (5) and

(7)    are themselves the determinants of the samples used to estimate them, and

the correlations described above may be quite severe.

           To deal with these potential biases, reservation wages of both the

employed and nonemployed for each racial group are presented below.

Furthermore, attempts have been made to use the Inverse Mills Ratio to correct

for    potential   selection problems in certain wage and reservation wage equations

that   appear below.8
          A few other sampling issues will be considered here as well. Students

are onmitted from all estimations     reported below   since their labor market

experiences often reflect a different set of factors than those of non students.

However, results not reported here show similar ratios of reservation wages to

received   wages for students and    nonstdents of each racial group in the NLS; thus

the omission of      students is unlikely to be a major source of selection bias.
The samples here include some individuals who have not actually searched for
                                           —i6—


work in the previous month, since the discussion above indicates that search

theory can be applied to those who are not always actively looking for work.

However, the relevant questions in the NLS        have been asked only of individuals
who have searched in the previous xnth or intend to search in the coming year;

those permanently out of the labor force are thus included here.

        A final sampling issue here involves the oversampling of low—income whi-

tes in the NLS. Because we are interested in estimating relationships for the

black and   white   populations rather than those nonrandomly selected samples; arid

because estimated relationships may vary across income groups; all estimations

below are weighted by sample weights to produce population—wide estimates.

Though this may induce some heteroscedasticitywhich would bias estimated stan-

dard errors, the coefficients are unbiased estimates of population—wide rela-

tionships. The decision to weight the samples rather than stratify them 'by

income was hased on the small sample sizes used below.

        As noted above, two major datasets have been used for the estimation of

these equations. These are the New Youth Cohort of the National Longitudinal

Survey (NLS); and the Survey of Inner-City Black Youth recently conducted by the

National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).

        The new LS is a survey of young men and women aged 114 through 21 in

1979. Minorities have been oversampled, creating a reasonable nationwide sample

of young black males with which to work (1380 in total) and which can be com-

pared to young whites (3081 in total). Since low—income whites have also 'been

oversampled., all   estimations   are weighted by the sample weights so that a true

nationwide sarip1e is obtained within each racial group.
                                        —iT—


        Among the variables included in the NLS dataset are reported reservation

vages, search effort in the previous month and retrospective histories which

give starting and ending dates for each period of employment. Also, the 1979

and 1980 panels are both available. Thus, for individuals who are nonempioyed

at the time of the 1979 Survey, durations of sub.equent spells and wages ultima-

tely received on the next job are available from the 1980 Survey arid appear as

the dependent variables of equations (5) and (6).    Durations for prior spells
can be calculated within each panel. Extensive information is also available on

family background and personal characteristics. Occupations aspired to for the

future and sought currently are also useful indicators of accuracy in labor

market expectations.

        The NBER Survey was conducted between Noveber 1979 and May 1980 among

21400 young black men, ages 16 through 214 in the inner—cities of Boston, Chicago,

and Philadelphia. The interviews were limited to inhabitants of city blocks

with at least 70% black residents and 30% of its families below the poverty line

in income. The questions in the survey focused on the daily activities of both

the employed and nonemployed; their family backgrounds, their job search beha-

vior and experiences (e.g., reservation wages, number of rejected offers and

offer wages, time spent and methods used while searching, etc.); their

retrospective work histories for the preceding 12 months; their income sources,

participation in illegal activities; and alcohol or drug use. Its usefulness as

a supplement to the NLS, which will provide the bulk of the black—white com-

parisons, lies in:     (i) its focus on orthern, inner—city blacks, who are the

greatest "problem group" with regards to youth employment; (2) the fact that
                                              —18-.


ny of the questions used here from the NBER Survey are directly comparable to
those    of the NIS, after which some were rdel1ed; and (3) other questions in the

NBER Survey are not duplicated elsewhere and probe at the relevant factors in

explaining the black unemployment situation. Thus the two surveys together pro-

vide for a good comparison of young blacks and iites nationwide, as well as an

additional look at a group of young blacks whose employment problems are espe-

cially severe.

II •   Relative Reserva pWa es for Blacks and Whites: Coptr2llin for Demand
       Characteristics

          This section presents empirical evidence from the NLS and NBER Surveys

on the relative reservation wage levels of young blacks and whites. The first

few tables present summary evidence comparing various reported reservation wage

measures with received wages of young blacks and whites. These provide a crude

measure of reservation wages relative to offer wages for each group. The next

few tables present distributions of occupations sought and held by these groups

and their relationships to the reported reservation wages. It is shown the

individuals report quite different reservation wages according to the charac-

teristics of the jobs to which they pertain. Some differences in reservation

wages also appear to result from differences in the formats of the questions

used to gauge them, as described below. The last few tables in this section

show results from     equations   in   which wages, weeks worked, and other charac-
teristics are    used to control for a broad range of demand—side factors in deter-
wining   the relative reservation wages of blacks and whites.

          Tables   1 and   2 present summary measures on various reported reservation
                                         -19-


wages   and received wages in the NBER and NLS Surveys.       The first of these pre-
sents xians   and   standard deviations on received    wages and   on reservation wages
for jobs which individuals are seeking or have in mind ire generally; the
histograms presented in the Appendix to this chapter also present the full
distributions on     of these variables. The second table presents frequencies

on reservation wages for specific jobs such as dishwashing, factory work,         etc.,
which were designated in the survey.

         The reservation wages presented in Table 1 for the NLS responses to the

question, "What would the wage (or salary) have to be for you to be willing to

take it," which follows the question, "What     type   of work have you been looking

for?" or "What type of work will you be looking for?" ang those who intend to

seek work in the coming year. The reported reservation wage is therefore for

"job sought" where the latter is allowed to vary across individuals. Responses

are also open—ended in the sense that the individuals could state any wage rates

they wished to instead of answering "yes" or "no" to rates listed in the survey.

The questions were asked of both employed and nonemployed who sought work or

intended to seek work that year, and the questions were asked in both the 1919

and 1980 surveys.

         The reservation wages in Table 1 for the NBER survey also refer to jobs

which vary across individuals. One question states, "Suppose you were offered a

job of the type that you are looking for," and then states different travel

times which might be needed to get to and from work. For each time, the indivi-

dual was asked whether or not he would accept the job at $2.50 per hour and then

at rates which increased by .50 each until one was       accepted.    Thus, unlike the
                                          Table 1


                          Reservation Wages and Received Wages:

                             Means and Standard Deviations


                                                             NLS

                            Reservation Wages:      Received Wages: Ratio of Reservation
                              For Job Sought        Most Recent Job   to Received Wages
                             Whites   Blacks        Whites Blacks     Whites   Blacks

Nonemployed.,   1979-80        4.59     4.47        4.75            4.00     .966   1.118
                              (1.96)   (2.21)       (2.76)         (2.20)
    North                     4.73     4.51         5.05           3.91      .937   1.153
                              (1.85)   (1.77)       (2.96)         (1.88)

    South                      4.31    4.45         4.02            4.07    1.072   1.093
                              (2.22)   (2.54)       (1.98)         (2.45)

Employed, 1979—80              6.01    5.40          5.13           4.26    1.172   1.268
                              (3.05)   (2.95)       (2.25)         (1.86)

    Full Year                 6.18     5.29         5.32            4.30    1.162   1.226
                              (3.06)   (2.36)       (2.26)         (1.88)

    Part Year                  5.71     5.66         4.76           4.19    1.120   1.351
                              (3.00)   (3.83)       (2.16)         (1.82)

Nonemployed, 1979              4.39    4.23          4.23           3.85    1,038   1.099
                              (1.95)   (2.41)       (2.97)         (2.41)


                                                    Received Wages:
                                                    First Job,
                                                    Subsequent Year

Noneuployed, 1979        4.36          4.20          4.73           4.33
Work in Subsequent Year (1.86)         (2.60)       (2.37)         (2.03)
                              Table I (Continued)


                     Reservation Wages and Received Wages:
                         Means and Standard Deviatons

                                      NBER
                                      Blacks

                                      Reservation Wages:               Received Wages:
                           For Job          For Best       For Any
                           Sought        Job Attainable       Job      Most Recent Job

Nonemployed                   3.61              3.64          3.40           3.98
                             (1.26)            (1.58)        (1.11)         (1 .98)

Employed                     4.44               4.59          3.98          4.34
                            (1.43)             (1.85)        (1.19)         (1.52)


                        Ratio of Reservation Wages to Received Wages:

                           For Job          For Best         For Any
                           Sought        Job Attainable        Job

Nonemployed                  .907               .915          .854

Employed                    1.023              1.058          .917


Note: Only nonstudents included in both the NLS and NBER samples in all tables.
Total sample sizes are 1599 for employed whites with wages, and 1130 for those
with reservation wages in the 1979—SO NLS. ComDarable numbers are 350 and 491
for nonemployed whites; 567 and 379 for employed blacks; and 329 and 191 for
nonemployed blacks. Sample weights are used in all calculations using the LS.
For the NBER sample sizes are 475 for employed and 821 for nonemployed young
blacks. Reseration wages in the NLS defined only for those who sought
employment in the previous month or intended to seek it in the next year. Wages
received in either survey are for those with employment in the previous year.
                                         -20-

NLS version of this question, the one in the NBER survey       used a closed     rather
than open—ended format. The "job sought" reservation wages of Table 1 for the
NBER Survey present the wages chosen at the lowest travel time of 30 minutes.

         Another series of questions in the NBER Survey read, "Say that for some

reason you had to get (a job/another job) right now ... what would be the best

job you think you could get," "how much per hour do you think you would earn on

that job," and "if you were offered that job tomirov would you take it if it

paid ________," where the same wage rates were used as in the above question to

guage responses. Though one might expect the 30 minute travel time designated

in the earlier variable or the stipulation of "having to get a job right now,"

in the latter to bias the responses in various ways, they were generally quite

similar to each other,                                              -




        A final question appeared in which the respondent is asked to list the

"lowest hourly pay you'd be willing to take     on any job   right now" and these

responses   are also included in Table for "sought job" and     "best   job,"   responses

to this final question were open—ended but directly followed the others in

sequence.   All   questions were asked of all individuals, both employed and

noneinployed,   in the sample.
        Several   interesting findings emerge from Table 1. Perhaps the most

striking is that the reported reservution wages for jobs sought by        blacks in the
NLS are similar to those reported by whites in an absolute sense, but they are

generally higher relative to their previously or currently received wages than

are those of whites. For the total sample of nonernployed the ratio of reser-

vation to received wages is 15.2% higher among blacks than whites. The black
                                          —21—



and   white difference is higher in the North than in the South; but even for the

latter group the ratio remins well above that of Northern whites, who consti-

tute three—fourths of the total for this group.

          Of course, we would prefer to have offer wages rather then received

wages for this comperison, but the former are not observed. As mentioned above,

received wages are   endogenous with respect to reservation wages due to the trun-
cation of the offer wage distribution from below by past reservation wages—-the

higher the past reservation wage, the higher is the received wage and the lower

is the ratio of the two. Thus, the ratio of reservation wages to offer wages is

likely to be even higher for blacks. These measures also ignore the lower pro-

bability of receiving offers for blacks and therefore that the level of reser-

vation wages relative to overall demand facing blacks is presumably even lower.

          Most of the analysis in this paper concerns only the currently

nonemployed,   since only they have the spells of     nonemployment directly or sub-

sequent   to observations on reservation wages which we are trying to explain.
But as noted above, selection based on employment creates the possibility that
lower   reservation wage individuals   with shorter past nonemployment spells are
being   removed from the sample, and   that   the magnitude of this effect could

differ between blacks and whites. The evidence of currently employed than among

the nonetployed that is presented below raises the possibility that selection on

employment may be an important source of bias.

          Therefore Table 1 also includes reservation and received wages of

employed individuals in the NLS who are seeking or intend to seek new

employment. Since we are primarily int,erested in the effects of reservation
                                             —22—


wages on nonemployment durations, the reservatIon wages             of employed individuals
who only do on—the—job search and who have not been nonemployed in the recent

past    are less    relevant here. It is therefore useful      to   distinguish between

those    who have   had noneniployment spells in the previous year and those who
haven't    among the currently employed. Also, an individual's current           reservation

wage    is not necessarily unchanged from that which determined his previous
nonemployment spell; but at least the current one provides a useful first
approximation to the unobserved one from the past.
           The results show that the ratio of reservation wages          to received wages
is   higher for employed blacks than for      employed whites, especially among      those
who have had nonemploy-inent spells in the previous year. Thus the omission of
these individuals and their spells from the analysis does not appear to induce a
major selection bias with regards to reservation wages.
          Table 1 also shows that the standard deviations of received wages among
both employed and nonemployed are generally lower for blacks as well as their
means. Thus the apparently higher reservation wages of blacks cannot be              attri-

buted    to a higher variance in their offer wage distributions despite the lower

means.

          Finally,    the reservation wages of the 1979 samples, and particularly of
those who gain employment in the suhseuent year, can be compared to the wages
at which such employment is gained. Although comparisons of such nans provide
no evidence on      correlations   between the two irasures, the comparison is at least
useful as a first step towards evaluating th            validity   and effectiveness of
self—reported reservation wages. For if         these   reservation wages are   truncating
                                          —23-


distributions of after wages from below, we would expect the iran received wages

to be somewhat    higher   than the reservaticn wages. In fact, the results here

show this to be true for both groups,though the difference is not significant

for blacks. Thus either the validity of responses or their abilities to obtain

these wages becomes re questionable for blacks than for whites.

         Before   noving on to consider results from the NBER Survey, it might be
useful   to briefly consider the full   distributions of wages   and   reservation wages
for   blacks and whites as veil as the summary statistics presented in Table 1.

These distributions are presented in the Appendix to this chapter for the

nonemployed. They show, for instance, that the ratio of reservation wages to

received wages are higher for blacks than for whites at the medians of their

respective distributions as well as at the means. These medians are b.00 for

reservation wages and 3.00 for received wages of nonemployed blacks; and 4.00

and 3.50 for nonemployed whites. They also show that few of the jobs sought

would be accepted at below the minimum wage ($2.90 in 1979, $3.10 in 1980) by

either group, although a sril1 fraction of received wages fall below the minimum

for each group.

         Furthermore, the distributions of received wages are re heavily spiked

at the minimum wage for blacks than for whites. If this is true of the actual

offer wage distributions as well, any movement of the reservation wages of

blacks above the minimum will have greater effects on their noneloyment dura-

tions. This is true because a greater part of their wage distribution is being

trunca'ted by the reservation wage, leaving a smaller fraction of the distribu-

tion that is acceptable. By differentiating Equation (2), we thus see thismore
                                        —24—


clearly: dPNE/dwr =   _f(r) where NE is the transition probability, yr is the
reservation wage, and n is the offer probability. A more heavily spiked offer

wage distribution for blacks ians a higher f(v') for them and thus a larger

effect on transitions and durations.    This result is confirmed by estimates

from duration equations for blacks and whites below which show larger effects of

reservation wages on the durations of blacks. The higher spiking at the minimum

for blacks also confirms the notion presented above that the variance of the

offer wage distribution appears to be lower for them and cannot be responsible

for their relatively higher reservation wage.

         Thus far, a fairly consistent picture has emerged in which the reser-

vation wages for sought jobs of young blacks in the NLS are higher relative to

received wages than are those of young whites. However, some puzzling contra-

dictions appear when considering the results of the NBER Survey in Table 1 and

of the reservation wages for specific jobS in both surveys in Table 2. In Table

1, the reservation wages for "sought jobs," "best jobs" and "any jobs" of young

inner—city blacks are well below those of blacks and whites in the NLS, espe-

cially relative to their received wages. Furthermore, histograms on the reser-

vation wages of the NBER nonemployed indicate that a substantial fraction of

youths are willing to accept their sought jobs below the minimum, and that the

median reservation wages are close to the minimum at $3.00 per hour. That the

medians and xians differ quite substantially here is no surprise, given the

spiking of the wage distributions around the minimum and the large right—hand

tails.

         Other inconsistencies appear upon consideration of Table 2. This table

presents reservation wages for a list   of   specific jobs. In this case the format
                                          Table 2


                          Reservation Wages for Specific Jobs:
                              Percentage Willing to Accept
                               Work at Given Wage or Less



    NLS
                         Whites             Whites                Whites
                           TOT               North                 South
                  2.50 To 5.00          2.50 3.50 5.00        2.50 3.50 5.00

Sought Job, 1979 .02 .41          .70    .02 .40 .67           .01     .42 .76
Neighborhood
Cleaning           .25 .44        .65    .21 .42 .59           .35 .50 .81
Cleaiiing          .18 .38 .62           .12 .31 .55           .32 .53 .77
Dishwasliing       .17 .34 .60          .13 .28 .55            .26 .47 .68
Factory            .22 .46        .70   .20 .44 .67            .28 .52 .78
Supermarket        .17 .39 .67          .16 .35 .63            .21    .50 .78
Received Wage,     .07     .59 .79      .06 .54 .76            .09 72 .88
Most Recent Job                                                       -




                     Blacks                   Blacks             Blacks
                           TOT                 North              South
                  2.50 3.50 5.00 2.50 3.50 5.00              2.50 3.50 5.00

Sought Job, 1979 .03 .45 .75            .03 .41 .74            .03 .50 .77
Neighborhood
Cleaning           .31     .55 .79      .31     .54 .77        .31    .55 .79
Cleaning           .36 .60 .77          .33 .53 .68            .39 .65 .83
Dishwashing       .36 .60 .75           .36 .55 .73            .39 .68 .81
Factory           .35 .71         .86   .38 .66 .82            .33 .76 .89
Superrarket       .44 .69 .84           .40 .61        .78    .48 .76 .89
Received Wage,    .16 .60 .82           .19 .60 .80           .12     .5.8   .83
Most Recent Job

                                                             (over)
                                Tbla 2(Cont'd)
                      Reservation age for Specific Jobs:
                          Percentage Willing to Accept
                           Work at Given Wage or Less



  !ThER
                     Blacks
                  2.50 3.50 5.00

Sought Job         .24 .65 .93

Dishwashing        .15 .47   .85
Factory Labor      .26 .61 .93

Supermarket        .19 .59 .89
Received Wage,     .11 •57 .84
Most Recent Job




NOTE: NL3 saiples are limited to the 1979 panel of the Survey,
since questions for specific jobs only appear that year. Only
the noneIployed are included here. Sample sizes are 241 for tne
whites and 160 for those with received wages;for blacks in the NLS
they are 186 and 90 for those with wages;for those in the NBER they are
821 and 503, respectively.Reservatjon wages for sought job and received
wages for most recent job have been rescãled from the Continuous to the
discrete form.
                                            —25—



of    the questions is identical between the two surveys, though the list of jobs

considered in the NLS      is   longer. The question reads, "If you were offered a job

as a ___________,   would you accept it at ___________?"    In   each case the wage

rates considered are $2.50, $3.50, arid $5.00 an hour. Table 2 presents the per-

centages of the nonemployed who are willing to accept these jobs at each wage

rate in the two surveys.          Since this set of questions was asked only in the

1979 survey of the NLS, responses to the question on sought job for that year

have been resealed to the same format and are presented here as well. The same

has been done for sought job on the NBER Survey and for most recently received

wages   in both surveys.
          Several strong findings emerge from Table 2. Perhaps most important is
the   much greater willingness of blacks than of whites in the NLS to accept each

of the specific low—skilled jobs, even though there is no such greater

willingness to accept the sought jobs. This is true among those in the North as

well as the South. It is even true when comparing these reservation wages to

received wages for each group. Among whites arid especially blacks there is a

fairly substantial fraction of individuals who are willing to accept these jobs

at below the minimum wage, even though this was not the case for either group

with regardsto their sought jobs.

          Comparisons between the different reservation wage measures for each

group produces some interesting findings. For whites, the cumulative percentage

of' individuals willing to accept jobs like factory or supermarket work at $3.50

or $5.00 is relatively close to the percentage for sought jobs, even though vir-

tually no one accepts their sought job at $2.50. But for blacks, no such con-
                                            —26—



vergence   occurs —   the   percentage accepting work remains lower at each   level     for

the sought jobs. The discrepancy is strongest among blacks of the South, whose

reservation wages for sought jobs are higher but for the specified jobs lower

than those   of   blacks in the North, Finally, some demands for "compensating

differentials"    can be seen among   both blacks and   whites   in the preference of

each   for factory or supermarket jobs relative to such unpleasant, dead—end, or
menial   jobs as dishwashing or cleaning positions.

         As for the NBER Survey, there is greater consistency here between reser-

vations wages for sought jobs and      those   for specified jobs in factories and

supermarkets. The same relative dislike of jobs such as dishwashing is also

evident. in   fact,   reservation wages for sought jobs are lower here than for

jobs like dishvashing. Furthermore a comparison of the reservation wages for

specific jobs between inner—city blacks of the NBER Survey and blacks from the NLS

shows that the absolute willingness of inner—city blacks to accept these jobs is

quite comparable to that of Northern blacks in the NLS. If anything, the reser-

vation wage rates are somewhat higher for the inner-city groups, especially at

the 2.50 mark. In any event, the relatively comparable responses of Northern

blacks across the two surveys when questions were asked in the same formats

indicates the crucial importance of these formats in determining the different

responses received.

         To sunrize, results from the NLS show that reported reservation wages

for jobs sought relative to previously received wages are higher for blacks than

for whites, while reservation wages for specified, low—skilled jobs appear to be

lover. The latter result is generally consistent with evidence from the NBEB
                                      —27—


Survey, where similarly phrased questions show reservation wages for soecified

jobs ang inner—city black youths to be somewhat higher than those of Northern

blacks xrxre generally. Reservation wages for both grops show a demand for corn—

pensating differentials with regard to jobs considered menial or unpleasant.

        The variety of responses to differing reservation wage questions by the

same individuals in the NLS, with their very different implications for black

and white youth job search behavior, make it crucial to understand why these

differing responses occur and which of the reported reservation wages have

stronger behavioral implications with regards to subsequent wages and durations

of nonemployment.

        A few different hypotheses will be considered here on the question of

why responses differ across various reservation wage equations, and some empiri-

cal evidence on the issue will be presented. Some evidence on the crucially

important question of which reservation wage measures have re predictive power

with regards to subsequent nonemployment durations and wages received will be

explored in the next section.

        The two hypotheses considered with regards to differences between

reported reservation wages include the two major differences between the

questions asked in each case. One hypothesis involves differences between open—

ended and closed formats on questions of these types. All but one of the NEER

questions on reservation wages asked individuals whether or not they would

accept specific dollar amounts rather than asking them to come up with a dollar

figure of their own; and the one question in which this was not done directly

followed the others in sequence. Accordingly, Tables (1) and (2) show fairly
                                        —28—


consistent responses to these questions in the NBER Survey. By contrast, the

"job sought" question in the NLS is open—ended while the one for specific jobs

uses specific dollar figures; and the inconsistencies between responses to the

two kinds of questions are zrDlch stronger in the NLS, for whites and especially

for blacks, than they are in the NBER data.

        One explanation for this xy be that open—ended questions allow indivi-

duals to confound their wage expectations with their reservations.9 This

hypothesis is supported by the fact that explicit wage expectations were asked

of' individuals in the NBER Survey, and responses to these questions were

substantially higher than responses to reservation wage questions. In fact, the

nean wage expected on the "best job" obtainable by nonemployed individuals in

the NBER Survey is .88, which is substantially closer in value to the reported

reservation wages of blacks in the NLS than are the reservation wages for sought

jobs reported in the NBER Survey. The fact that inconsistencies in the NLS are

higher for blacks, especially for southern blacks, than for whites nay indicate

either a greater degree of confounding on their part or a greater degree of

expectational error on their part.

        Another   hypothesis about differences in reported reservation wages

involves the nature of the jobs being considered. Reservation wages for sought

jobs allow these jobs to vary between individuals and racial groups. The

distribution of these jobs for each group relative to what they can obtain

could thus 'be an important determinant of reservation wages relative to received

wages for each group. The jobs sought also differ from the specified jobs,

which are primarily low-wage and low—skill positions.
                                                -29-


         Furthermore, different dimensions of the sought or specified various

Jobs could have different implications for the relevant reservation wage. On the

one hand, unpleasant nonwage characteristics of jobs which might also be con-

sidered menial may- lead to higher reservation wages for these jobs; this appears

to be the case for whites and         blacks   within the NLS as well as for blacks within

the NBER, all of whom are more willing to accept factory or supermarket work

over dishvashing or cleaning. On the other hand, jobs sought may command higher

reservation wages than low—skilled Jobs for a number of reasons. For one thing,

the   low—skilled jobs may 'be regarded as more temporary- because of their
"dead—end" nature while sought or desired jobs may be regarded as more per-
manent. As noted above, theoretical treatments of reservation wages           within    the
search literature have emphasized the importance of time horizon and its posi-
tive effects on reservation wages; and empirical evidence has shown that tur-

nover rates are higher and employment durations lower in low-wage service

occupations than in other oCcupations)'0 Another reason why sought or

desired jobs may carry higher reservation wages than low—skill jobs is that

higher wages may be regarded as more appropriate and therefore more equitable

than the former. A long tradition exists within the literature of labor econo-

mics that emphasizes the importance of traditional wage norms for Jobs and con-

siderations of equity and relative position with regards to comparable workers.11

An understanding among youth         that   these low—skill jobs generally pay low   wages
may enable   them to occasionally accept these Jobs, particularly if they regard
them   as being   temporary   and they need the earnings quickly while they con-
                                    if

tinue to search or to aspire to longer—term positions for which they will demand
                                                       —30—


  higher pay. Of course, the willingness to accept the low—skill job even tem-

  porarily diminishes greatly when these jobs are considered unpleasant or nial,

  as is the case for dishwashing and cleaning.

             It is therefore quite possible that the higher reservation wages in the

  NLS for jobs sought iy reflect the characteristics of those jobs as well as

. confounding of expectations with reservations. Again, one must ask why the
  willingness to accept temporary jobs would be greater for blacks in the NLS than

  for NBER blacks or for whites. It might be, for instance, that the dislike of

  dead—end or rnial jobs is the relatively stronger effect for whites and

  Northern, inner—city blacks; it might also be that the expectations of the

  nationwide (including Southern) groups of blacks with regards to attainable

  occupation or pay at those jobs may be xxre unrealistic than those of whites and

  of Northern,     inner—city blacks. It thus              becomes clear that expectations about

  wages   and jobs   attainable are an important part of both explanations, although

  their implications for reservation wages differ somewhat between the two

  stories.

             Some empirical evidence on the issues of occupational expectations

  and time horizons, as well as their effects on the various reservation

  wage measures, is provided below. Table 3 presents distributions on occupations

  held, sought, and aspired to at age 35 by nonemployed blacks and whites in the

  19T9 NLS.     Distributions for occupations held prior to the current spell of

  nonemployment as well as for those found after the spells are both listed. The

  aspired occupations represent responses to the question, "What do you hope to be

  doing at ace 35?"
                                  Table 3

              Frequencies on Occupations Sought and Held by the
                               Nonemployed

NLS
                                                               Job at Age 35
            Job Previously Held     Job Sought     Job Found   Aspired to



Not
Specified    .318     .451          .504 .560    .325 .352     .165   .104


White
Collar       .045    .059          .075 .062     .042 .110     .529   .556


Crafts—
Operatives .339      .185          .262 .248     .397 .248     .252   .290


Laborer
Service     .298     .305          .160 .130     .236 .290     .054   .050




Note: These are weighted frequencies for the 1979 panel of NLS. JOb
Previously Held refers to 1979 survey while Job Found refers to response
from 1980 Survey for those nonernployed in 1979.
                                          —31—


          The results show that the distributions of jobs sought and aspired to

are remarkably similar between young blacks and    whites   while the distributions

of jobs   held are not. More specifically, blakcs are   re heavily represented in
the   laborer   and service categories as well as the white collar area (mostly

clerical) while whites are imich nre heavily represented in the crafts and

operative positions. Since the latter categories generally include uore skilled

and highly-paid positions than the former, It appears that young blacks have

occupational expectations which are higher than those of whites relative to what

each group ultimately obtains. This view is also consistent with one presented

over ten years ago by Leonard Goodwin (1973), who argued that the black and poor

wanted work like everyone else but had no Iixans of achieving their occupational

aspirations.

          Having demonstrated the relatively higher occupational expectations of

young blacks, it remains to be seen how these expectations affect their respon-

ses to the various reservation wage questions. Table 14 presents reservation

wages of nonernpioyed blacks and whites in the NLS for jobs sought and jobs spe-

cified disaggregated by job sought. As before, reservation wages for jobs

sought appear in continuous form and as the percentage accepting work at $3.50

or less; reservation wages for specified jobs appear only in the latter form.

          The results show that the reservation wages of young blacks for jobs

sought increase quite th-araticai1y when the job in question ves beyond the

laborer and service category. The percentage of blacks willing to accept these

jobs at $3.50 or less drops from over 5O when the job sought is from this cate-

gory to 10% or less in other categories. For whites this decline is visible
                                   Table 4

                     Mean Reservation Wages by Occupation
                        Sought of the Nonemployed




NLS — B           Job Sought:

                                                      Craft &      Laborer &
                  Not Specified      White Collar     Operative    Service



Reservation
Wage for
Job Sought        4.51     4.49      4.04    4.28    4.76    4.24 3.62    3.28
Percent
Accepting
_____   at
< $3.50

Job Sought          .365    .409      .529    .322    .422    .371 .495    .813

   Neighborhood
   Cleaning        .383     .558      .539    .430    .515   .543 .491    .515

   Cleaning        .368     .629      .337    .118    .438   .592 .344    .669

   Dishwashing     .344     .645      .303   .413     .317   .533 .400    .688

   Factory         .479     .681      .479   .457    .505    .789 .348    .791


Note: Samples are the same as those of Table           All means are weighted.
                                        —32—


though much less pronounced. Willingness of blacks and 'whites to accept the

specified low—skill jobs also shows some sensitivity to the jobs which they

claim to be seeking. In particular, those who are seeking white—collar jobs are

less Likely to accept specified low—skill jobs than those who are seeking other

jobs. But the differences in these rtasures across the job sought categories

are far less striking than they are among blacks for the reservation wages

attached specifically to jobs sought.

        This fact becomes even clearer when one compares reservation wage

measures within each category of ob sought. Generally, those who seek laborer

or service employment have comparable or lower reservation wages for these

sought jobs than for the specified low—skill jobs. But ang blacks, those who

seek other jobs have higher reservation wages for sought jobs than for specific

ones. It is clear, then, that the jobs which the black nonemployed seek affect

their reservation wages for these positions, although xny of them who are

seeking skilled blue—collar or white—collar jobs at higher wages seem willing to

accept the specified low—skill sobs at lower wages.

        The hypothesis that blacks will accept lower wages for the specified

jobs because they regard them as being rre temporary cannot be tested directly,

but the latter part of the statement can be demonstrated on its own. The NBER

Survey included questions about individuals' intended time horizons for their

most recently held jobs. One question asked, "Did/Do you regard this job as

being long—term or temporary?" while another asked, "How long did/do you intend

to stay on this job?" Respcnses to these questions are presented for the dif-

ferent occupational groupings in the NBER sample in Table 5.   Turnover   rates,
                                  Table 5

                  Time Horizons and Turnover Rates for Jobs
                               By Occupation



                                   Crafts &
NBER — Blacks      White Collar    Operatives   Laborer & Service

Perceptions of
Long—Term
Potential:

   Long—Term           .39            .40              .29

   Temporary           .53            .56              .65

   Don't Know          .07            .04             .06


Intended
Employment
Durations:

   < 3 months         .14             .14             .19

   3—6 months         .08             .12             .10

   6—12 months        .02            .03              .04

   Indefinite         .67            .66              .56


Turnover Rates        .64            .66              .72




Note: Calculations are done for all who had employment in previous year.
       Turnover rates defined as percentage of all with employment who
       lost or left their jobs in the previous year.
                                        —33-


defined   as the percentage of individuals who los or left   jobs   in the previous

year, are also presented for these groupings. As expected, the results show

that laborer and service jobs are re often-regarded as being temporary by

those who hold them than are other jobs; and intended employment durations are

shorter as well. The xre objectively defined turnover rates also show higher

rates of uvement out of (and therefore shorter employment durations in) these

jobs. The evidence is thus consistent with the claim that black individuals nay

be less choosy about certain low—skill jobs than they are about others which

they are seeking because they often expect the former to be temporary.

          Of course, none of this demonstrates that the responses to the open—

ended reservation wage questions for sought jobs in the NLS are truly reser-

vations as opposed to just expectations about wages. It remains to be shown

which of the reservation wages listed here have greater predictive power with

regards to subsequent durations of nonemployment and wages received. This issue

will be addressed in Section III.

          For now, it has been shown above that reservation wages for jobs sought

by young blacks are higher relative to wages they ultimately receive than are

those of young whites; while the reported reservation wages of blacks for speci-

fic low—skill jobs appears to be lower. The comparisons between means (or

frequencies) of reservation wages and received wages are a crude first attempt

to judge the level of reservation wages of young blacks and whites relative to

the potential offer wages of each group in the labor rket, where the latter

is a reflection of the derand for labor facing each group. However, such compariscris

are of limited usefulness here. For one thing, they control cnly for offer
                                         —34—



wages but not     for offer probabilities. Since black—white wage differentials

have declined in recent years while employment differentials have risen,

omitting    the latter from the controls is likely to demand bias estimated black—
white differentials in reservation wages. Furthermore,       the endogeneity of

received wages with    respect to reservation wages is also likely to bias downward
any measure of the latter relative to the former. This bias may be compounded
by the omission from the sample of those without any employment in the previous

year, a state which may have been caused for some by their high reservation wages.

On the other hand, the ratio of reservation to received wages may not be

constant across all individuals within each racial group. In particular, if

this ratio declines as received wages rise, the ratio of the means for whites

may understate the true ratio among whites whose characteristics are comparable

to those of blacks. Thus the black—white differential in this ratio will

reflect an upward bias as well; and the net effects of these downward and upward

biases are unclear.

         Therefore, different specifications of Equation (7) above have been

estimated for blacks and for whites, and they have 'been used to calculate racial

differences in reservation wages in the following manner:

              =     -WB =         —


where the     are the estimated coefficients of Equation (7) and the X are either

predicted wages, weeks worked, or their underlying determinants which are

descibed in Section i.12

         The equations used to predict wages and weeks worked appear in Table A.l

of   the Appendix. The   equations presented there were   estimated using OLS and
                                         -.35—



included   both currently employed and nonemployed individuals in the sample. Due
to   the large number of individuals without wages or work in the previous year,
some equations   were estimated uzing the inverse of the Mills ratio calculated

from probit equations for employment in the previous year. However, the coef-

ficients on this variable proved to be highly sensitive to what was       included   in

the first stage probit equation and predicted wage values were unstable and

often implausible?3

         Table 6 presents the results of simple reservation wage equations on

predicted wages or predicted weeks worked in the NLS surveys. Some equations

contain the continuous reservation wage for sought sobs as the dependent

variable, while others contain a dwrmy   variable     for whether or not the sought or

specified jobs would be accepted at $3.50 per hour. The latter results are frcm

equations which have been estit'ated as linear probability models. Most of

these equations within the NLS have been estimated separately by region; these

disaggregated results on the merged 1979 and 1980 sample for the continuous job

sought variable are presented as well here.

         The results of Table 6 show that the reservation wages of whites are

consistently more responsive to demand side factors than are those of blacks.

The differences exist with regard to both wages and weeks worked and in reser

vation wages for both sought and   specified     jobs. Most of the observed differen-

ces are reasonably significant as well.'5 The regional breakdown shcws that the

lower responsiveness is primarily a characteristic of blacks in the South, but

regional breakdowns on the 1979 NLS sample, though not presented here because of

very small sample sizes for Southern whites, also show smaller coefficients for
                                         Table 6

                            Coefficients from
                     Simple Reservation Wage Equations
                   for Predicted Wages and Weeks Worked

                              Whites                        Blacks
NL S
                         1              2              1               2

                    Wages Weeks Worked              Wages Weeks Worked
Dependent
Variables—
Reservat
Wages for:

Sought Jobs
 1979, 80

       TOT          .623               .013         .420             .007
                   (.085)          (.003)          (.120)        (.003)
       North        .630            .012            .618          .013
                   (.116)          (.003)          (.162)        (.004)
       South        .718               .012         .260          .003
                   (.175)          (.006)          (.178)        (.004)

Sought Jobs,
  1979              .716            .015            .399          .007
                   (.153)          (.005)          (.194)        (.004)
Percent
Accepting
Wages < $3.50
in 1979 for:

Sought Jobs        —.817           —.015           —.652        —.008
                   (.219)          (.007)          (.287)        (.007)
Neighborhood
Cleaning           —.   286        -.008            • 134         .002
                   (.226)          (.007)          (.239)        (.007)
Cleaning           —.574           —.019           —.285        —.002
                   (.220)          (.007)          (.285)       (.007)
Dishwashing      —1.048            —.032           —.406        — .002
                   (.206)          (.006)          (.276)       (.006)
Factory           —.201            —.018           —.701        —.012
                  (.231)           (.007)          (.257)       (.006)

Note: Separate equations estimated for wages and weeks worked. Independent
variables are predicted values based on equations which are presented in the
Appendix. Equations for the NLS are weighted by the sample weights. Only the
nonemployed are included in samples for reservation wage equations, while wage
and weeks worked equations included both the employed and nonemployed.
Continuous reservation wage and predicted wage variables appear in logs.
                                           —36—



Northern    blacks than for Northern whites with regards to several of the spe-
cified occupations.l6
           Table   7 shows the calculated racial differences in reservation wages

using coefficients of whites from equations in Table 6, as well as those from

equations where the X. variables were directly entered into the reservation wage

equation. For the sake of comparison, racial differences in nan reservation

wages and in the ratios of reservation to (predicted) received wages are

included in the table as well.

           The results of this table show that the reservation wages of young blacks

for sought jcbs are higher than those of whites when controlling for wages and

weeks worked. This result appears to reflect the greater responsiveness of

reservation wages amont whites to wages and weeks worked, as well as the lower

levels of these variables for blacks. The weeks worked control produces a

larger effect than the one for wages, since the racial difference in weeks

worked is larger than that in received wages; predicted values for both are

shown in Table A.2 of the Appendix. This table also shows mean values of the

underlying X variables for blacks and whites. As is apparent from line 2 of

Table 7,   the   racial differences in these variable and their effects on reservation

wages were not strong enough to produce a racial differential in reservation

wages when these variables were used as the controls.

       The results also show that the racial differential inferred above from

simply comparing nan reservation to received wages for each group is virtually

identical to the one obtained from an equation controlling for weeks worked. It

thus appears that the various downward biases discussed above in estiting the
                                       Table 7


                    Black—White Differences in Reservation Wages —
                           With and Without Various Controls
                                         NLS

                                                  Reservations   Wages For:

                                        Sought Job, 1979—80            Sought Job, 1979
                                     Total     North     South              Total
Black—White Differences

1. Differences in Means,             —.013       —.031      .051               —.042
    No Controls

2. Controlling for                   —.007       —.018    —.018                —.041
     Exogenous Determinants
     of Wages and Weeks Worked

3. Controlling for Wages              .094        .098      .092                .089

4.   Controlling for Weeks            .134        .133      .155                .149
     Worked

5. Ratio of Mean Reservation          .135        .176      .104                .149
    Wages to Received Wages

                                     Percent Accepting Wages       $3.50 in 1979 for:

                                     Sought Neighborhood
                                      Jobs    Cleaning   Cleaning Dishwash Factory

1. Differences in Pecentages,         .015        .076      .194        .279           .227
    No Controls

2. Controlling for Exogenous          .006        .053      .150        .203           .219
    Determinants of Wages and
     Weeks Worked

3. Controlling for Wages             —.134        .024      .081        .088           .099
4. Controlling for Weeks             —.167       —.025    —.041       —.108            .013
    Worked


Note: All differences are between blacks and whites , respectively. Mean
received wares and weeks worked in all cases reflect predicted values here , dua
to large nurnbers of missing values for the actual variables. All means and
equations are weighted. Coefficients from equations for whites are used along
with mean black wages , weeks worked , or characteristics to predict reservation
wages for whites when controlling for these characteristics.
                                       —37—


racial differential though the means are almost exactly counterbalanced by the

upward bias of using a constant ratio of reservation to received wages for whi-

tes (a notion rejected by the coefficients on wages for whites in Table 6, which

are significantly less than one).

        As for the results on reservation wages for specific jobs, these remain

generally lower for blacks than for whites even when controlling for wages. But

when controlling for weeks worked, the willingness of young blacks and whites to

accept these jobs become more comparable. In the case of dishwashing, the

control for weeks worked actually produces lower reservation wages for whites.

This appears to reflect the especially strong responses to wages and weeks

worked of the reservation wages of whites for this job.

        To sum up, then, the reservation wages of young blacks fcr jobs sought

are comparable to those of young whites in an absoli.ite sense; but they are

higher for the former after controlling for wages on weeks worked. The same

appears to be true of the jobs sought by young blacks. On the other hand,

reservation wages for specific low—skill jobs are generally comparable or lower

for blacks, even after controlling for these factors. It remains to be seen how

the various reservation wage measures affect the nonemployed durations and sub-

sequent wages of each group.

        Before moving on to this issue, a final note should 'be added concerning

the determinants of the relatively high reservation wages of blacks. While some

sumry evidence has been presented above on the roles of occupational expec-

tations and characteristics, none has been presented on the role of nonwage

income which is central to most job search and labor supply models.
                                       38



But evidence presented elsewhere shows that reservation wages and nonwage

income are positively correlated for young blacks in the NBER survey.16

Furthermore, illegal income is a major source of nonwage income for this

sample; and Viscusj (1983) shows that participation in illegal activitIes is

negatively correlated with perceived labor market opportunity for this

group. Thus, the outside income generated by illegal activities (and other

sources) for low—skill young blacks may be an important source of their

relatively high reservation wages.



III. Reservation Wage Effects on Nonetnployment Durations and Subsequent

           Wages

     This section considers the effects of the various reported reservation

wage measures on durations of subsequent nonemployment spells and on wages

subsequently received using the panel data from the NLS. The estimated

results of Equations (5) and (6) are therefore presented and discussed below.

     Before moving to these results, Table 8 presents summary evidence on the

durations of nonemployment spells for blacks and whites in the NLS sample.

Durations of three types of spells are presented here: 1) The full, completed

spell of all those who are nonernployed at the time of the 1979 survey; 2) the

incomplete portion of that spell which occurred priorto the survey; and 3)

the portion which occurred subsequent to the survey. The calculations

therefore use retrospective employment histories of both the 1979 and 1980

surveys to generate the completed spells for those who were still rioriemployec3

in 1979.
                                             Table 8

                             Duratione of Nonemployent Spefla:
                               l4sans and Standard Deviations


                                         NLS — 1979



                   Whites           Blacks         Black—White
                                                       Difference
Current Coin-
pleted   Spells
    TOT            317.26            406.47             .281
                  (209.28)          (211.35)

   North           298.97            422.70             .414
                  (204.96)          (215.63)

   South           379.29            387.84             .023
                  (217.04)          (205.99)

Spells Prior
to Survey
    TOT            156.93            212.10             .351
                  (126.81)          (132.35)

   North           147.03            223.91             .523
                  (124.24)          (130.18)

   South           189.11            198.89             .052
                  (131.74)          (133.10)

Spells Subse-
quent to Survey
    TOT          162.64              195.29             .201
                (135.45)            (138.67)

   North           153.66            200.06             .302
                  (131.00)          (141.83)

   South           194.04            190.58            —.018
                  (147.85)          (135.h8)


NOTE: Spells calculated from retrospective employment
histories in the 1979 aid 1980 LS sarveys for those who were
unemployed in 1979. All spells greater than one year in length
are included with a value of 365. All means are weighted using
sample weights. Sample sizes are 241 for whites and 186 for
blacks. Black—White Differenco calculated with durations of
whites as base.
                                      39




     These results show that the durations of completed spells of

nonemployment are about 28% higher for blacks than for whites, with somewhat

smaller differentials for the portions occurring subsequent to the survey and

somewhat larger for those occurring prior to the survey. About all of the

differentials occur in the North rather than the South, though these numbers

should be interpreted with caution. For durations are substantially longer

for Southern whites than for Northern ones. Thus Southern blacks also have

substantially longer durations than Northern whites, who make up about three—

fourths of the total white population and thus are primarily responsible for

their aggregate results. Blacks, of course, are quite evenly split between

the two regions and aggregate results weight both about equally.

     Two other points should be mentioned here. First, the NBER results are

omitted here since only the incomplete, prior spells are available for that

cross—section survey. As has been the case before, the calculated results for

this group were quite similar to those of Northern blacks in the NLS.17

Second, the issue of past, completed spells among the currently employed must

again be mentioned here. As noted before, the past spells are more likely to

have been missed at the time of the survey because they are likely to be

shorter. Looking only at spells of the currently nonemployed is therefore

likely to give upward—biased estimates of mean duration, especially when

considering the full, completed spells (which are not subject to the downward

bias of truncation by the survey date). In fact, the past completed spells

estimated from the retrospective histories were substantially shorter than any

of those presented in Table 8.18 However, this was about equally true for
                                        40



blacks and whites. The racial differentials for these spells was also In the

20—3OZrange, and thus the case for a substantial bias in estimated differences

between blacks and whites is reduced.

     Therefore, given that the nonemployment rates for blacks and whites in

the NLS are .396 and .196 respectively, the overall nonemployment differential

Is 102%; and differences in durations of spells appear to account for about a

third or so of the noneinployment rate differentials between the two groups in

this sample.19 It should be noted that this is a smaller fraction than found

by Clark and Summers or by Ballen and Freeman, all of whom found duration to

account for over half of nonemployment differentials between young blacks and

whites.    The one—third figure can thus be regarded as a lower bound to the

true estimate.

     Moving on to the estimated effects of reported reservation wage measures

on these durations, Table 9 presents the coefficients of duration equations

which •take the fcrm of Equation (5) above. The dependent variable in each

case refers to the portion of the completed spell occurring subsequent to the

1979 Survey date, since the reservation wage reported on that date directly

determines transition probabilities and therefore expected durations from that

date onward.2° As equation (5) specifies, the independent variables

include: a reservation wage measure; a dummy variable for whether or not the

individual has actively searched for work in the previous month; and a set of

variables to control for the labor demand factors which determine offer

probabilities and offer wages. This set of control variables includes all of

the detetminants of wages and weeks worked presented above, as well as dummy

variables for occupation, industry, and colective bargaining for jobs
                                      Table 9

                    Effectsof Reservation Wages on Durations of
                        Subsequent Spells of Nonemployment

                                                    Whites           Blacks
Equations for:                            Coefficient F—Value Coefficient F—Value
1. Reservations Wages for.Sought
    Job, 1979
        Total                                    .112               .585
                                                (.342)             (.313)
           North                                 .334              1 .801
                                                (.386)             (.726)
           South                                1.001               .136
                                            (1.474)               (1.442)
Percent Accepting Job at <    3.50:

2. Sought Job
           3.50                                  1 .68            —.749
                                                (.339)            (.339)
           5.00                                  .801             —. 384
                                                (.348)            (.358)
3. Neighborhood Cleaning                                  1.02              1.10
        3.50                                    —.315             - .424
                                                (.244)            (.301)
           5.00                                 —.042             —.221
                                                (.292)            (.355)
4. Cleaning                                               1.91              2.09
        3.50                                    -.018             —.416
                                                (.258)
                                                - .484            (.278)
        5.00                                                        .133
                                                (.278)            (.396)
5. Dishwashing                                            1.91               .33
       3.50                                      .142             - . 047
                                                (.273)            (.302)
        5.00                                    -.404              .198

6. Factory
                                                (.2)       .07
                                                                  (.386)
                                                                             .56
        3.50                                    - .080              35
                                                (.266)            (.338)
        5.00                                     .007             —.251
                                                (.310)            (.427)
Critical                                                  2.68              3.10
        F .05


Note: Separate equations estimated for each reservation wage measure. F-Values
are for pairs of dummies indicating willingness to work at given wages. Sample
includes all those nonernpioyed in the 1979 panel of the NLS. Controls include a
dummy variable for seach in the previous nonth;     all
                                                     of the determinants of wages
and weeks worked used above; and also dummies for occupation, industry and
collective bargaining. Missing values on these latter variables are given zero
values and special dummy variables which take on values of one. All equations
are weighted using sample weights. Sample sizes are 170 for whites and 129 for
blacks. Durations of spells and continuous reservation wages are in logs.
Means of the dependent variables on the total samples are 4.412 fcr whites and
4.738 for blacks.
                                       41



 occurring prior to 1979. Individuals without employment in the previous year

 vere given zero values on these variables and values of one on dummy variables

 for missing values.21 Other specifications of this equation using the more

 limited set of demand determinants or using predicted wages or weeks worked

 were estimated as well. But these controls were generally insufficient to

 overcome the downward bias due to omitted personal factors on the reservation

wage coefficients22, and theoretically incorrect negative coefficients

appeared in these equations for whites. Results for blacks were far more

robust with respect to the controls used.23

     Two other features of the results presented in Table 9 (as well as in

Tables 10—12 for subsequent wages) are noted. Separate duration equations are

estimated for each reservation wage measure. These measures appear in both

continuous and discrete form for the job sought; and in discrete form only for

specified jobs. The discrete forms appear as a pair of dummy variables, which

reflect willingness to accept work at 3.50 or less and at greater than 3.50

but 5.00 or less. To compare the predictive power of the different

reservation wage measures with regards to outcomes, F—statistics are presented

for each set of reservation wage dummies. These can be compared with the

critical F—values for joint significance at the .05 level for each sample size

that appears in the table as well.

     The results show that reservation wages for sought jobs have strong

effects on the durations of nonemployment for young blacks, particularly for

those in the North. Since both the durations and the reservation wage

measures are expressed in logs, the cdefficjents can be interpreted as

elasticities. The results show an elasticity of over .5 for the nationwide

sample of blacks and as high as 1.8 for those in the North. The results for

whites are positive but much smaller and not significant.
                                              42



       There are two possible interpretations for the smaller estimated

 coefficients for whites in these equatIons.         One, as noted above, is that the
 coefficients are downward biased because certain unobserved components of

 demand are correlated positively with durations but negatively with

 reservation wages. If either of these correlations is greater for whites than

 for blacks, the resulting bias in their coefficients will be greater. There

is, in fact, some reason to believe that both correlations are greater for

whites. For, though these coefficients are not reported here, several of the

observed measures of personal characteristics and fatally background appear to

have smaller effects on duration for blacks than for whites.24
                                                                        Furthermore,
the simple equations of Table 6 show greater responsiveness of reservation

wages to wages and weeks worked for whites than for blacks.          Therefore, if the

observed and unobserved components of demand have similar relationships to

duration and to reservation wages, we would expect the downward bias to be

greater for whites.

      However, another explanation of the lower estimated effects of

reservation wages for whites is that the effect is, in reality, lower for

them. As noted above, the partial effect of reservation wages on durations is
—
    f(Wr),   where it   is   the probability of receiving offers and f(Wr) is the

value of the probability density function for wages when evaluated at the

reservation wage. Since the evidence of the Appendix shows wage distributions

which are more spiked around the minimum wage for blacks than for whites, as

well as reservation wages which are higher relative to received wages for

blacks, this would imply a stronger effect of their reservation wages on

durations. Of course, we would expect the offer probabilities to be lower for

blacks, and it is not clear whit the net effect on the relative magnitudes of

the partials would be. However, as discussed below, it appears that the
                                      43



probability of individuals obtaining some kind of job offer (albeit at the

minimum wage) If desired may be quite high even for young nonemployined blacks;

and thus the relatively high reservation wages for sought jobs of young blacks

may have strong effects on their nonemployment durations.

     Given the estimated elasticities of durations with respect to reservation

wages as well as the estimated differences in these reservation wages when

controlling for demand characteristics of blacks and whites, we can estiniate

the overall effect of these higher reservation wages on the nonemployment

durations of blacks. The estimated elasticity for blacks of .585, together

with a predicted reservation wage differential that was estimated to be as

high as .135 relative to received wages for each group, imply that the higher

reservation wages add as ruch as 7.9% to the nonemployment durations of

blacks. Given the differences in mean durations between blacks and whites of

28% as reported in Table 8 and of over 30% in the dependent variable of the

regression sample (see Note, Table 9), the results imply that a quarter to a

third of the average racial difference in duration may be due to the

relatively higher reservation wages for sought jobs of blacks.

     Since durations of nonemployrnent appear to account for at least a third

and probably over half of the higher nonemployment rates of young blacks than

of young whites, the notion that the reservation wages of young blacks may

significantly add to their nonemployment rates seems supported by the

evidence. Furthermore, the estimated duration elasticity and racial

differentials in reservation wages are even higher in the North than in the

South, as is the difference in nonemployment durations. Although the

estimated duration elasticity for the North seems implausibly high,25 the

effects of thei: reservation wages on their nonemployment rates may be

considerable.
                                         44



         Of course, these calculations use the highest estimates of both the

 duration elasticities and the reservation wage differentials controlling for

 demand characteristics that were estimated. It has been argued in both cases

 that the higher estimates are the more believable ones because others are

plagued by various downward biases discussed above. Still, it should be

pointed out that the effects of reservation wages on overall nonemployment

durations and nonemployment rates for young blacks which are calculated above

are likely to be upper bounds to the true effects.

     A final caveat must be mentioned here with regard to the above

calculations that will be elaborated on below. These calculations assume that

the elasticities of durations with respect to reservation wages would not

change as the latter themselves changed; but, as the formula for the partial

derivative implies, the elasticity is itself dependent on the reservation

wage. More importantly, a general decline in reservation wages would

presumably lower the probabilities of receiving offers facing individuals if

the aggregate availability of jobs was less than the number of individuals

seeking work. Thus the calculations presented above (of a quarter to a third

of the racial differential explained by reservation wages) are even more

likely to overstate the true contribution of reservation wages to the

aggregate racial difference in durations. The predominance of factors

determirg labor demand in explaining racial differences in durations is

clearly established despite the significant effects estimated for reservation

wages.

     Moving on to the discrete measures of reservation wages for sought and

specified jcbs, the results of Table 9 show that the former have greater

explanatory power than any of the latter with regards to duration for both

blacks and whites. However, the high joint significance level of the dummies
                                      45



for sought jobs of whites masks the fact that the relative magnitudes of their

coefficients are not correct — since those with reservation wages above

5.00 have the shortest durations. For whites, only the reservation wages for

neighborhood cleaning have coefficients with sensible magnitudes of which at

least one is marginally significant; for blacks this is true of the

reservation wages for neighborhood cleaning, cleaning, and factory jobs. But

none of these other measures came close to having the predictive power or

magnitudes of coefficients (both relative and absolute) which the measure for

sought jobs has arnong blacks. The belief that the measures for sought jobs

are lees 'valid' than those of specified jobs because the former represent a

confounding of expectations and reservations may be partially true, but the

strong behavioral implications of the former support the case for their

validity.

    Having evaluated the effects of reported reservation wages on subsequent

durations of nonemployment, their effects on subsequent wages can now be

addressed. Consistent with the notion shown above that received wages reflect

a probability—weighted average of an offer wage distribution truncated by

reservation wages, Equation (6) specifies that subsequent wages be estimated

as a function of reservation wages and predicted wages, where the latter

proxies for the mean of the offer wage distribution.

    Table 10 presents the results of these equations for blacks and whites.

The reservation wages for sought and specified jobs appear in the same format

as in the duration equations, with separate equations and F—values presented

for each measure, hile the predicted wage is the same as that described

above. The results show very significant effects of reservation wages for

sought jobs on the received wages of both blacks and whites. The effect is a

bit stronger for whites, and for both groups the effects in the North are
                                      Table 10

       Effects of Reservation lageB on Received Wages at Subsequent Jobs

                                                      White           Blacks

Equations for:                           Coefficient F—Value Coefficient F—Value

1. Reservations Wages for Sought
    Job, 1979
        Total                                 .554                 .252
                                             (.091)               (.106)
           North                              .723                 .643
                                             (.116)               (.170)
           South                              .145                 .101
                                             (.092)               (.141)
Percent Accepting Job at      3.50:

2. Sou.ght Job                                           21 .05            5.68
        3.50                                 — .551               —.348
                                             (.085)               (.108)
           5.00                              —.422                -.171
                                             (.085)               (.112)
3. Neighborhood    Cleaning                               1 .78            7.51
           3.50                              -.104                —.336
                                             (.074)               (.089)
           5.00                               .032                —.167
                                             (.o8a)               (.107)
4. Cleaning                                               1.59             1.76
           3.50                              —.142                —.161
                                             (.079)               (.089)
           5.00                              -.072                -.044
                                             (.082)               (.120)
5. Dishwashing                                            3.93             7.66
           3.50                              - .220               —.311
                                             (.079)               (.095)
           5.00                              — .069               —.026
                                             (.078)               (.121)
6. Factory                                                2.73             2.35
       3.50                                  —.189                —.102
                                             (.083)               (.115)
           5.00                              - . 090              —.113
                                             (.091)               (.133)
Critical                                                  3.05             3.10
       F .05


Note: Separate equations estimated for each reservation wage measure. F—Values
are for pairs of dummies indicating willingness to work at given wages. Sample
includes all those nonemployed in the 1979 panel of the NLS who reported wages
for jobs obtained in the subsequent year. Predicted wages are included as a
control variable. All equations are weighted by sample weights. Samples sizes
are 143 før whites and 99 for blacks. Continuous reservation wages and received
wages are in logs.
                                      •46




greater than in the South. In this equation, the effects of omitted

components of the predicted wage should have a positive rather than negative

effect on the estimated coefficients for reservation wages (since these

components should be positively correlated with both reservation and received

wages); and these effects could be causing the higher coefficient for whites

observed here.

     But an alternative explanation is that whites are more likely to obtain

their sought jobs than are blacks, and hence their reported reservation wages

for these jobs have more predictive power with regards to subsequent wages.

This explanation is consistent with the results of Table 3 which show a

greater consistency between occupations sought and those received or held for

whites. It is also consistent with the higher estimated effects of these

reservation wage measures on the nonemployment durations of blacks, which

imply that their higher reservation wages relative to offer probabilities and

offer wages often lead to higher nonemploymerit rather than higher wages for

blacks.

     Comparing the reservation wages for sought and specified jobs in their

discrete forms, we find that the former totally dominate all of the latter for

whites, In both magnitudes of coefficients and F—values. For blacks, the F—

values for sought jobs are a little lower than those for neighborhood cleaning

and dishwashing jobs; but the magnitudes of the coefficients for sought jobs

are very similar to those for neighborhood cleaning and are greater than those

for dishwashing (though their standard errors are greater). Thus the

reservation wages on sought jobs do as well o better as those for specified

jobs among both blacks and whites in explaining subsequently received wages;

again, doubts about the validity of this measure are not supported by its

strong ability to explain observed behavior. But the fact that reservation
                                         47



wages for specified, low—skill jobs have relatively greater predictive power
for    the wages of blacks than of whites again suggests that blacks are more
likely to have to accept these jobs in place of their preferred ones, even if
only   temporarily.
       In   an attempt to test for whether or not the explanatory power of the

reservation wage measures for different jobs vary according to the nature of

the job ultimately received, the same wage equations were estimated for two

subsamples of blacks and whites: those whose jobs found were in the laborer

and service category; and those whose jobs found were in the same broad

category (i.e., white—collar, craft and operative, or laborer and service) as

their job sought. It was hypothesized that reservation wages for sought jobs

should have relatively more explanatory power in the latter group while those

for the specified, low—skill jobs should do relatively well in the former.

       The tests are rather crude because of the broadly—defined nature of the

occupational aggregates and because of the much smaller sample sizes in the

subsamples. Nonetheless, the tests were moderately successful, especially

among whites. Table 11 shows the results for the group with laborer and

service jobs. The results show a strong increase in the explanatory power of

reservation wages for dishwashing and for cleaning among whites with a strong

decline in those for jobs sought relative to the results for the total

sample. Among blacks the changes are less pronounced, but there is a strong

increase in the explanatory power of reservation wages for factory jobs. As

for the results in Table 12 for those who obtained the kinds of jobs which

they sought, the reservation wages for these jobs continue to have strong

explanatory power among whites while those for the specified low—skill jobs

have very little here. Among blacks the strongest decline is in that for

factory jobs, though the ragnitudes on the coefficients for this and some of
                                        Table 11

                    Effects of Reservation Wages on Received Wages
                   at Subsequent Jobs — Laborers and Service Workers

                                                           Whites          Blacks

EQuations for:                              Coefficient F—Value Coefficient F—Value

1. Reservations biages for Sought
    Job, 1979
        Total                                       .735                .599
                                                   (.180)             (.175)
           orth
           South

Percent Accepting Job at C     3.50:
2. Sought Job                                                  7.59             4.92
           3.50                                 —.565                 — .463
                                                (.159)                (.172)
           5.00                                 —.298                 — .221
                                                (.157)                (.122)
3. Neighborhood     Cleaning                                   1.35             6.75
           3.50                                —.135                  —.418
                                               (.120)                 (.119)
           5.00                                  .059                 -.219
                                                (.146)                (.138)
4. Cleaning                                                    2.59                 .45
           3.50                                — .232                 — .071
                                               (.118)                 (.133)
           5.00                                 .007                   .037
                                               (.130)                 (.155)
5. Dishwashing                                                 4.51             6.52
           3.50                                — .336                 -.358
                                               (.112)                 (.143)
           5.00                                -.180                   .024
                                               (.142)                 (.125)
6. Factory                                                     2.07             5.77
        3.50                                   —.143                  —. 183
                                               (.165)                 (.149)
        5.00                                       • 085               .207
                                               (.165)                 (.211)
Critical                                                       3.15             3.20
        F .05


Note: Separate equations estimated for each reservation wage measure. F—Values
are for pairs of duramies indicating willingness to work at given wages. Sample
is subset of that for Table 10 and includes only those who obtained jobs as
laborers and service workers in subsequent year. Sample sizes are 64 for whites
and 47 for blacks. Continuous reservation wages and received wages are in logs.
                                       Table 12

                   Effects of Reservation Wages on Received Wages at
                   Subseauent Jobs — For Those Obtaining Jobs Sought

                                                        Whites            Blacks

Equations for:                             Coefficient F—Value Coefficient F—Value
1 •   Reservations Wages for Sought
      Job, 1979
          Total                                 .402                   .643.
                                               (.148)              (.306)
           North

           South

Percent Accepting Job at       3.50:

2. Sought Job                                               5.29               3.64
           3.50                                —.486               — .402
                                               (.157)              (.237)
           5.00                                — .424               .315
                                               (.148)              (.324)
3. Neighborhood     Cleaning                                 .73               4.67
           3.50                                - .090              —.627
                                               (.203)              (.217)
           5.00                                -.204               —.200
                                               (.i)                (.243)
4.    Cleaning                                              1.13               4.00
          3.50                                  .067               — .648
                                               (.168)              (.229)
           5.00                                —.139               —.515
                                               (.152)              (.290)
5. Dishwashing                                               .07               4.00
           3.50                                 .024               —.603
                                               (.175)              (.219)
           5.00                                 .054               —. 1 84
                                               (.iso)              (.318)
6. Factory                                                   .30                   .69
         3.50                                  - .082              —.368
                                               (.174)              (.355)
         5.00                                  —.124               - .082
                                               (.160)              (.421)
Critical                                                    3.20               3.47
         F .05


Note: Separate equations estimated for each reservation wage measure. F-Values
are for pairs of duamies indicating willingness o work at given wages. Sample
is subset of that for Table 10 and includes only those who obtained jobs that
they were seeking in subsequent year. Sample sizes are 40 for whites and 23 for
blacks. Continuous reservation wages and received wages are in logs.
                                      48



the other reservation wages for specified jobs actually increase.

     To summarize, the reservation wages reported for sought jobs in the NLS

have a large, significant effect on the duration of nonemployment for blacks

and on subsequent wages for both blacks and whites. Reservation wages for the

specified, low—skill jobs also have some effects on subsequent wages,

particularly among those who obtain laborer and service jobs, and this is

generally more true of blacks than of whites.. The notion that reported

reservation wages for sought jobs in the NLS are less valid than the others

because the open—ended format of the questioning allowed confounding of

expectations and reservations is not supported here, given the stronger

behavioral implications of these measures. If anything, the results here

suggest that young blacks truly aspire to the sought jobs and the reservation

wages reported for them, and therefore these measures appear to contribute

more to their nonemployment durations than do those for low—skill jobs.

Perhaps the latter jobs are temporarily accepted only when the need for income

is great or the spell has been quite long.

     A final issue which needs to be addressed here is that of overall job

availabIlity for young blacks. The large observed effects of reservation

wages for sought jobs on nonemployment durations of this group seem to imply

that a reduction in the mean level of these reservation wages would reduce

mean nonemployment durations and nonemployment rates. As noted abc.ve, the

large estimated effects have the economic interpretation that offer

probabilities are high with regard to lower wage jobs for nonempioyed blacks,

i.e., that jobs are relatively available to those who want them or who are

willing to accept them at lower wages. Neelless to say, this is a fairly

controversial implication for a corunity of young blacks with such high rates

of nonemployment. Before this strong implication Is accepted, two 4uestions
                                            49



 should be asked:       1) Is there other evidence of job availability which is more

 direct than simply drawing inferences from estimated duration elasticities?

 2) Even if these jobs are currently available to individuals who are willing

 to   accept them, are they available in    the aggregate? Or is their only a small
 number    of   such jobs available which Only seem plentiful to particular

 individuals because most other individuals will not accept them? This latter

 statement essentially means that the offer probabilities facing individuals

 may depend on the aggregate level of reservation wages, and that the

 elasticity of duration with respect to reservation wages may decline as well

 if there was an aggregate decline in those reservation wages.

        This may be especially true because the available jobs (or those with

vacancies) are likely to be concentrated among those wIth high turnover rates

and which are not among those generally sought —
                                                        i.e.,   low—wage labor or

service sector jobs. Those jobs considered menial or 'dead—end" may be the

most available of all because of the high turnover and the
                                                                   relatively high
reservation wages for these positions. The important point here is that a

general lowering of reservation wages and of the level of job sought (or even

of the turnover rates Out of these jobs) rnight substantially reduce the

apparent availability of jobs to those who want them, leaving an aggregate

shortage of jobs to be more salient to the       nonemployed.
        The empirical evidence which exists on these larger issues is not too

comprehensive. Some unique evidence from the NBER survey appears in Table

13. The inner—city black youths were asked, "Suppose you were desperate for

honey. How easy would you say it would he for you to find a job working
as/at   ___________?," and   several jobs were listed afterwards. The results

from this data indicate that over 70Z of the nonernployed youth in the survey

believe that it would be o:ewhat easy or very easy to obtain some sort of job
                                    Table 13


                       Perceived Ability to Obtain Jobs
                             Among the Nonemployed

                            Very           Somewhat
NBER - Blacks               Easy               Easy       Di fficult   Impossible
Working as a Laborer         .184                  .276      .463          077

Working at a Minimum         .375                  .328      .227          .071
Wage Job




                                               /
                                      50



at the minimum wage; while for other jobs, such as laborer work, the

percentage is lower (46Z for laborer work). These data indicate that on

employed, inner—city young blacks perceive a fair amount of job availabilIty

at low wages, which is consistent with the high estimated elasticities of

duration with respect to reservation wages for this group.

     Several caveats must be mentioned with regard to these results. For one

thing, the NBER survey was conducted in late 1979 and early 1980, which

predated the recessions which have plagued the labor markets for the last

three years. Also, these are subjective perceptions or expectations of what

Is available —— as noted above, such expectations may be overly optimistic.

Finally, these perceptions are clearly individual rather than aggregate and

tell us little about job availability If overall reservation wages were to

change. Therefore, the extent to which the estimated effects of reservation

wages on durations would hold for major changes in the aggregate remains

unclear at this time.



IV. Conclusions and Implications

     This paper has analyzed the relative levels of reservation wages of young

blacks and whites, and their effects on nonemployment durations and subsequent

wages for each. The results have shown that young blacks seek jobs and wages

that are comparable to those of young whites, but which are higher than what

the young blacks ulttmately obtain. These relatively high expectations

contribute somewhat to their nonemploytrent durations, which are already

substantially higher than those of whites. On the other hand, young blacks

appear at least if noc more likely than whites to take specific low—skill

jobs, though it seems that they take these only temporarily. Reluctance to

take certain "menial'    dead—end jobs appears among both blacks and whites.
                                      51



     What all of this seems to imply is that young blacks have ixdel1ed their

expectations and aspirations after those of the white society around them,

although their means of achieving these ends are lower. To what extent the

latter is true because of lower skills, fewer contacts, less information, or

simple discrimination is unclear.

     It does seem as though the concern expressed in recent years about a

"Culture of Poverty" among poor blacks, whose main problem is their lack of

middle—class aspirations are to be met.

     The results also shed new light on the value of strategies which create

only more low wage, "dead—end" jobs for young, nonemployed blacks in the

public or private sector. To the extent that many young blacks appear willing

to take these jobs temporarily, they may be useful in a limited sense as a

means of providing income or training. But it is clear that young blacks,

like their white counterparts, aspire to better positions than these, even in

the short run. Unless accompanied by substantial training or some other means

of achieving upward movement, public service jobs or private ones created by

policies like a youth subminimum wage are urilikey to meet the hopes and needs

of the young nonemployed.
                                       pp end ix

                                       iable   A.i

                      in (Wage) and Weeks Worked Equations

                                         NLS

                                      Whites                        Blacks
                                               Weeks                         Weeks
                           Wages               Worked      Wages             Worked
lute rcept                 4.787               17.235      5.116               7.310
                            (.180)             (6.598)     (.245)            (10.522)
Age                            .052                 .561     .024                .264
                           (.010)               (.355)     (.013)              (.552)
Experience - Years             .021             1.473        .033              3.880
                           (.011)               (.405)     (.016)             (.716)
     Urban                     .085                 .144     .038             2.642
                           (.020)               (.736)     (.042)            (1 .832)
     South                 —
                               .076             2.381      -.014              5.243
                           (.021)               (.i)       (.029)            (1.246)
KWW                            .019                 .168     .019               • 270
                           (.006)               (.208)     (.008)             (.365)
Library Card                   .058             1 .309      .027             —1 .816
    at Home                (.023)               (.853)     (.070)            (1.293)
H.S. Diploma                 .086               7.786       .146              5.976
                           (.023)               (.805)     (.030)            (1.308)
Marital Status:
      Now Married          —.029                3.522      -. 007             - .064
                           (.040)              (i .581)    (.062)            (2.443)
      Was Married              .168             5.572        .203            —2.131
                           (.105)              (3.844)     (.186)        (13.337)
1950 Th.iraniy                 .061             —. 670       .051             —.192
                           (.018)               (.663)     (.028)            (1.250)
H.H. Income                -.002                —.016       .003               .083
    Excluding Own          (.001)               (.037)     (.002)             (.079)
H.H. Income                    .001             5.600       .173             14.726
    Listed < 0             (.032)               (.947)     (.046)            (t .764)
H.H. Inccme Missing        -.040                1   .041   -.024               .666
                           (.025)              (1.023)     (.036)            (1.684)
N2                          .163                    .160    .176               .256

N                          1   ,891             1   ,936     737                832
Mean Dep.    Var.          6 .140              41 .086     5.953             30.105
Note: Equations estimated using OLS. Samples include everyone reporting wages
in previous year for wage equations and everyone (including those without work
in previous year) in weeks worked euqtions. Household income (exiuding om) in
thousands of dollars. Knowledge of World of Work (Kww) ranges from 1 to 11 for
nunber of questions answered correctly. Experience reflects number of years in
whi'ch individual was employed as of cne year fore survey date, starting in
1975.
                                     Table A.2

                     Characteristics of the Noneraployed —
                         Means and Standard Deviations

                                           NLS

                                  Whites —                             Blacks
                      1979-80               1979             1979-80                  1979

                   Total      N        S         Total    Total      N          S         Total

Predicted Wages    6.054    6.105    5.913       6.007    5.878    5.898   5.860             5.816
                   (.181) (.157) (.170) (.168) (.165) (.158) (.170) (.I'LS)
Predicted leeks   36.222 36.681 34.437 35.788 24.695 22.751 26.528 22.732
    Worked        (5.687) (5.718) (5.397) (5.497) (7.506) (7.102) (7.415) (6.298)

Age               19.200 19.387 18.677 19.145 19.496 19.688 19.315 19.214
                  (1.730) (1.610) (1.936) (1.549) (1.694) (1.681) (1.687) (1.565)

Exerience          1.010   1.043   .777    .785    .803   .926    .687                     .578
                  (1.152) (1.204) (.950) (1.122) (1.508) (1.123) (.980                    (.955)

       Urban        .728     .821     .466         .722    .855    .952     .763             .856
                   (.445) (.383) (.499) (.442) (.352) (.213) (.425) (.351)
       South        .263               —           .261    .515                 —            .501
                   (.440)              —         (.442)   (.500)                —         (.500)
ICWW               5.589   5.723   5.213   5.625   4.793   4.863   4.727   4.953
                  (1.790) (1.774) (1.780) (1.815) (1.709) (1.699) (1.715) (1.743)

Library Card        .806     .836     .722         .809    .723    .692     .753             .712
    at Home        (.396) (.371) (.448) (.393) (.447) (.497) (.431) (.453)
H.S. Diploma        .499     .593     .236         .439    .452    .442     .462             .370
                   (.oo) (.491) (.424) (.496) (.498)                       (.s) (.483)
Marital Status
    Now Married     .051    .053      .046         .042    .073    .036     .109             .071
                   (.220) (.224) (.209) (.201) (.261) (.187) (.312) (.257)
Was Married         .009    .013      .000         .014   .004     .000     .007             .006
                   (.096) (.iii) (.000) (.118) (.061) (.000) (.085) (.078)
H.H. Income        13249   13862   11374   12503   11267   12333   10435    9884
                  (13005) (13201) (loao2) (11170) (13428) (14506) (11443) (11056)
N                    420     300      120          179     296      155         141           141

Note: All means are weightod us-?Lng sample weights. Predicted wages and weeks
worked calculated using renys fron these tables and coefficients from equations
presented in the previous table. Sanplë sizes reflect those for whom reser-
vations wages for sought jobs and all variables are defined.
Percentage
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4.
 2
      ___ ____ ___ ___ ____ ___
      2.50   3.00   3.50 4.00   4.50   5.00   5.50   6.00   6.50   7.00   7.50   8.00   8.50   9.00   9.50   10.00—
                                                                                                                      Wage
                                                        gurA.1
                            NBER—Nonemployed Blacks,Received Wages,Most Recent Job
Percentage
32
 30
28
 26
 24
 22
 20
 18
 16
 14
 12
 10
  8
  6
  4
  2
      2.50   3.00   3.50 4.00   4.50   5.00   5.50   6.00   6.50    7.00   7.50        9.00
                                                                                              Wage
                                                     Figre   A. 2
                           NBER—Nonemployed Blacks,Reservation Wages for Sought Jobs
Percentage
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
 8
6
4.
2
     2.50    3.00   3.50 4.00
                                                             -                        -          I
                                                                                                     ......
                                                                                                                 I                      II
                                 4.50   5.00   5.50   6.00       6.50   7.00   7.50       8.00            8.50       9.00   9.50   1.0.00—
                                                                                                                                             Wage
                                                       Figure      A.
                                NLS—Nonemployed Blacks,Receiveci Wages,Most Recent Job
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
18
16
14
12
10
     8
     6
     4
     2
                                              5.00   5.50   6.00     6.50   7.00   7.50   8.00   8.50   9.00   9
         2.50   3.00       3.50 4.00   4.50
                       -                                                                                           Wage
                                                            Figure    A.6
                                  NLS—Nonemployed Whites,ReservatioflWages for Sought Jobs
                                       Notes




    'Recent work by economists on the reservation wages of blacks and whites

includes a piece using only one of the available reservation wage measures in

the NLS by Michael A. Borus (1982). Using these data, he finds blacks more

willing to work, even after controlling for personal and local labor market

characteristics. A piece from a more sociological perspective which stresses

the reluctance of young blacks to do menial work Is by Elijah Anderson (1980).

    2See Richard B. Freeman (1979).

   3For an excellent survey of the job—search literature, see S.J. Lippman

and J.J. McCall (1976).

    4For a search model based on utility—maximization which allows reservation

wages to vary across jobs, see Harry J. Hoizer (1983).

    5See Lippman and McCall (1976).

   6The endogeneity of nonwage income with regards to reservation wages

derives from the fact that participation in illegal activities or government

transfer programs will be affected by employment status which, in turn, may

reflect rese:vation wages. The endogeneity of duration of preceding spells

reflects the fact that an individual's reservation wage may not vary greatly

over tfme and therefore current reservation wages reflect those In the past

which are partly responsible for the preceding spell.

    7The "Knowledge of the World of Work" variable reflects the number of

questions out of eleven which were answered correctly where the questions

Involved choosing definitions of specified occupations.

             possibilIty was first suggestedto me in conversations with

John Bound
   20Since reservation wages directly determine transitional probabilities

which, in turn, determine expected duration, several equations were estimated

of the same form as Equation (5) but where the dependent variable was ne' a

dummy variable for transition probability which equals one if the subsequent

nonemployment duration was 30 days or less. Results of this equation were

generally consistent with those of comparable duration equations, though

coefficients were generally of comparable duration equations, though

coefficients were generally less significant in the former. This appeared to

be caused by a greater variation in reservation wages within the post 30—day

spells (which accounted for over 80% of the sample for both groups) than

between the two groups of spells.

   21These extra variables were not included in the wage and weeks worked

equations because these equations were estimated for both 1979 and 1980; and

because, in each of these years, the missing value variables were endogenous

with respect to wages and weeks worked. In other words, the missing value

variables were always zero if wages were earned arid were always one if weeks

worked were zero. This problem was not encountered in the duration equation

because the missing value variables for employment prior to 1979 are exogenous

with recpect to durations that ocurred subsequent to 1979.

   22The formula for bias on the estimated coefficient of duration would be

bDN,XX*b,,Wr where the former coefficient is the true regression coefficient

on the omitted variable    while the latter is the auxiliary regression of the

omitted on the included variable. In this case, the former would be negative

and the latter positive, creating'a downward bias.

   23The coefficients for blacks on reservation wages for equations using

predicted wages or the more limited set of demand—side determinants as

contro]s generally ranged from .4 to .5
   24For instance, the coefficients on KWW, household income, and experience

were significantly smaller for blacks than for whites in the duration

equations.

   25The estimated duration elasticity of 1.8, together with reservation wage

differentials of .176 relative to mean received wages, imply an effect of

.317, which accounts for most of the racial differential in the regression

sample for that region. Since sample sizes were fairly small here (N=71), the

results are subject to some doubt.                         -
                                     References




Akerlof, George and Main, Brian 1980.        Unemployment Sel1s and Unemployment

      Experience.      American Economic Review, 70:885.

Anderson, Elijah, 1980. "Some Observations of Black Youth Unemployment," in

     Anderson, Bernard and Isabel Sawhill, Youth Employment Issues and

      Policy, New York: Prentise Hall.

Borus, Michael A., 1982. "Willingness of Youth to Work." Journal of Human

     Resources, 17:581.

Clark, Kim B. and Summers, Lawrence H., 1982. "The Dynamics of Youth

     Unemployment," in Freeman, Richard B. and Weise, David A., The Youth

     Labor Market Problem: Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences, Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press, p. 199.

Dunlop, John T., 1957. "The Task of Contemporary Wage Theory," in Taylor,

     C.W. and Pierson, F.C., New Concepts in Wage      Determination,   New York.

Freeman, Richard B., 1979. "Why     Is   There a Youth Labor Market Problem?"

     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 365.

Goodwin, Leonard, 1973. Do the Poor Want to Work? Washington, D.C.:

     Brookings Institution.

Heckinan, James J., 1979. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error."

     Econoinetrica 47:153.

Hoizer, Harry J., 1983. Black Youth Nonetnployment. Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis,

     Harvard University.

Kaitz, Hyman B., 1970. "Analyzing the Length of Unemployment Spells," Monthly

     Labor   Review   93:11.
Llpptnan, Steven J. and McCall, John J., 1976. "The Economics of Job Search:

     A Survey." Economic Inquiry 14:155.

Marston, Stephen T., 1976. "Employment Instability and High Unemployment

     Rates." Brookings Papers and Economic Activity, 1:169.
