THE INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION OF KNOWLEDGE WORKERS:
WHEN IS BRAIN DRAIN BENEFICIAL?
Peter J. Kuhn
Carol McAusland
WORKING PAPER 12761

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION OF KNOWLEDGE WORKERS:
WHEN IS BRAIN DRAIN BENEFICIAL?
Peter J. Kuhn
Carol McAusland
Working Paper 12761
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12761

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

Kuhn received support from Industry Canada contract 5017079 on the International Mobility of Highly
Skilled Workers during the early stages of this project. The authors acknowledge helpful comments
from seminar participants at the University of California, Santa Barbara. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2006 by Peter J. Kuhn and Carol McAusland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The International Migration of Knowledge Workers: When is Brain Drain Beneficial?
Peter J. Kuhn and Carol McAusland
NBER Working Paper No. 12761
December 2006
JEL No. F22,J61
ABSTRACT
We consider the welfare effects of the emigration of workers who produce a public good (knowledge).
We distinguish between the knowledge diversion and knowledge creation effects of such emigration,
and show that the remaining residents of a country can gain from emigration, even when tastes for
knowledge goods exhibit a kind of 'home bias'. In contrast to existing models of beneficial brain drain
(BBD), our results do not require agglomeration economies, education-related externalities, remittances,
return migration, or an emigration 'lottery'. Instead, they are driven purely by the public nature of knowledge
goods, combined with differences in market size that induce greater knowledge creation by emigrants
abroad than at home. BBD is even more likely in the presence of weak sending-country intellectual
property rights (IPRs), or when source country IPR policy is endogenized.
Peter J. Kuhn
Department of Economics
UC, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu
Carol McAusland
Agricultural and Resource Economics
UNiversity of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742-5535
cmcausland@arec.umd.edu

1. Introduction.
Will a “brain drain” from a small, or low-wage economy hurt or help the
remaining residents of that economy? While the earliest economics literature on this
question (e.g. Berry and Soligo 1969, Bhagwati and Hamada 1974) suggested that harm
was likely, recent contributions have identified a number of factors that could give rise to
beneficial brain drain (BBD). These include increased incentives to acquire education in
the sending country (Mountford 1997), remittances (e.g. Ozden and Schiff 2006), and
added discipline on the sending country’s tax authorities (Bucovetsky 2003).
In this paper we study another possible source of beneficial brain drain: the direct
benefit to sending-country consumers that occurs when its brains move to an environment
where they produce higher-quality knowledge goods. More specifically, we model brains
as “knowledge workers”, whose efforts improve the quality of a good that is reproducible
at zero marginal cost (Rosen 1981).1 Improvements in the quality of such goods benefit
source-country consumers whether their brains live at home or abroad. Thus, for
example, scientists sent to a U.S. laboratory, actors sent to Hollywood, and programmers
sent to Silicon Valley may produce products of greater value to their origin-country
consumers than the products they would have produced at home. Of course, both the
amount of home bias in tastes, and the strength of intellectual property rights (IPRs) in
the sending and receiving countries will affect the magnitude of these gains in consumer
welfare. We study these effects as well.
What factors might induce a sending country’s brains to produce higher-quality
knowledge goods when employed abroad? While we can think of several --including
agglomeration economies and a stronger IPR environment-- in order to illustrate the
distinct nature of the causal mechanisms studied here, our most basic model assumes
identical production costs and full IPRs in both the sending and receiving countries. The
welfare gains from brain drain come instead from market size and home-bias effects: If
the foreign market is sufficiently larger than the sending country’s, and if knowledge
produced abroad is not too irrelevant to consumers in the sending country, the extra
incentives to produce knowledge created by this larger market mean the (remaining
residents of) the home country are better off allowing their knowledge workers to
emigrate. Later in the paper we introduce differences in intellectual property rights,
showing that (a) weak domestic IPRs accentuate the gains from knowledge worker
emigration, and (b) if source country IPRs are chosen endogenously, BBD becomes even
more likely than in the base case. Both of these results stem from the source country’s
ability to “free ride” on its own brains after they leave.

1

The term “knowledge worker” was coined by Peter Drucker (1959); since then it has become a truism that
the production of new knowledge is an essential and growing component of a developed economy . It is
therefore surprising that a defining characteristic of knowledge –its publicness—has not, to our knowledge,
yet been incorporated into formal models of international skilled worker migration.

2
2. Existing Literature
As noted, the earliest economics literature on the “brain drain” (e.g. Berry and
Soligo 1969), and indeed on international factor mobility in general (e.g. Jones, Coelho
and Easton 1986), focused on induced changes in domestic factor prices and producer
surplus in an undistorted “sending” economy. Although exceptions exist (for example
the two-good, two-factor small open economy model in which factor rewards are
independent of factor endowments, and the case of large countries whose terms of trade
are advantageously affected by a factor outflow), in most of these models the reduction in
opportunities to trade with differently-endowed agents makes remaining residents worse
off after an outflow of skilled labor.2
Since then, economists have identified a number of factors that accentuate the
harm associated with a “brain drain”. One such factor is a fiscal externality: in the
presence of publicly-subsidized education and progressive taxation, the exodus of highly
educated workers imposes a net fiscal loss on the sending country’s remaining residents
(Bhagwati and Hamada 1974). Also, in an endogenous growth context, some authors
have argued that an outflow of educated workers can inflict a very high level of harm in
the long run by reducing a country’s growth rate (Miyagiwa 1991, Wong and Yip 1999).3
Over the same time period, however, the literature has identified a number of
factors working in the opposite direction, generating what is sometimes referred to as
“beneficial brain drain” (BBD). Probably the oldest such argument is the notion that
emigration provides a social “safety valve” for unemployed skilled workers in less
developed countries (see for example the discussion in Bhagwati and Rodriguez 1975).
Two additional factors --by no means confined to skilled workers-- are emigrants’ cash
remittances to the home country (e.g. Ozden and Schiff 2006), and the return migration
of “brains” who have acquired new skills abroad (possibly at foreign taxpayers’
expense).4 Less obviously, Stark, Helmenstein and Prskawetz (1997, 1998) have argued
that the possibility of emigrating and earning a higher wage can raise incentives to
acquire education in less-developed sending countries. If this effect is strong enough
relative to the actual outflow of educated workers, the “sending” country’s stock of
skilled workers can of course rise. Extending this “emigration lottery” reasoning to an
endogenous growth framework, Mountford (1997) has shown that the temporary
possibility of skilled-worker emigration can “jump-start” an economy out of a poverty
trap.

2

Despite its age, the argument still figures prominently in contemporary policy discussions about
international labor mobility (e.g. Borjas 1995). Of course, nothing in the argument is specific to skilled
labor: it pertains to any non-infinitesimal factor outflow that does not mirror the nation’s factor
endowment mix exactly.
3
Introducing a skilled worker outflow into more traditional growth models (where growth occurs purely
via either human or physical capital accumulation) has less dramatic negative long run effects (see, e.g.
Rodriguez 1975).
4
According to DeVoretz (2005), it is precisely this prospect of return migration that led China to relax its
exit requirements in the early 1990s.

3
Most recently, Bucovetsky (2003) and Haupt and Janeba (2004) have considered
the discipline that skilled emigration could impose on tax authorities in skilled-worker
“sending” countries: human capital, once acquired, is sunk and therefore vulnerable to
over-taxation by governments with limited commitment power. By constraining
governments’ abilities to tax human capital, the possibility of brain drain can induce
those governments to act in their country’s own long run interests, thus raising the long
term level of human capital investment and per-capita income.
In addition to the literatures on brain drain and international factor mobility, the
current paper also relates to recent work on intellectual property rights, including
Grossman and Lai (2004). These authors examine countries with different market sizes,
and show that equalizing IPRs across countries may hurt a human-capital poor country;
further such equalization is not necessary to provide optimal aggregate incentives for
innovation. Helpman (1993) examines IPRs in a model of endogenous, ongoing
innovation, and shows that weakening IPRs in a single country can benefit both that
country and its trade partner; the welfare gain arises when weakening IPRs in high-wage
North shifts production to low-wage South. Neither of these models, however, examine
the effects of international labor migration.

3. The Model
We focus on a single knowledge worker, or “artist”. The artist produces a
prototype knowledge good; the prototype can be replicated costlessly. The prototype
might be, for example, a musical recording, an insight into the laws of physics, or a
malaria vaccine.
Market willingness to pay for reproductions depends on both the quality, ρ, and
relevance, t, of the knowledge good, each to be discussed below. We assume individual
inverse demand for a reproduction is given by tρp(q) where p(q) is a decreasing function
of quantity consumed per capita, q. We can interpret p(q) as base inverse demand, i.e. as
marginal willingness to pay for a unit of a knowledge good with 100% relevance and
1 p(q)
quality 1. Define ε ≡ − dp ( q )
as the elasticity of base demand. An interior solution
q
dq
to the profit maximization problem requires ε be decreasing in q, which we assume
throughout the remainder of the paper.
The variable ρ captures the intrinsic quality of a good, for example, if the good is
a treatment for influenza, ρ may index the speed with which the treatment reduces flu
symptoms. We draw a distinction between quality and applicability, or relevance: ever
since Armington (1969), several economists (e.g. Trefler 1995) have argued that
consumers may prefer locally produced goods to otherwise-identical imports.5 In the
current paper we operationalize home bias via an iceberg “translation” cost 1-τ; we can
5

Empirical studies tend to find strong evidence of home bias in consumption. For example, Whalley and
Xin (2006) find home bias can account for over 90% of the measured border effect in US-Canada trade.

4
think of τ as the fraction of a knowledge good’s value that survives translation to a
foreign market. Recalling terminology introduced above, let tij measure the relevance to
consumers in market i of a knowledge good developed in market j; then with iceberg
translation costs tij = 1 for i=j and tij = τ ∈ [0,1] for i≠j; accordingly, we can think of τρ
as the net premium for imported, or translated, goods. We treat τ as a parameter outside
the artist’s and government’s control, however we acknowledge that τ will vary with the
type of knowledge good considered: for instrumental music τ may be near unity; the τ
associated with comedy is often remarked to be close to zero.6
If emigration is legal, the artist faces a two-stage problem. First she must decide
where to live and work, and second she must decide what quality prototype to produce
and how to price it to each market. As usual, we begin with the second stage.
3. 1 Stage Two: Profit Maximization
We simplify the world into two countries: Source (S) and Recipient (R). Let Ni be
the number of consumers in country i ∈ {S,R}. Define πi = maxq pi(q)q as the artist’s
maximized per capita base profits from market i, and qi = argmaxq pi(q)q as her optimal
per capita deliveries to this market.7 Note that our inverse demand functions are indexed
by country (i); this allows per-capita income differences to enter our model with higher
income assumed to shift the inverse demand curve upwards. In this section we assume
that both Source and Recipient provide full legal protection of intellectual property rights
(IPRs). Thus the artist is an uncontested monopolist in both markets, and will choose qi
such that ε=1 in each market. Using these definitions, we can rewrite the artist’s total
profits from market i when residing in country j as Nitijρπi. Further, the artist can treat πS
and πR as parameters when solving her investment and location problems.
Improving the quality of the prototype comes at a price. The knowledge worker
may hire complementary inputs (a scientist outfitting a better lab), acquire additional
human capital (voice lessons for an opera singer, a post doc for a biologist), or simply put
in more effort (work longer hours). We will refer to any such actions as investments. Let
c(ρ) measure the total cost of producing a prototype of quality ρ. We assume the
marginal cost of improving prototype quality is positive and increasing, i.e. c'(ρ) and
c''(ρ) are both positive; define
ψ ≡ c''ρ/c'
as the elasticity of the marginal investment cost. In general, ψ is a function of ρ, although
on occasion we will adopt the following assumption:

6

Importantly, the home bias in our paper refers to the artist’s current location, not his/her country of birth;
thus we assume that, for example, Indian consumers treat goods produced by Indian expatriates in the
United States similarly to goods produced by other Americans. In part, this is based on a very prevalent
notion in the business literature that close contact (in our case living in the same country and culture) with
consumers is essential to producing innovations that customers like (see for example Ulwick 2002).
7
Because ε is decreasing in q, base profits pi(q)q are locally concave at qi and qi is unique.

5
A1: c is iso-elastic in ρ, i.e. ψ is a constant.
The artist chooses the quality of her prototype based on the following calculation:
maxρ ρ[tSjNSπS + tRjNRπR ]- c(ρ). Define Mj ≡ tSjNSπS + tRjNRπR, which measures the size
of the artist’s effective global base market when residing in country j. Thus we can
rewrite the artist’s investment problem when residing in country j as
maxρ ρM j- c(ρ).
A convex cost function (i.e d2c/dρ2 > 0) ensures the second order conditions for an
interior maximum, while the first order condition
Mj = c’(ρ)
implicitly defines ρ(Mj) as the price premium corresponding to the artist’s optimal
investment when residing in country j. Because higher values of ρ reflect higher quality
knowledge goods, we can interpret an increase in ρ as knowledge creation; differentiating
the first order condition we see dρ(M)/dM = 1/c'' > 0. Hence, if an action by the artist or
a government increases the size of the artist’s effective market, that action will in turn
have a knowledge creation effect.
3.2 Stage One: Emigration
We assume zero relocation costs. Since the artist earns more when M is larger,
she will move to wherever her residency confers the largest global base market. If the
artist remains in Source, her effective market is MS ≡ NSπS + τNRπR. If instead she
emigrates to Recipient her market is MR ≡ τNSπS + NRπR. For τ<1, whether MS<MR
depends only on relative populations and base profits. Assuming the artist stays home
when indifferent, we obtain the following lemma and proposition.
Lemma 1. If translation costs are non-zero (i.e. τ<1), the artist emigrates if and only if
NSπS < NRπR.
If both countries have the same individual inverse demand curves (for example because
their per capita income levels and tastes are the same), Lemma 1 implies that the artist
optimally locates herself in the country with the largest population for any non-zero level
of translation costs. Of course, the artist might optimally choose a country with smaller
population if its consumers were sufficiently richer than the other country.
Proposition 1: Voluntary emigration induces knowledge creation.
Proof:

By Lemma 1 the artist emigrates voluntarily if and only if NRπR > NSπS,
which is equivalent to the condition MR > MS for τ<1. Since dρ/dM > 0
then ρ(MR) > ρ(MS) and so emigration leads to higher quality knowledge
goods.■

6

If NRπR > NSπS then Recipient offers a larger effective market than Source. Since the
artist can take better advantage of that market by relocating to Recipient, she emigrates.
Once immersed in the Recipient market, the artist responds to the increased returns on
her investment, producing a higher quality prototype.

4. Beneficial Brain Drain
We now turn our attention to conditions under which brain drain is beneficial to
the parties involved. In order to minimize the number of cases that must be described, we
restrict our attention in the remainder of the paper to cases in which the artist will
emigrate if allowed, i.e. in which NRπR > NSπS.
Clearly consumers in Recipient and the artist all benefit from voluntary
emigration if, as assumed so far, both Source and Recipient offer full legal IPR
protection. A simple revealed preference argument confirms that the artist benefits. To
see that consumers in Recipient gain, we look at their consumer surplus, denoted CS.
Following usual methods and factoring out terms, in our model
CSij = Ni tij ρ Φi
gives consumer surplus in country i when the artist resides in country j, where
Φi =

∫

qi

0

p(q)dq − p(q i )q i

is “base” consumer surplus per capita, i.e. consumer surplus associated with qualityunadjusted goods, when qi units are sold per capita in country i. Notably, Φi is
independent of ρ.
Proposition 2: Recipient consumers gain from voluntary migration.
Proof:

Without migration, CSRS = NRτρ(MS)ΦR. With migration, CSRR =
NRρ(MR)ΦR. Thus migration benefits Recipient consumers if and only if
ρ(MR) > τρ(MS), which is assured by τ ≤ 1 and Proposition 1. ■

Recipient consumers gain from the Artist’s immigration on two counts. Firstly, they
benefit from the knowledge creation stemming from their large native market. Secondly,
migration induces knowledge diversion. To the extent that the flavor and applicability of
a knowledge worker’s prototype is influenced by her environment, some of the value of
an artist’s output is “lost in translation” to overseas consumers. When the artist resides in
Source, Recipient’s consumers suffer 1-τ in translation losses. Alternately, we can think
of 1-τ as the local component of knowledge goods; this local component accrues only to
the artist’s fellow residents. Emigration transfers this local component of the artist’s
knowledge good from Source’s consumers to Recipient’s. This knowledge diversion is

7
to Recipient’s unambiguous benefit. However it comes at Source’s expense, and must be
weighed against the rate of knowledge creation.
Proposition 3: Source’s consumers are made better off from voluntary migration if and
only if the rate of knowledge creation is greater than the rate of knowledge diversion, i.e.
ρ MR −ρ MS
> 1-τ.
(1)
ρ MR
Proof:
Following the proof of Proposition 2, emigration raises Source’s consumer
surplus if and only if ρ(MR)τ>ρ(MS). Multiplying each side by -1, adding
ρ(MR) and then converting to ratios gives the equivalent condition (1).■

( ) ( )
( )

Proposition 3 formalizes the condition that the knowledge creation effect of emigration
must dominate the knowledge diversion effect in order for brain drain to benefit Source’s
consumers. However, because (1) is written in terms of endogenous values, it does not
tell us under which parameter conditions BBD occurs.
N Rπ R − N S π S
.
N Rπ R + N S π S
(a) If the gap in relative market size exceeds the elasticity of marginal investment costs,
i.e.
_
N Rπ R − N S π S
R R
S S
,
(2)
ψ(ρ(N π +N π )) < ψ ≡ R R
N π + N Sπ S
_

Proposition 4: Define ψ ≡

_

then there exists a non-empty interval (τ ,1) of translation rates under which voluntary
_

emigration benefits Source’s consumers, where τ ∈(0,1).
_

(b) If A1 holds and (2) is satisfied then there exists a value τ that divides the interval
⎧ _ ⎫
⎧ harmful ⎫
⎪ < τ_ ⎪
⎪ neutral ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
[0,1] as follows: if (2) holds and τ ⎨ = _τ ⎬ then brain drain is ⎨
⎬ to Source’s
beneficial
⎪
⎪∈ (τ ,1)⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎩ neutral ⎪⎭
⎩ =1 ⎭
consumers.
(c) If A1 holds and (2) is violated then Brain Drain is harmful to Source’s consumers for
any τ ∈ [0,1).
Proof: See Appendix
_

Corollary 1: Under A1, when condition (2) holds, there exists a non-empty interval (τ ,1)
of translation rates under which voluntary emigration is Pareto welfare improving.

8
Part (a) of Proposition 4 provides a sufficient condition for BBD; if in addition
investment costs are iso-elastic, i.e. condition A1 holds, then parts (b) and (c) provide
necessary and sufficient conditions for BBD. Figure 1 plots the rates of knowledge
creation, [ρ(MR)-ρ(MS)]/ρ(MR) and diversion, 1-τ, when condition (2) holds. Clearly, the
possibility of BBD depends on the curvature of the cost function and the size of the
translation cost. Because the right hand term in condition (2) can be no larger than unity,
a necessary condition for BBD is that marginal costs be inelastic in ρ, i.e. ψ < 1. This is
not inconsistent with investment costs being convex in quality: if c is iso-elastic, for
example, convexity requires only that ψ be positive. Rather, the constraint that ψ < 1
simply requires that investment costs not rise too quickly with quality.
ρ(MR)-ρ(MS)
ρ(MR)
1
1−τ = rate of knowledge diversion (translation loss)

S S
1- ρ(N π )
R
ρ(N πR)

ρ(MR)-ρ(MS) = rate of knowledge creation
ρ(MR)

0

τ

1

τ = translation/survival rate

Beneficial Brain Drain

Figure 1: knowledge creation versus knowledge diversion

Another critical parameter is τ. If translation losses are complete, i.e. τ=0, then
knowledge creation is irrelevant to Source’s consumers since they won’t be able to
understand, or make use of, any of it. Conversely, if τ=1 then any additional knowledge
created will be perfectly useful to Source’s consumers; however, because MS and MR
would be identical, emigration would leave ρ unchanged. But, if τ has an intermediate
value, then voluntary emigration prompts investment and some of that quality
improvement survives translation. If τ is not too small, the net value of the artist’s
product will rise for Source’s consumers, rendering brain drain beneficial. Figure 1
nicely illustrates how both differences in effective market size and home bias (i.e.
“translation costs”) are required for BBD: if there is no home bias, knowledge workers
can serve the entire world equally well from wherever they live; thus there is no
efficiency gain from sending them into a large consumer market such as the U.S.
The final determinant of whether (2) holds, and hence whether BBD is possible, is
Source’s relative size.

9

Proposition 5. Under A1, the range of cost-elasticities and translation costs under
which Brain Drain is beneficial to Source’s consumers are each larger the smaller is
Source’s aggregate base profits NSπS relative to Recipients, NRπR. Specifically,
_

_

dψ
dτ
N Sπ S
<0<
where α ≡ R R .
dα
dα
N π
Proof: See Appendix.

Proposition 5 simply states that brain drain is more likely to benefit the Source country
when aggregate base profits in Source are small. Some of the factors determining
aggregate base profits, e.g. the size of the native population as well as their income level --the latter being a determinant of base demand p(q))-- are outside the control of
policymakers, at least in the short run. However, since the goods in question are
knowledge goods, goods which can be reproduced at essentially zero cost, then πS may
depend critically on de jure and de facto rules governing intellectual property rights
(IPRs), which are the subject of the next section.

5. Brain Drain and Intellectual Property Rights

This section poses two questions. First, we ask how the previous section’s
conclusions, derived for the case of full intellectual property rights in both countries,
change when IPRs are fixed at some other exogenous level that can differ across
countries. This generates a set of comparative statics for the effects of IPRs on the gains
(or losses) from knowledge worker emigration. Second, we endogenize IPR policy by
characterizing a (potential) sending country’s best combination of emigration and IPR
policies. The goal of this exercise is to see whether (or when) BBD is still optimal when
the source country has access to a broader array of policy tools.8
The strength of a country’s IPRs can be measured along two dimensions: the
breadth of its fair use rules, and the zeal with which it enforces its rules. We consider
only the case in which fair use rules are very tight, and so the consumer must purchase
one copy of the artist’s prototype for each application (e.g. one copy of an operating
system for the user’s desktop, another copy for his laptop), but where enforcement is
imperfect. In particular, a competitive fringe sells pirated reproductions of the artist’s
prototype at marginal cost. Assume constant returns to scale in producing pirated goods,
and denote their marginal cost by d. Assuming pirates have access to the same
reproduction techniques as the artist, the materials portion of d is zero. Thus d reflects
only the expected costs of getting caught distributing copyrighted materials. In
8

For simplicity, in conducting this exercise we continue to characterize Source’s emigration policy as a
simple choice between “closing its exits”, i.e. prohibiting emigration, or not (rather than, for example, an
emigration tax). Given our earlier restriction NSπS < NRπR, brain drain is inevitable unless Source’s exitdoors are closed; thus open-exit policy is synonymous with “Brain Drain” in our discussion.

10
particular, we assume d equals the probability of detection multiplied by the (nonmonetary) penalty for piracy. For parsimony, we assume the penalty is proportional to
the price premium, tρ, for the translated good. This means the marginal cost in country i
of pirated copies of a prototype produced in country j can be written
dij = βitijρ

(3)

where βi is increasing in the strength of i’s IPR enforcement. This βi proxies the strength
of de facto IPRs, and equals the base price of pirated goods.
When facing a competitive fringe with marginal cost d, the artist becomes a contested
monopolist. We assume that all demand goes to the artist if legal and pirated goods are
offered at the same price. Decomposing dij as indicated in (3), the contested monopolist’s
optimization problem in market i becomes
maxq Ni tij ρ p(q) q, s.t. p(q) ≤ βi.
As is usual with constrained monopoly, we can write the artist’s maximized per capita
base profits as a piecewise function of β:
⎧ p −1 ( β *)β *⎫
for βi
−1
i
i ⎬
p
(
β
)
β
⎩
⎭

π (β ) ≡ ⎨

⎧≥⎫
⎨ ⎬ β*
⎩<⎭

where β* is the base price the artist would set absent any competition and p-1(·) is the
inverse of function p(·).
Lemma 2 π(β) is increasing in β for β <β*.
Proof:
For β<β*, dπ(β)/dβ=p-1(β)[1-ε]. Since ε is decreasing in q and ε is unity
at the uncontested monopoly output p-1(β*), then, for any β<β*, ε<1 and
thus dπ(β)/dβ>0.■

For β <β*, it follows that the artist’s total profits from market i when residing in country j
can now be written as: Ni tij ρ πi(β), where dπ(β)/dβ>0; the only change from the case of
full IPRs is that πi is now a function of β (but, importantly, not of ρ). In the full-IPR
case, we were able to treat these total profits as exogenous conditional on Ni, tij and ρ.
Now, profits are exogenous conditional on Ni, tij and ρ and βi .
Recall that at the outset of Section 3 we restricted our attention to cases in which
NSπS < NRπR. As we are now treating π as endogenous via β, we refine this restriction as
follows:
A2. NSπS(β*) < NRπR.

Given Lemma 1, Assumption A2 ensures that Source is too small to be attractive to the
artist even if Source fully protects intellectual property.

11

Assumption A2 is not innocuous. It hinders our analysis from applying to large
Source countries whose ample population and income levels would allow Source a
second means of preventing emigration: offering sufficiently strong local IPRs. As
before, we rule out such possibilities for the sake of brevity. We note, though, that it is
possible to show that a large country may prefer to forego strong IPRs---suffering Brain
Drain as a result---if translation costs are small relative to the deadweight loss from
market power.
We next look at the properties of consumer surplus when pirates are at play.
Define CSSj(β) as Source’s consumer surplus when Source IPR’s are β and the artist
resides in country j:
CSSj(β) = NStSjρΦS(βS),

(4)

where
ΦS(β S) =

∫

p −1 ( β S )

0

p (q )dq − β S p −1 ( β S ) .

Comparing this to the equivalent expression in the full-IPR case, the only change is that
source-country per-capita base surplus, ΦS, now depends on the IPR parameter, β (but
again, not on ρ). It is easy to show that dΦS/d(β) = - p-1(β ) < 0; i.e. holding product
quality fixed, stricter IPRs (and therefore higher prices) make consumers worse off.
We are now in a position to consider the effects of brain drain on source
consumer surplus at any exogenous level of IPR in both the sending (S) and receiving (R)
countries, and to ask how Source’s optimal emigration policies depend on IPR in the two
countries. Without emigration, Source country consumer surplus is NSρ(MS)ΦS(βS); with
emigration, it is NSρ(MR ) τ Φ S (βS). Thus, source consumers gain from brain drain if and
only if NSτ >ρ(MS )/ρ(MR ), or if condition (1) holds. Importantly, while strict source
country IPRs (higher βS) directly reduce source consumer surplus, their direct effect on
source consumer surplus is the same whether emigration occurs or not. Thus the
condition for Source to gain from brain drain is the same as in the presence of full IPRs
(equation 1); the only difference is the need to account carefully for the effects of IPRs on
product quality via the effective market sizes, MS and MR. To do this, note that when
IPRs are less than full, effective market sizes are:
MS ≡ NSπS(βS) + τNRπR(βR )

and
MR ≡ τNSπS(βS) + NRπR(βR ),

which are identical to the previous conditions with the exception that per-capita base
profits now depend on IPR policies in both the sending and receiving countries, βS and
βR. It follows that the effects of an exogenous increase in Source IPRs (a rise in βS) on

12
optimal emigration policy are identical in direction to the effects of an increase in sourcecountry population, NS, or for that matter to an exogenous increase in source-country
base profits (πS) (caused for example by an increase in source country income). The
proofs of Propositions 4 and 5 both go through exactly as before, with a rise in βS (or a
fall in βR) equivalent to a rise in α. Thus, in the sense formalized in Proposition 5, an
exogenous rise in IPR protection in Source (Recipient) makes BBD less (more) likely.
The intuition behind these results is fairly straightforward. As we have shown,
for any fixed source IPR policy (and therefore a fixed base price for the knowledge
good), the only effect of brain drain on Source consumers is via its effects on the quality
and appropriateness of the knowledge good. The larger the differential in IPR protection
between the recipient and source country, the larger the increment to quality will be when
Source’s brains move abroad, making beneficial brain drain more likely. In sum, if
Source has low IPR protection for reasons that lie outside our model (for example, its
legal system and enforcement technology may simply not be capable of a high level of
enforcement), Source’s interests are more likely to involve sending its knowledge
workers abroad and consuming better (if culturally less appropriate) entertainment,
science and technology as a result. If Recipient (again for reasons outside our model,
such as a politically powerful knowledge industry) has very strong IPR protections, again
it may behoove Source to “let its knowledge workers go”.
Our final exercise in this paper involves endogenizing IPR policy. The goal in
doing so is not so much to provide a realistic model of IPR policy (this choice has been
studied in detail by Grossman and Lai, 2004, among others), but to ask how our main
results regarding the optimality of beneficial brain drain in the limiting case where we
allow countries to optimally adapt their IPR policies to their emigration policy regime.
We do so in full recognition that not all important factors affecting optimal IPR policy
are included in our model.
We begin by differentiating our expression for source-country consumer surplus
(4) with respect to β (while appropriately allowing for the endogeneity of product quality,
ρ), yielding:
⎡ N S t Sj [1 − ε ( β )]Φ ( β ) ⎤
dCS Sj ( β )
= p −1 ( β ) N S t Sj ρ ⎢
− 1⎥ ,
dβ
M jψ j
⎦
⎣

(5)

or, if β > 0, equivalently:

dCS Sj ( β ) CS Sj ⎡ λ Sj [1 − ε ( β )] π ( β ) ⎤
=
−
⎥
dβ
β ⎢⎣
Φ(β ) ⎦
ψj
1444
424444
3

(6)

≡∆ ( β , j )

where λij≡tijNiπi/Mj is country i’s contribution to the artist’s effective global market when
the artist lives in country j.

13

Lemma 3. Under A1, CSSj is strictly (locally) concave in β at any extremum.
Proof: See Appendix.

Referring to (6), whether strict IPRs raise or lower Source’s consumer surplus depends on
⎡ λSj [1 − ε ( β )] π ( β ) ⎤
the sign of ∆(β,j)≡ ⎢
−
⎥ . The first term in ∆ reflects the investment
ψj
Φ(β ) ⎦
⎣
effects of raising β: stronger Source IPRs translate to higher base profits for the artist,
prompting greater investment; the second term in ∆ measures the loss in base consumer
surplus arising from consumers having to pay higher prices per (base) unit. We can think
of these as the investment and consumption effects of strong IPRs. Define βO and βC as
Source’s optimal choice of β when its doors are open and closed, respectively.
Proposition 6: Under A1 and A2,
(a) If Source offers any IPR protection at all, it offers weaker policy when its exits are
open than closed. Specifically, βO<βC if and only if

N S [1 − ε (0)]Φ (0)
>1;
ψ [τN R π R ]

(7)

if (7) fails then βO=βC=0.
(b) Source never offers full IPR protection: βO≤βC<β*.
Proof: See Appendix.

Intuitively, Source’s optimal IPR policy balances the investment and consumption
effects described above. Since the investment effects are dissipated as β approaches β*,
Source will always offer less than full IPRs when the artist’s residency is given.
Moreover, when the Artist lives abroad rather than in Source, the investment incentives
associated with high πS are diluted by translation losses. Thus the investment effect of
high β is weaker when Source’s exits are open, rendering strong IPRs less attractive to
Source.
We are now in a position to revisit our earlier claims concerning when/whether
Brain Drain might benefit the Source country. In particular, Proposition 4 provided a
sufficient condition for Source to gain from BD under the condition that Source IPR
policy was full. However, as Proposition 6 highlights, Source has an incentive to set
weaker IPR policy when suffering from Brain Drain. The following extends Proposition
4 to allow for endogenous IPRs..

14
Proposition 7. Suppose Source’s IPRs are set optimally given exit policy, i.e. β=βO when
_

Source’s exits are open and β=βC when Source’s exits are closed. Define τ (β) as the
ρ ( N S π S ( β ) + τN R π R )
. Under A1,
non-unity value of τ at which τ =
ρ (τN S π S ( β ) + N R π R )
(a)

N Rπ R − N S π S (β C )
>ψ
N Rπ R + N S π S (β C )

(8)

is a sufficient condition for Source to prefer an open-exit policy in lieu of closed-exits for
some non-empty range (τ1,1) of translation costs;
_

(b) if condition (7) holds then τ1< τ (βC).
Proof: See Appendix.

Part (a) of Proposition 7 offers a sufficient condition for brain drain to benefit
Source even when Source adjusts its IPRs to complement its emigration policy. The
underlying logic is the same as for Proposition 4: emigration transfers the local
component of knowledge goods away from Source’s consumers---what we have coined
knowledge diversion; in exchange, the large market that attracts mobile knowledge
workers in the first place prompts them to produce higher quality goods, inducing
knowledge creation. This basic principle is unchanged by endogenous IPRs. However,
as Part (b) of Proposition 7 indicates, the range of translation costs at which brain drain is
beneficial is larger when IPRs are endogenous rather than fixed (and full). This is
because endogenous IPRs open up a second channel through which Source can benefit
from the artist’s emigration to a large overseas market. Simply, Source can manipulate
domestic IPRs to raise consumers’ share of the benefits from knowledge creation: by
lowering β, i.e. by weakening domestic IPRs, Source can raise Φ, allowing Source’s
consumers to reap a greater share of the benefits from any increase in ρ.9 A case in point
might be Canada’s policies on drug pricing and medical researcher emigration: Canada’s
policies of keeping the prices of drugs (including those invented in the U.S.) well below
U.S. levels actually accentuates the gains to Canadian consumers from allowing medical
researchers to emigrate to the U.S.
Finally, we revisit our earlier suggestion that BBD is more likely when Source has
a small native population. This claim may seem innocuous given Proposition 5, but if πS
is endogenous then a proper proof should account for any influence that NS has over
Source’s IPR policy.
Proposition 8. Under A1, larger countries have incentives to set stricter IPRs: dβk/dNS≥0
for k∈{O,C}.
Proof: See Appendix.
9

Of course, raising Φ by lowering β will in turn reduce π, and so the knowledge creation effect will be
smaller---but still positive ---when Source IPRs are endogenous.

15

Corollary 2. A Source country is more likely to benefit from brain drain the smaller is its
native population NS.

Proposition 8 indicates that bigger economies have incentives to set stricter IPRs.
The intuition is straightforward: the large base profits associated with strict Source IPRs
are more meaningful (to the Artist) when Source’s native market constitutes a larger
share of the artist’s global market. Conversely, when Source is small its IPRs have a
weaker investment effect, rendering strict IPRs less attractive to Source. Thus we can
confirm that Source’s effective market size NSπS is increasing in NS, both directly and
indirectly via πS(β), and so by Proposition 5 we can conclude that countries with small
populations are more likely to gain from brain drain.

5. Discussion

In the late twentieth century, the worldwide pattern of information goods
production and IPR protection had three distinct features. First, knowledge goods
production was highly concentrated in a single country with a large domestic market (in
most cases the United States).10 Second, a significant share of these goods was produced
by immigrants to that country.11 Third, intellectual property rights protection was
strongest in the producing country and weaker in other countries, including the source
countries from which migrating knowledge workers were drawn. While the exodus of
talented “brains” to larger, richer economies is sometimes bemoaned in sending
countries, this paper shows that, under quite general conditions, all the above features
could be in the interests of both the migrating knowledge workers and the remaining
residents of the nations that send them. Remaining residents benefit because “their”
brains produce “better” knowledge (such as more effective medicines, more entertaining
movies, or more effective software) abroad than if they had remained at home.
Some noteworthy features of our model include the following. First, beneficial
brain drain “BBD” is possible even when (a) the sending country places no welfare
weight on the utility of its expatriates, (b) knowledge/cultural goods are less culturally
relevant to the source market when produced abroad, that is, when demands exhibit home
bias, or “losses in translation”, and (c) both sending and receiving countries fully protect
knowledge workers’ intellectual property rights in a national treatment framework.
10

Using purchasing power parity measures of R&D activity, Dougherty et al (2003) find that expenditures
in the US exceeded the combined expenditures of the next four leading research nations, Germany, Japan,
France and UK. In 2000, 34.3% of Triadic Patent Families (defined by the OECD as “patents taken out at
the European Patent Office (EPO), the Japanese Patent Office (JPO) and the US Patent & Trademark
Office ( USPTO) that share one or more priorities”) were taken out by American residents. The
comparable proportions for residents of Japan and the EU are 26.9 and 31.4 (Source: OECD, Patent
Database, September 2004.) The international predominance of the United States as a source of
commercial popular culture is well known.
11
In addition to entertainers, this of course includes scientists and engineers working in U.S. firms and
universities. Nearly one in five scientists and engineers in the United States is an immigrant; 51 percent of
US doctorates in engineering are currently awarded to foreigners (Zakaria 2005).

16
Second, while we acknowledge that agglomeration economies may be important in
explaining the location of many industries (e.g. Rivera-Batiz and Romer 1991) and a
potential source of beneficial emigration, such external economies are not present in our
model. Instead, the international specialization (via the migration of producers to a single
country) derives simply from differences in domestic market size and home bias in tastes.
Of course, in an expanded model there could be other important factors that induce
expatriate “brains” to produce more and better knowledge when located in a country like
the United States than at home; not least among these are the ability to cooperate with
other factors of production (including critical masses of highly skilled workers) that the
U.S. has already produced (or imported). Thus a natural extension of the current model
would be to a dynamic context in which critical masses, or “clusters” of knowledge
workers are created endogenously; importantly however these dynamics are not essential
to the basic argument here.
Third, source countries’ gains from brain drain depend on intellectual property
rights in both the sending and receiving countries-- rising with weaker sending country
and with stronger receiving country IPR protection. The likelihood that brain drain
benefits the source country also increases when we expand its menu of policy tools to
include an optimal choice of IPRs. Thus it may be in the interests of a small, or poor
country to simultaneously specialize out of knowledge goods production (even actively
sending its talented knowledge workers abroad) and keep the price of knowledge goods
low by setting weak IPRs.
Finally, the level of home bias in consumers’ tastes has interesting effects in our
model. If we think of our parameter τ (the fraction of a knowledge good’s value that
survives export to another country) as rising over time due to declines in international
transportation and communications costs, then our model predicts that source countries’
benefits from brain drain will be minimal when international communication is poor, and
will then rise as the ability of knowledge workers in one country to serve consumers in
another rises. It is only in the limiting case of zero ‘home bias’ (τ = 1) --where
knowledge workers can serve the world’s consumers equally well from any location-where better international communication eliminates the gains to consumers in a small or
poor country from sending their brains abroad.
Our results may have interesting implications for policies affecting “brain drain”
in small, or poor countries that have not, to our knowledge, been noted before. For
example, skilled-emigrant-sending countries may want to refine their policies (or at least
their discussion of the issue) by distinguishing emigrants according to the “publicness” of
the goods they produce. Thus, for example, the emigration of a physician who spends all
of her time treating patients (a private good) may be more likely to hurt the remaining
residents of her country than the emigration of a physician primarily engaged in research
on new treatments and medicines (the sort of knowledge good modelled in this paper).
We close by asking why the existing literature on the “brain drain” has apparently
not noticed the simple consumption effect of emigration on remaining residents that sits
at the core of the current paper. We conjecture that this is because the literature has not,

17
to date, considered the production of “knowledge goods” that can be reproduced at zero
marginal cost. Instead, all existing models of international factor mobility of which we
are aware treat skilled workers simply as an input to the production of private goods. To
the extent that knowledge produced by skilled workers has “public” qualities, this has
been modelled as a production externality where the presence of more skilled workers
makes other workers in the country where they live more efficient at producing private
goods (e.g. Mountford 1997).12 The consumption benefits to sending countries of
knowledge produced by expatriates have thus tended to be ignored; we hope the present
model encourages more exploration of this important aspect of international skilled
worker flows.

12

In principle, one could of course construct a model in which private goods imported from the U.S.
become cheaper to Indian consumers as a result of Indian “brains” migrating to the U.S., but to our
knowledge no such model has been developed.

18
References
Armington, Paul S. "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of Production."
International Monetary Fund Staff Papers March 1969, 16(1): 159-78.
Berry, R. and R. Soligo, “Some welfare aspects of international migration” Journal of Political
Economy 77 (1969).
Bhagwati, J. and K. Hamada, “The brain drain, international integration of markets for
professionals and unemployment: A theoretical analysis”. Journal of Development
Economics 1(1) (1974)
Bhagwati, J. and C. Rodriguez. “Welfare-Theoretical Analyses of the Brain Drain” Journal of
Development Economics 2 (1975) 195-221.
Borjas, George J. "The Economic Benefits From Immigration," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 1995, 9(2), 3-22.
Bucovetsky, S. “Efficient Migration and Income Tax Competition” Journal of Public Economic
Theory. April 2003; 5(2): 249-78
Commander, Simon, Mari Kangasniemi, and Alan L. Winters. “The Brain Drain: Curse or Boon?
A Survey of the Literature” in Robert E. Baldwin and L. Alan Winters, eds. Challenges
to globalization: Analyzing the economics. NBER Economic Research Conference
Report series. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 2004; 235-72.
DeVoretz, D. “International Mobility of Highly Skilled Workers: Quo Vadis?” Mimeo, Simon
Fraser University, 2005.
Dougherty, Sean M., Robert Inklaar, Robert H. McGuckin, and Bart Van Ark.
“Internationalization and the Changing Structure of Business R&D: Recent Trends and
Measurement Implications” mimeo 2003, The Conference Board and Growth and
Development Center of the University of Groningen.
Drucker, Peter. Landmarks of Tomorrow. New York: Harper, 1959.
Grossman, Gene M. and Edwin L.-C. Lai. “International Protection of Intellectual Property”
American Economic Review (December 2004): 1635-1653.
Haupt, A. and E. Janeba. “Education, Redistribution, and the Threat of Brain Drain”. NBER
working paper no 10618, June 2004.
Helpman, Elhanen. “Innovation, Imitation and Intellectual Property Rights,” Econometrica, 61
(1993), p. 1247-1280
Jones, R.W., I. Coelho and S. Easton, 1986, The theory of international factor flows: The basic
model, Journal of International Economics 20, 313-327.
Manasse, Paolo, and Alessandro Turrini. “Trade, Wages and ‘Superstars’” Journal of
International Economics 54 (2001), pp. 97-117.

19

Miyagiwa, Kaz. “Scale Economies in Education and the Brain Drain Problem” International
Economic Review. August 1991; 32(3): 743-59
Mountford, A. (1997) “Can a Brain Drain be Good for Growth in the Source Country?” Journal
of Development Economics 53, 287-303.
OECD. The Knowledge-Based Economy. Paris: OECD, 1996.
Oettl, A. and A. Agrawal. “You Can’t Take it With You-- Or Can You? Exploring International
Labour Mobility and Knowledge Flows” Mimeo, University of Toronto, 2005.
Ozden, Caglar and Maurice Schiff, eds. International Migration, Remittances, and the Brain
Drain Washington, D.C.: World Bank; Houndmills, U.K. and New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2006.
Rivera-Batiz, Luis A., and Paul M. Romer. “Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2) (May 1991): 531-555.
Rodriguez, C. (1975) “On the Welfare Aspects of International Migration” Journal of Political
Economy 1975.
Rosen, Sherwin. "The Economics of Superstars" American Economic Review Vol. 71, No. 5.
(Dec.1981), pp. 845-858
Stark, O., C. Helmenstein and A. Prskawetz (1997) “A Brain Drain with Brain Gain” Economics
Letters 55, 227-234.
Stark, O., C. Helmenstein and A. Prskawetz (1998) “Human Capital Depletion, Human Capital
Formation, and Migration: A Blessing or a Curse?” Economics Letters 60, 363-367.
Vidal, J.-P. (1998) “The Effect of Emigration on Human Capital Formation” Journal of
Population Economics 11, 589-600.
Trefler, Daniel. 1995. “The Case of the Missing Trade and other Mysteries,” American Economic
Review 85(5): 1029-1046.
Ulwick, Anthony W. “Turn Customer Input into Innovation” Harvard Business Review 80(1)
(January 2002): 91-97
Whalley, John and Xian Xin. 2006. “Home and Regional Biases and Border Effects in Armington
Type Models,” NBER Working Paper No. 12439.
Wong, Kar-yiu and Chong Kee Yip. “Education, economic growth, and brain drain” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 23 (1999) 699-726.
Zakaria, Fareed. “The Wealth of Yet More Nations”. Review of T. Friedman, The World is Flat:
A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century, New York Times Book Review, May 1,
2005, pp. 10-11.

20
Appendix

Proof of Proposition 4:
Part (a). Rearranging Proposition 3 indicates voluntary brain drain is beneficial to
Source’s consumers if and only if
ρ (M S )
<τ
ρ (M R )

Define Γ(τ)≡

ρ (M S )
ρ (N Sπ S )
.
Γ(τ=0)=
is positive and less than unity, while Γ(t=1)=1;
ρ (M R )
ρ ( N Rπ R )

therefore, if dΓ/dτ>1 when τ=1, then the continuity of Γ in τ ensures there exists a non_

_

empty interval ( τ ,1) over which Γ(τ)<τ, where τ ∈(0,1). Differentiating Γ with respect
to τ gives
⎤
⎡
dΓ
N Rπ R
N Sπ S
= Γ⎢ S
−
⎥.
S
R
R
dτ
⎣ M ψ ( ρ ( M )) M ψ ( ρ ( M )) ⎦
Evaluating at τ=1 gives
⎡ N Rπ R − N S π S ⎤
dΓ
1
=
⎥
⎢
dτ τ =1 ψ ( ρ ( N R π R + N S π S )) ⎣ N R π R + N S π S ⎦
which is greater than unity if and only if (2) holds.
⎛MS
Part (b). Given A1, we can write Γ≡ ⎜⎜ R
⎝M

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

1 /ψ

. Define α such that NSπS = αNRπR where

1 /ψ

_
1−α
⎛ α +τ ⎞
α<1. This allows us to write Γ= ⎜
. Twice differentiating Γ
while ψ =
⎟
1+α
⎝ ατ + 1 ⎠
with respect to τ when ψ is constant gives
⎤
⎡1 − α 2
d 2Γ Γ
(1 − α 2 )
=
− α 2 − 2ατ − 1⎥
2
2
2 ⎢
ψ (τα + 1) (τ + α ) ⎣ ψ
dτ
⎦
_

which is positive for all τ∈[0,1] if and only if ψ<ψ . Hence whenever (2) holds, Γ is
_

globally convex in τ and thus τ ∈ (0,1) divides the unit interval into regions where brain
drain is and is not beneficial to Source’s consumers.
Part (c). Differentiating Γ with respect to τ gives
⎤
dΓ Γ ⎡
1−α 2
= ⎢
⎥.
dτ ψ ⎣ (τα + 1)(α + τ ) ⎦
_

If ψ>ψ then dΓ/dτ is less than unity whenever τ is such that Γ=τ. Hence the 1-Γ curve
cannot cross the 1-τ line in Figure 1 from above. Moreover, since Γ=1 when τ=1 and

21
dΓ

_

_

< 1 then Γ≤τ is ruled out whenever ψ>ψ and τ<1. Finally, suppose ψ=ψ ; then Γ

dτ τ = 1
is strictly convex in τ for τ<1. Moreover, since Γ>0 for α>0 when τ=0, while Γ and dΓ/dτ
_

are both unity when τ=1, then Γ≤τ is ruled out whenever ψ=ψ . ■

Proof of Proposition 5:
_

Rewriting condition (2) in Proposition 4 in terms of α gives ψ =

1−α
, which is
1+α

_

decreasing in α. Hence the range of cost elasticities (0, ψ ) for which brain drain is
beneficial for some translation costs contracts with α. Moreover, when (2) is satisfied,
_
dΓ Γ ⎡ 1
τ ⎤
= ⎢
−
for
τ<1,
which
implies
d
>
0
τ
/dα>0; thus the smaller is α, the
dα ψ ⎣ α + τ ατ + 1⎥⎦
_

larger the interval ( τ ,1).■

Proof of Lemma 3:

Differentiating the right hand term in (5) with respect to β and evaluating at any
extremum gives
d 2 CS Sj ( β )
N S t Sj ⎡ Φ ( β ) dε ( β ) 1 − ε dΦ ( β ) [1 − ε ]Φ dM j ⎤
−1
S Sj
(
)
p
N
t
=
+
−
β
ρ
⎢−
⎥
2
dβ ⎥⎦
dβ 2
ψ j ⎢⎣ M j dβ
M j dβ
Mj
Because ε is decreasing in q, ε is non-decreasing in β; since higher prices translate to
lower consumer surplus, dΦ/dβ<0; since profits are increasing in β, dMj/dβ>0. Hence
d 2 CS Sj ( β )
< 0 at any extremum of CSSj.■
2
dβ

[ ]

Proof of Proposition 6:

We prove Part (b) first. Since the artist’s marginal costs of reproduction are zero, if her
monopoly power is uncontested then she sets prices such that ε=1. From equation
dCS Sj ( β )
(5),
<0 whenever ε=1, thus Source never offers full intellectual property
dβ
protection if the artist’s residency is fixed. Finally, when A2 holds, Source’s exit-policy
fully determines the artist’s residency; thus Source can treat the artist’s residency as
invariant to β within a given exit-policy regime.

22
dCS Sj ( β )
≤ 0 for j ∈ {S,R} and so Source
dβ
sets βk=0 for k∈{O, C}. If instead (7) holds then βC>0; by part (b), βC<β*. Hence βC
λSS [1 − ε ] π ( β C )
takes an interior value; from equation (6), βC solves ∆(βC,S)=
−
=0. By
ψS
Φ( β C )
Lemma 3, A1 implies CS is locally concave in β. Using (6), evaluating dCSSR(β)/dβ at βC
and factoring out like terms gives
dCS SR ( β )
CS Sk 1 − ε ( β C ) SR
=
λ − λ SS .
C
dβ
β
ψ
β =β C

Part (a). When (7) fails then, from equation (5),

[

][

Since λSR<λSS under A2, then A1 implies

]

dCS ( β ; M R )
dβ

<0, hence βO<βC.■
β =β C

Proof of Proposition 7:

Part (a): Define CSk(β) as Source’s consumer surplus when Source’s IPR policy is β and
exit-door policy is k ∈ {open, closed}. By Proposition 4, equation (8) is a sufficient
_

condition for CSopen(βC) > CSclosed(βC) whenever τ∈ ( τ (βC),1). Revealed preference
ensures CSopen(βO)≥CSopen(βC).
Part (b): When condition (7) holds then, by Proposition 6, βC>βO. Since Source’s
consumer surplus is strictly locally concave in β by Lemma 3, then
_

_

CSO(βO)>CSO(βC)=CSC(βC) when τ= τ (βC). Since CSO(βO)>CSC(βC) at τ= τ (βC), then
_

τ1< τ (βC).■

Proof of Proposition 8:

By the envelope theorem and the local concavity of CSSj in β, if βk is unconstrained then
⎡ dβ k ⎤
⎡ d dCS Sj ⎤
sign ⎢ S ⎥ =sign ⎢ S
⎥ . Differentiating (6) with respect to N under A1 gives
dβ ⎦
⎣ dN ⎦
⎣ dN

∂ dCS Sj CS Sj 1 − ε ( β ) ∂λSj ∆ ∂CS Sj
=
+
,
β
∂N S dβ
ψ j ∂N S β ∂N S
⎡ ∂ dCS Sj ⎤
⎡ dλSj ⎤
∂λ Sj λ Sj [1 − λSj ]
k
=
≥
0
.
Because
∆=0
at
β
then
sign
=
sign
⎥
⎢ S
⎢ S⎥
dβ ⎦
∂N S
NS
⎣ ∂N
⎣ dN ⎦
k
S
which is positive. If instead β is constrained then marginal changes in N leave βk
unchanged: dβk/dNS=0. ■

where

