                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             IS THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT ENDANGERING SPECIES?

                                           John A. List
                                         Michael Margolis
                                         Daniel E. Osgood

                                       Working Paper 12777
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12777


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




Correspondence to: John A. List, Professor, The University of Chicago, Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street, Chicago, IL 60636; email: jlist@uchicago.edu Draft for discussion purposes
only; these results are quite preliminary. Margolis: Escuela de Economia, Universidad de Guanajuato.
Osgood: IRICP, The Earth Institute at Columbia University. Thanks are due to Amy Ando, Spencer
Banzhaf, Dean Lueck, Robert Innes, Marc Nerlove, Steven Polasky, and David Wilcove for helpful
comments, and to Alan Isaak and the American University Gauss archives for code to perform probit
and logit estimations. Seminar participants at Harvard University, Princeton University, Resources
for the Future, University of Texas-Austin, University of California-Berkeley, the NBER Summer
Institute, and the 2005 ASSA meetings also provided useful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2006 by John A. List, Michael Margolis, and Daniel E. Osgood. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is the Endangered Species Act Endangering Species?
John A. List, Michael Margolis, and Daniel E. Osgood
NBER Working Paper No. 12777
December 2006
JEL No. H23,H41,Q27

                                                ABSTRACT

We develop theory and present a suite of theoretically consistent empirical measures to explore the
extent to which market intervention inadvertently alters resource allocation in a sequentialmove principal/agent
game. We showcase our approach empirically by exploring the extent to which the U.S. Endangered
Species Act has altered land development patterns. We report evidence indicating significant acceleration
of development directly after each of several events deemed likely to raise fears among owners of
habitat land. Our preferred estimate suggests an overall acceleration of land development by roughly
one year. We also find from complementary hedonic regression models that habitat parcels declined
in value when the habitat map was published, which is consistent with our estimates of the degree
of preemption. These results have clear implications for policymakers, who continue to discuss alternative
regulatory frameworks for species preservation. More generally, our modeling strategies can be widely
applied -- from any particular economic environment that has a sequential-move nature to the narrower
case of the political economy of regulation.

John A. List                                           Daniel E. Osgood
Department of Economics                                Columbia University IRI
University of Chicago                                  61 Route 9W
1126 East 59th                                         Palisades, NY 10964
Chicago, IL 60637                                      deo@iri.columbia.edu
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu

Michael Margolis

michael.margolis@ugto.org
                     Is the Endangered Species Act Endangering Species?
                       John A. List, Michael Margolis, and Daniel E. Osgood

                                                December 7, 2006




Abstract
         We develop theory and present a suite of theoretically consistent empirical measures to
explore the extent to which market intervention inadvertently alters resource allocation in a sequential-
move principal/agent game. We showcase our approach empirically by exploring the extent to which
the U.S. Endangered Species Act has altered land development patterns. We report evidence
indicating significant acceleration of development directly after each of several events deemed likely
to raise fears among owners of habitat land. Our preferred estimate suggests an overall acceleration of
land development by roughly one year. We also find from complementary hedonic regression models
that habitat parcels declined in value when the habitat map was published, which is consistent with our
estimates of the degree of preemption. These results have clear implications for policymakers, who
continue to discuss alternative regulatory frameworks for species preservation. More generally, our
modeling strategies can be widely applied—from any particular economic environment that has a
sequential-move nature to the narrower case of the political economy of regulation.

JEL: D8, K2, Q2
Key words: decisionmaking under risk and uncertainty, land use, preemption, endangered
species act

Correspondence to: John A. List, Professor, The University of Chicago, Department of
Economics 1126 East 59th Street, Chicago, IL 60636; email: jlist@uchicago.edu


Draft for discussion purposes only; these results are quite preliminary. Margolis: Escuela de Economía,
Universidad de Guanajuato. Osgood: IRICP, The Earth Institute at Columbia University. Thanks are due to Amy
Ando, Spencer Banzhaf, Dean Lueck, Robert Innes, Marc Nerlove, Steven Polasky, and David Wilcove for
helpful comments, and to Alan Isaak and the American University Gauss archives for code to perform probit and
logit estimations. Seminar participants at Harvard University, Princeton University, Resources for the Future,
University of Texas-Austin, University of California-Berkeley, the NBER Summer Institute, and the 2005 ASSA
meetings also provided useful comments.
1 Introduction
       Few pieces of environmental law have created as much controversy as the federal

Endangered Species Act (ESA). The ESA was passed in 1973 by large majorities in both

houses of Congress, following discussion focused on such charismatic wildlife as bald eagles

and grizzly bears. Federal agencies were given a broad mandate to constrain activity likely to

harm a species thought to be in danger of extinction, with minimal scope for cost-benefit

analysis. Little thought appears to have been given to issues that might arise when habitat is

on private land, and the conservation of such habitat has turned out to be of critical

importance—nine out of ten listed species are found on private land, and most have more than

80% of their habitat on private land (Innes et al. 1998). It is clear that any serious effort to

achieve the ESA’s purpose of conserving “the ecosystems upon which endangered species

and threatened species depend” must persuade numerous landowners, whether through

coercion or contract, not to develop much of that habitat.

       This situation has led to numerous controversies over the years, both over species

listings and the design of remedies. These controversies have been well publicized in the

affected region, serving as a warning to landowners that, if their land is likely to be valuable

to the species in question, they may lose their development rights. The result is an incentive

to make the land less habitable to the species, as per a “scorched earth” approach or to

exercise the development rights prematurely, which may also have the perverse impact of

degrading the habitat the ESA seeks to protect.

       We believe that our study is the first to measure the extent to which landowners act to

preempt regulation during the urban growth process, which is widely considered to be the




                                                                                              1
leading cause of habitat loss in the United States (NWF 2001).1 The empirical challenge in

this case is especially thorny, since the preemptive act we seek to observe is a shift in the

timing of development activities in which the landowner was likely to engage in any case –

otherwise, there would be no motive for preemption. Such a shift can, however, carry a

considerable economic cost, and in some circumstances the landowner might not have opted

to destroy the habitat had he observed how land prices actually evolved.                      Preemptive

development may also forestall the negotiation of conservation plans between landowners and

government or private conservation groups.

        In this paper, we develop empirical strategies derived from our theory to measure

preemptive development along an expanding urban fringe and apply them to the case of the

Cactus Ferruginous Pygmy Owl near Tucson, Arizona. Our identification strategy revolves

around whether the plot of land was included as part of the owl’s designated critical habitat

(CH). Preemption in this case is measured by the difference between CH and non-CH land in

the timing of development permit applications.

        Using data drawn from more than sixty thousand plots, we find that CH parcels were

developed on average about a year earlier than similar non-CH parcels. Alternative empirical

analyses provide overall support to the proposition that CH parcels were developed earlier,

indicative of preemption on a scale likely to matter for conservation and efficiency goals.

Further support in favor of these findings is obtained in an empirical analysis of sales price

data of undeveloped land. Our hedonic land price model suggests that market prices for plots


1
  We know of only two other studies examining whether agents respond to the ESA’s perverse incentives: a
survey in which about one in four landowners admitted to managing land in such a way to discourage mouse
colonies (Brook et al. 2003); and a forestry study which found that trees close to colonies of an endangered
woodpecker that nests in old trees were harvested earlier than they otherwise would have been (Lueck and
Michael 2003).



                                                                                                          2
of land identified as likely CH parcels become depressed during the period of uncertainty

before a designation is made. Combining these insights with the fact that the ESA has been

regarded by some scholars (Peltzman, 2004, p. 10) as “a colossal failure, having thus far

produced a net recovery rate of under ½ percent (6 of 1300+) of listed species” points to the

distinct possibility that the endangered species act is actually endangering, rather than

protecting, species.

       While these empirical results are interesting in their own right, we view a major

contribution of our study as methodological.      The methods we develop can be widely

applied—from any particular economic environment that has the general sequential-move

nature associated with agent interaction to the more narrow case of any restriction that is

known to threaten a group of landowners but requires regulatory action before applying to any

individual units. Besides species conservation, the most important examples of the latter

include “smart growth” and anti-sprawl laws, which often ban or limit land conversion on

particular regions of the urban development frontier. Furthermore, the underlying model

permits comparison of such analyses across widely disparate times, locations, and types of

development restriction. Combined with field work designed to gather appropriate data, this

approach is capable of yielding a substantial body of evidence from which the economic and

environmental significance of land use policies in general can be measured.

       The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a model of

preemptive development in the context of a growing city.         Section 3 provides a brief

description of the Endangered Species Act, and contains a description of the data. Section 4

summarizes the results of our econometric analysis. Section 5 concludes.




                                                                                           3
2 Theoretical Model
       A landowner deciding whether to preempt a regulatory act weighs the benefits of

preserving development rights against two types of loss. The first loss is the extra interest

paid because the investment is made somewhat earlier than would otherwise be the case. The

second loss is the result of uncertainty about future land values: it might turn out that the land

was not worth developing after all, or not worth developing until a much later time than was

expected when the preemption decision was made.

       Let r(t,z) denote the rent from a developed parcel with characteristic-vector z at time

t. (The dependence on z is suppressed in much of what follows). Assume that landowners

expect rent to follow a Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM) process with growth rate g and

variance σ2

                                     dr = grdt + σ rdu                                    (1)

where u is a standard Wiener process.2 The growth rate g corresponds to the most common

expression for the growth of an asset value, as a percentage per year. The variance parameter

σ measures the extent to which a given day’s rent change is likely to depart from expectation.

For σ=g, for example, developed land actually falls in value about 16% of the time, and just as

often it rises by more than double the expected rate g.

       Note that the growth rate and variance parameters do not vary over land; this is

intended to represent the time path of demand in a single urban housing market (Capozza and




2
  In Appendix 3 we provide evidence that the growth of residential housing values in our sample is
approximately GBM.


                                                                                                4
Helsley 1990). Let ρ be the interest rate, and assume ρ > g .3 At time t the expected

discounted value of rents is

                                                          r (t , z )
                                           V (t , z ) =                                              (2)
                                                          ρ−g

which evolves according to

                                          dV = gdV + σ du .                                          (3)

That is, V evolves according to geometric Brownian motion with the same parameters as r.

        V(t,z) is the price for which a parcel with characteristics z would sell at time t if it had

already been developed. For a landowner deciding when to develop, V is the termination

value in an optimal stopping time problem. Prior to development, the value F(t,z) of the land

follows the Bellman equation

                                       ⎧        ⎛    1         ⎞1⎫
                               F = max ⎨V − C , ⎜ y + E ( dF ) ⎟ ⎬                                   (4)
                                       ⎩        ⎝    dt        ⎠ρ⎭

where C is the cost of development, assumed constant over land and time, y is the income

from undeveloped land, and E is the expectations operator. Intuitively, this implies that the

land is worth the greater of what you get by developing now or the expected discounted value

of what it will be worth tomorrow undeveloped. The analysis below will be conducted in

terms of a simplification, the continuation-region Bellman equation, which holds up until the

moment of development, and with y held at zero

                                           ρ Fdt = E ( dF ) .                                        (5)




3
  Violation of this assumption leads to the case of no landowner ever building except, perhaps, preemptively.
This is a general feature of option exercise problems: as long as the value of the underlying asset is growing
faster than the interest rate, it is optimal to wait to invest.



                                                                                                            5
          Let D(t) be defined as equal to one if the owner has permission to develop, zero

otherwise. Assume that landowners believe the evolution of D is governed by a Poisson

process

                                       ⎪⎧−1    with probability π dt ⎤
                                 dD = ⎨                                ⎥                                 (6)
                                      ⎩⎪0 with probability (1 − π ) dt ⎦

evolving from initial condition D ( 0 ) = 1 . The most important limitation to this assumption is

its inconsistency with a political or bureaucratic process of known duration – i.e., the case in

which it is known that development rights will be lost on a particular day or not at all. It is

straightforward to show that in such a case no landowner would act preemptively prior to the

last day. In the present case, there is no such known duration, but there are several roughly

anticipatable breakpoints, the significance of which we discuss below.

          The right-hand side of (5) is an expectation over two sources of uncertainty: the

possibility that development rights go to zero, and the stochastic growth of V. The analysis is

greatly simplified by assuming that land yields nothing until developed.4                            Under this

assumption, the loss of development rights will cause the land to be worthless, which implies

∂F        = F . Making use of this observation and Ito’s lemma,5 the expectation of dF is
     ∂D

                                         ⎛    ∂F 1 2 2 ∂ 2 F       ⎞
                              E ( dF ) = ⎜ gV   + σ V         −π F ⎟ .
                                         ⎝    ∂V 2     ∂V   2
                                                                   ⎠

Substituting this into the continuation-region Bellman equation (5) and rearranging gives

                                                 ∂F 1 2 2 ∂ 2 F
                                 ( ρ + π ) F = gV + V σ         .                                        (7)
                                                 ∂V 2     ∂V 2


4
  This seems tenable in our sample, and it appears (but we have not proven) that the results we use are robust to
sensible generalization (i.e., treating R as the rent differential between developed and undeveloped land).
5
  Ito’s lemma is the formula for the expected value of the differential of a function of a stochastic process. This
version is discussed in Dixit and Pindyck (1994).


                                                                                                                 6
       Thus, the risk of preemption acts very much like an increase in the discount rate. The

only difference is that this added discount term disappears once the investment is made. That

is, the rents, r, are discounted using only ρ to derive the time path of current value conditional

on development, V; but to get F, the value prior to development, V is discounted with ρ+π.

       This second step is then exactly the classic investment timing problem first analyzed

by MacDonald and Siegel (1986). Dixit and Pindyck (1994: Ch. 4, Appendix B) derive

sufficient conditions under which the solution to this problem can be characterized by a

critical value V * (t ) such that development occurs the first time V = V*. The assumptions

already made are sufficient to ensure that those conditions are fulfilled (in particular, that

there is no continuation payment, that the termination value is monotonic in V, and that the

resolution of uncertainty on any given parcel is a one-time event). That the threshold varies

over time but not over z values will become clear below.

       Equation (7) is a second-order differential equation in F, subject to boundary

conditions

                                         F ( , 0) = 0                                     (8)

                                     F (1, V * ) = V * − C                                (9)

                                         ∂F
                                                      =D                                (10)
                                         ∂V   V   *




Condition (8) follows from the observation that the geometric evolution of V implies that once

it goes to zero, it stays at zero. Condition (9) is known as the value matching condition and

simply states that the value of undeveloped land on the day of development is the value after it

is developed minus development cost.




                                                                                                7
        Condition (10) is known as the smooth pasting condition, and the intuition behind it is

somewhat more subtle. Suppose that by waiting for V to rise to V * + dV the value of the

option would rise by more than dV. Waiting would then increase the value of the unexercised

option to a level above that of the exercised option, since the value matching condition

requires that two values are equal at V * . Waiting another moment to invest would therefore be

optimal, which would violate the definition of V*.

        From the general theory of differential equations, all solutions to (7) are linear

combinations of exponentials in the two roots of the quadratic equation that results from

plugging F (1, V ) = AV β into (7), where A is any constant. Denote these roots β1 and β2. Dixit

and Pindyck (1994) show, with an argument that is not changed by the presence of π, that

β2<0.   This implies that the boundary condition F(1,0)=0 can be satisfied only if the

coefficient of the β2 term equals zero (since 0 raised to a negative exponent cannot be a real

number).

        The key constant governing the behavior of this system is thus the positive root

                                                                   2
                                1 g     ⎡ g 1⎤    ρ +π
                             β1 = −   + ⎢ 2 − ⎥ +2 2                                    (11)
                                2 σ 2
                                        ⎣σ   2⎦    σ

The value of the undeveloped land then follows


                                         (
                              F (1, V ) = (V * )
                                                   − β1
                                                          (V   *
                                                                        )
                                                                   − C ) V β1           (12)

and the threshold value is

                                                    β1
                                        V* =               C.                           (13)
                                               β1 − 1

        It is clear from (11) that preemption risk increases β1, and since β1>1 (see (Dixit and

Pindyck 1994), 5.2.A), (13) implies that any increase in β1 lowers V*. In particular,



                                                                                               8
                                                                  1
                                                              −
                                          ⎛        g 1⎞           2
                                          ⎜ β1 + 2 − ⎟
                                   ∂V *
                                                  σ     2⎠
                                        =−⎝                           C < 0.                          (14)
                                   ∂π        ( β1 − 1) σ 2
                                                      2




This formally establishes the intuition motivating our study: a higher perceived probability

that development rights will be lost lowers the threshold value for conversion of land and

leads to preemptive development of land.


2.1     Implications for estimation

        In this section, we focus on how our theory structures the appropriate interpretation of

the data and how particular matching estimators can lend insights into the evaluation.

Because V follows a geometric Brownian motion process, the moment at which it is expected

                                                  1
to be V* for the first time given V(t) is           ⎡ln (V * ) − ln (V ( t , z ) ) ⎤ .6 Therefore, the expected
                                                  g⎣                               ⎦

                                                                                          1 ∂V *
time of conversion changes with Δπ by (to a first-order approximation)                           Δπ . This
                                                                                         gV * ∂π

shift is independent of the current value V(t,z), which means that preemption shifts the

expected hitting time back by the same amount for all parcels, regardless of their z values.

We refer to this hastening of development time as the “timeshift” due to preemptive

development of land.

        The invariance of the timeshift is due to the geometric nature of the assumed housing-

value growth, and is orthogonal to the stochastic part of the GBM assumption. This result is

illustrated                                                                                                   in


6
  The distribution for the first hitting time under geometric Brownian motion was derived long ago and we
borrow it from Bar-Ilan and Strange (1996) who cite Cox and Miller (1965). We note for future reference that
higher moments of the distribution of first hitting times have not, as far as we know, been derived analytically;
however, simulation of this model indicates a lognormal distribution.



                                                                                                               9
Figure 1, which shows the growth of V over time for a high-value parcel (with zH) and a low-

valued parcel (zL). The two threshold values correspond to distinct levels of π. Because a

geometrically growing value increases at a rate that is determined by its level, the lower-

valued parcel is rising at exactly the same speed when it reaches the lower threshold as was

the high-valued parcel when it reached the same threshold much earlier. Intuitively, this

suggests that it takes the same amount of time for it to rise to the higher threshold associated

with a lower π. With a normal stochastic component, this equality holds in expectation.

       The invariance of the timeshift implies that it is inappropriate to measure preemption

by including a π-proxy in any of the popular accelerated failure-time models. In such models,

a particular parametric form is assumed for the distribution of (in our case) development times

and the control variables are assumed to hasten or slow the passage of time. In the above

model, the impact of π is additive, not multiplicative — metaphorically, this means that it

does not increase the speed of a particular runner in the race, but gives that runner a head start.

       The other class of models commonly applied to duration data (i.e., data about the time

elapsed until some event) is also inconsistent with our theory. The maintained assumption in

these models is that each independent variable has a multiplicative effect on the hazard

function λ ( t ) – the instantaneous probability of development given that it has not yet

occurred.

       In our model, the increase in V required to induce development at each t is V * − V (t ) .

From the definition of geometric Brownian motion, the probability of such an increase during

a small interval dt has normal cdf with mean gV and variance σ 2V . Therefore, conditional on

not having been developed or subject to takings until time t, the instantaneous probability that

a parcel will be developed is


                                                                                                10
                                 λ ( t ) ≡ Pr ( dV > V * − V ( t ) )
                                                ⎛ V * − V ( t ) − gV ( t ) ⎞
                                       = 1 − Φ ⎜⎜                          ⎟⎟                       (15)
                                                ⎝        σV (t )            ⎠
                                            ⎛ V ( t )(1 + g ) − V * ⎞
                                       = Φ ⎜⎜                       ⎟⎟
                                            ⎝        σ V (t )        ⎠

where Φ is the standard normal cdf.7

        A first-order approximation of the change in λ induced by a change in the takings

probability of Δπ is

                                           ⎛ V ( t )(1 + g ) − V * ⎞ ∂V * Δπ
                             Δλ ( t ) ≈ −φ ⎜⎜                      ⎟⎟         .
                                            ⎝       σ V ( t )       ⎠ ∂π  σ V

            V ( t )(1 + g ) − V *
Letting w =                       , the ratio of the hazard under high risk of takings to that under
                   σV (t )

low risk is

                                            ∂V * Δπ
                            Φ ( w) − φ ( w)
                                             ∂π σ V = 1 − h( w) ∂V Δπ
                                                                  *
                                                                                                    (16)
                                      Φ ( w)              σ V ∂π

where h(w) is the failure rate of the standard normal distribution.8                 The hazard ratio will

therefore be constant iff

                                               1    ⎛ (1 + g ) V * ⎞
                                   ξ (V ) ≡        h⎜         −    ⎟
                                              σV    ⎝ σ         σV ⎠

is constant. The standard normal failure rate has positive slope, however, and the slope is less

than the failure rate itself -- i.e., h′ < h (Evans et al., 1993).9 Therefore



7
  The final equality, which is purely for convenience, exploits the symmetry of the standard normal density
function.
8
  The failure rate is also called the hazard function, but we wish to reserve that term for λ.
9
  The standard normal failure rate is an upward curving function of its argument, near zero and with slope near
zero at w=-3, rising to about 3.2 by w=3, with the slope asymptotically approaching 1.


                                                                                                            11
                                                                   *
                                                        h − h′V
                                         ξ ′ (V ) = −                  V                                (17)
                                                          σV   2



is strictly negative in the neighborhood of V*.

         This result implies that if we have parcels of many different z values affected by the

same π, the multiplication of the hazard will be less on those for which the hazard was already

high. These are the parcels with V very close to V*; they will therefore have lower ξ (V ) than

                                       ∂V *
parcels a bit less valuable. The value      Δπ , which multiplies ξ (V ) in (16), is the same for
                                       ∂π

all parcels, and is negative.

         It is conceivable, of course, that the distribution of z values might be of just the sort to

yield a standard duration model, but that seems a rather extreme coincidence on which to

condition the analysis; hence we focus on four estimators suggested by our theory.10

         The most familiar of these four estimators is a double-bounded Tobit regression of

days to development on the CH dummy variable and control variables – the censored-data

equivalent of an ordinary least squares regression in raw time. This model is incorrect for our

problem in at least two senses, but we include it as a familiar analog to the less familiar

approach discussed next.11 The second empirical approach is maximum-likelihood estimation


10
   Nevertheless, we have explored some of the duration models that we show as inappropriate. The estimated
impacts are statistically significant and roughly consistent with our findings in most contexts. These results are
available upon request.
11
    The first problem is that the censoring mechanism maintains the assumption that unobserved development
times are distributed normally, rather than lognormally; this could perhaps be dismissed by a central limit
argument about the distribution over z-values, but to our knowledge no such argument has been developed. The
second problem is that the feature of the data that prevents observations of development times prior to January
1997 is not censorship, as Tobit assumes, but truncation. That is, the development times are not coded as
occurring at our zero date, they are simply unobserved. In general, one would like to approach such a problem
by constructing a likelihood reflecting incidental truncation on the left and censoring on the right, but since our
goal is to provide a familiar analog to the less familiar approach discussed next, that would not be appropriate.
We should note, however, that we inspected the results of Tobit regressions assuming no problem on the left side
of the distribution; results were almost identical to those reported below.




                                                                                                               12
of parameters derived directly from our theory, controlling for all other variables with a semi-

parametric matching method discussed in Appendix 1. Under the assumptions already made,

the distribution of development times is log-normal with a mean that depends on z and on

whether the parcel is CH. Identification of the parameter of interest requires that we further

assume that the variance σ D of log development time is common across parcels. Then we

have

                                   ln (T − α H )                   N ( μ ( z ) ,σ D )          (18)

Now suppose that we match each parcel in the CH with a non-CH parcel that has the same z

values. Let t0* be the development time for a non-CH parcel and t1* be the equivalent for the

CH parcel. We are not, in general, able to observe every t* value since development will

continue beyond our sampling period, t+ (February 26, 2001). From (18), however, the

likelihood of the sample is given by

                                                               ⎛ ln ( t0 ) − ln ( t1 + α ) ⎞
                     p ( t0 , t1 | α , σ ) =     ∑            φ⎜
                                                                            σD
                                                                                           ⎟
                                               t0 ,t1 < t +    ⎝                           ⎠
                                                         ⎛ ⎛ ln ( t0 ) − ln ( t1 + α ) ⎞ ⎞
                                          +      ∑ ⎜⎜1 − Φ ⎜            σD
                                                                                        ⎟ ⎟⎟   (19)
                                            t0 = t + ⎝     ⎝                            ⎠⎠
                                                     ⎛ ⎛ ln ( t0 ) − ln ( t1 + α ) ⎞ ⎞
                                          + ∑ ⎜Φ⎜                                  ⎟ ⎟⎟
                                                     ⎜              σD
                                            t1 = t + ⎝ ⎝                           ⎠⎠

where t0 and t1 are the actual, observed times of development or censoring (the end of the

sample period), and φ and Φ are the standard normal density and probability functions. We

will refer to maximization of (19) as the timeshift estimator.

       The Tobit and timeshift models yield estimates of days accelerated; our remaining two

approaches do not, but provide alternative contexts in which to test the hypothesis of no

difference between land classes.                  Our third estimator is simply the count of permit



                                                                                                      13
applications during designated intervals following potentially important events, again

controlling for observable confounders by matching. Matching also yields treatment and

control samples of equal size, so simple counts are also frequency measures. Our theory

indicates that any such difference in counts should be interpreted as evidence of a change in

Δπ at the start of the interval, or at most Δt days prior to the start (where Δt is the number of

days by which Δπ hastens development – i.e. α in the timeshift estimator is an estimate of Δt).

A persistent Δπ will shift as much development out of later intervals as into them.

       Our fourth, and final, measure is a rank-based statistic to compare the survival curves

for each of two matched samples – i.e., for each date, the fraction of the sample that remains

undeveloped. Our model predicts that the survival curves for well-matched samples should

diverge around the onset of treatment, and eventually stabilize parallel to one another in the

horizontal (i.e., time) dimension. We test this in the most general way possible by examining

the sample statistic corresponding to P (t1 < t0 ) . Call this statistic μ. A traditional Wilcoxon

test is based on
                                                      2
                                           ⎛    1⎞
                                           ⎜μ − ⎟
                                                2⎠
                                      Wχ = ⎝
                                             V (μ )
for some estimate of the variance of μ, V(μ). Under the null hypothesis that the two survival

curves are equal, Wχ has χ2 distribution with one degree of freedom.

       We present estimates of Wχ using a variance estimate derived under the assumption

that permits are sought according to a logistic distribution of some monotonic transform of

time. Such an assumption is necessary in order to deal with censoring, yet we should note that

in our case the alternative assumption of an extreme value distribution produces qualitatively

identical results. In calculating bootstrap intervals, we focus directly on a straightforward


                                                                                               14
analog      of      the     above       μ     adjusted       for      ties,    the      sample       analog       of

P (t1 < t0 ) + 1 P(t1 = t0 ) (Halperin et al. 1989).          No further distributional assumptions are
                2

required, because no variance estimate is needed.


3 ESA Background and Data Description
         The exact consequences of designating land as CH remains one of the ESA’s “most

contentious, ambiguous, and confusing concepts” (Bean and Rowland, 1997, p. 251). Yet,

Houck (1993, p. 1436) seems to summarize accurately the general public’s perception when

he notes that “there is no doubt that critical habitat designations are a red flag to the

development community and that community’s representatives in Congress.” Because of the

complexities of potential restrictions on development, we focus on the response of builders to

the “red flag” revelation of information that might signal an increased probability of future

restrictions to a landowner, rather than assume mechanistic legal or biological linkages.12 In

this spirit, for our purposes, an important feature of the ESA is Section 9, which prohibits any

individual from “taking” an endangered species.13 The only way to avoid liability under

Section 9 is described in Section 10 of the ESA. Section 10 requires individuals to obtain an

incidental takings permit (ITP), which must be accompanied by a habitat conservation plan

detailing how the proposed activity will affect the species, what steps will be taken to

minimize such impacts, what alternatives that would not result in takings were considered,


12
   Designation of critical habitat boundaries may be perceived as influencing the treatment of a parcel of land
under many development restriction processes, including under potential habitat conservation plans.
13
   A “taking” is usually defined quite broadly, following the original elucidation of the Secretary of Interior, who,
in 1975, declared that any significant environmental modification and degradation of habitat was included under
the definition of a taking. This general definition has survived judicial scrutiny in the Palila v. Hawaii
Department of Land and Natural Resources case as well as the 1995 Supreme Court case Babbitt v. Sweet Home
Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon. Furthermore, in the latter, the justices ruled that the actor’s intent
is irrelevant.



                                                                                                                 15
etc. Since penalties for violating the ESA depend on the violator’s state of knowledge (see,

e.g., Bean and Rowland, 1997, p. 227-229), whether the land is within or outside CH

boundaries might be critical in determining whether a violator can be held liable.

         In our case study, as in most endangered species cases, the endangered species was

listed, and a proposed CH map was published, months before the CH went into effect,

allowing landowners ample time to respond. The Pygmy Owl was listed as an endangered

species on March 10, 1997, with little scrutiny or local press coverage in Tucson, Arizona.

On November 14 of that year, protests were held and lawsuits filed against the Amphitheater

school district in Tucson which was proposing to build a new high school on a site thought to

be valuable habitat for the pygmy owl. Local newspapers subsequently began major coverage

of the issue. The proposed CH boundaries, which are depicted in Figure 2, were drafted by

the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and presented to the public on December 30, 1998.

Official designation occurred more than seven months later, on August 11, 1999.14 The CH

designation displayed in Figure 2 covers roughly 1.2 million acres and was based on the

biological requirements of the species.15


3.1 Data

14
    In our figures and tables, these dates are referred to as Listing (List), Protests (Pro), Map, and Final
respectively.
15
   In practice, the boundaries designated were unchanged from the draft boundaries presented during the hearings
(U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service 1999). This outlines the status quo when our data
were generated. Later, however, an Arizona District Court vacated the critical habitat designation, citing
deficiencies in the economic analysis. There will soon be a proposed rule issued in response to the court's order.
Before the final publication of the CH designation, the Department of the Interior will evaluate the economic
impact of the CH designation and may exclude parts of it for economic and other considerations. The new
proposal covers more area than the 1999 CH designation, but less of it is private land. The reader should bear in
mind that, if such a reversal is anticipated, landowner incentives to preemptively develop land are considerably
less than otherwise would be the case. A landowner with perfect foresight would preemptively develop only if
she had been otherwise planning to develop during the two and a half years following August 1999; otherwise, it
would potentially pay more to wait to preemptively develop the land during the new window of opportunity
opened by the reversal.



                                                                                                              16
        Of more than 300,000 parcels in Pima County, Arizona, 62,379 constitute the sample

analyzed herein (58,706 non-CH and 3,673 CH parcels). This lower figure was obtained

because all parcels that were already developed prior tom our sample period were removed, in

the belief that loss of development rights, and therefore the motivation for preemption, is

largely limited to land on which nothing has yet been built. A parcel was thus removed from

the sample if the Pima County Assessor's office recorded non-zero value of improvements at

the start of 1997. The partitioning of the land into parcels corresponds to records maintained

by the county’s Department of Transportation and Planning and Zoning Office. Parcels are of

various sizes and shapes and are the units in which building permits are requested. For each

parcel, we identified the date that a construction permit was sought; this is our measure of

development timing.16

        The variables used to correct for differences between CH and non-CH parcels consist

of an “ecological” and an “economic” group. The former variable type includes aspects of

landscape topology calculated from maps – elevation, slope, and aspect (the compass

direction a slope faces) – as well as soil type, plant coverage, hydrological class, plant cover,

satellite measures of greenness in 1996, and USDA estimates of suitability for twelve types of

habitat. These were taken from the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Department of

Agriculture, and are measured on a fairly coarse grid.

        Most of the economic data are from the 1990 Census and are measured on an even

coarser grid – the block or block group. These data consist of mean commute time to work,

rental rate, population, housing vacancy, median home value, median rent, unemployment


16
   According to the permit database, the vast majority of permits applied for are awarded, and construction
begins soon after the permit award date. An interesting analysis would be to estimate whether in- and out-of-
state landowners reacted similarly. We reserve this examination for another occasion.



                                                                                                          17
rates, and mean salary. Also included in the economic data are distances to amenities and

disamenities identified from the county land-use maps – golf courses, prisons, highways,

parks, and downtown areas -- and for these data each parcel has its own value. The distance

calculated is to the nearest example of each entity.

       Actual regressions were run on the principal components derived separately from

ecological and economic variables. Ten components from ecological variables and nine from

the economic variables are used in the results presented, capturing about 99% of the variance

in the data (a more detailed explanation of our data collection is contained in Appendix 2).

       Over our time period, construction permits were issued to 1,409 of the 3,673 CH

parcels, and to 16,028 of the 58,706 non-CH parcels. If the plots were identical, this statistic

alone would provide interesting evidence, since the proportions are quite uneven. More

compelling, however, is an examination of the temporal development rates across CH and

non-CH parcels. Consider Figures 3a and 3b, which provide development rates across CH

and non-CH parcels around events likely to raise fears among owners of habitat land. Trends

in Figure 3a for non-CH reveal that construction permits were roughly stationary—around

325 permits during our time period. There is little evidence of a large and meaningful effect

of the various events in these data.

       Alternatively, Figure 3b, which plots construction permits on CH parcels, shows a

sharp increase in permits just prior to final designation of the habitat area on August 11, 1999:

from December 1998 to just before August 11, 1998, permit applications tripled, whereas they

slightly decreased for non-CH parcels over this same time period.

       While these data provide compelling insights, such a comparison of the treatment and

control groups might be misleading.        CH parcels are somewhat higher in altitude and




                                                                                               18
considerably less steep than surrounding land. And, CH parcels are in wealthier parts of the

region—the Census tracts within which CH parcels lie have average salaries more than twice

as high and median housing values about 30 percent higher than other tracts; and the assessed

values of the tracts are about 10 percent higher for CH parcels. Parcels outside the CH area

are roughly twice the size of those within, and the USDA classifies CH land as significantly

more suitable for wildlife requiring open land.               Furthermore, CH land is predominantly

(>90%) of the hydrological class B, a classification representing the best-drained regions.17

Thus, it is possible that certain observable variables affect which units get treated and the

outcome of interest. This potential nuance motivates us to consider the empirical models

derived theoretically above.


4 Empirical Results
4.1 Preliminary: Some aspects of the matching procedure

        In the empirical models below we make use of the entire data set and various matched

samples. To obtain the matched pairs we first estimate a probit regression model to predict

CH status, and then match each CH parcel to the non-CH parcel with the closest predicted

probability of being CH (known as the “propensity score”).18 By matching every CH parcel

with a non-CH parcel, we obtain the “Nearest Neighbor” sample identified by the tag “NN”

below. Other more narrowly defined samples are formed by restricting the match to parcels

with propensity scores that are sufficiently similar and that are near to one another


17
   For the matching estimators discussed below, this component of difference was dealt with by removing from
the sample all the tracts that were not class B.
18
   Empirical results based on propensity score matching are typically preceded by a discussion of the probability
model used to generate the propensity scores. In the present case, substantial multicollinearity required that
these models be estimated on principal components (see Appendix 1), which renders the coefficient estimates
uninteresting. Hence, discussion is omitted, but we make the results available upon request.



                                                                                                             19
geographically. Of course, the purpose of matching is to develop a “balanced” sample – that

is, one in which the distribution of covariates is similar in the CH and non-CH sub-samples;

this two-dimensional criterion was found to yield balance superior to that achieved with

propensity score matching alone. Thus, we provide several estimates from samples with

propensity scores not more than X% apart and locations not more than X thousand

international feet apart, identified by “PX GX” below. The use of the same X for the

geometric and propensity bandwidths was decided upon after initial exploration indicated that

no great improvement in balance statistics was available using different bandwidths

       The only matched sample that can be said truly to have “passed” a balance test

consists of pairs that had propensity scores separated by no more than 1%, and were within

1000 feet of each other. As the matching criteria become more liberal, the number of matched

pairs rises and the balance deteriorates (see Table 1a). In the case of NN matching, which by

construction matches all CH parcels, the hypothesis of equal first moments between CH and

non-CH samples could be rejected for any of the 26 control variables at the p < .10 level.

Therefore, in addition to the simple comparison of CH and matched non-CH sub-samples, we

consider regression-adjusted estimates in which the variables that were not balanced by that

criterion (p < .10) are included as covariates together with a CH dummy in a suitable model of

development timing.

       Finally, note that we provide for most estimates two confidence intervals. The first,

based on standard analytic formulae, would be correct if the matching were perfect – i.e., if

the non-CH parcels were identical to the CH parcels. These are almost certainly too narrow.

The second, which is omitted if the first showed no significant impact, is based on bootstrap




                                                                                           20
replications of the entire data-processing sequence. These are likely too wide. A more

detailed discussion of these points is provided in Appendix 1.


4.2 Estimates of timeshift

        In Table 1 we present measures of preemptive acceleration in the natural unit, days of

difference between CH and non-CH plots. The first column in Table 1 consists of two-sided

Tobit models using the entire sample, which are maximum likelihood estimates of β 0 in

                                                           19
                                    t = α + β 0CH + ∑ β i PCi + ε
                                                           i =1

                                    ε ~ N ( 0, σ   2
                                                       )
                                    t+ ≤ t ≤ t−


where t is the time of the first permit application in days from start of observation, CH is a

dummy variable equal to one if the land is inside the CH area (shaded portions of Figure 2),

and PCi , i = 1, 2,...,19 are the principal components described above.                  We include three

distinct time frames in the rows of the table: in the top row, Full, t-=0 and t+=1516, the final

day of observation; in Pre-map we explore from t-=0 to t+=727, the day the map was published

(December 1998); and in Post-map, t-=727, t+=1516. Maximum likelihood 95% confidence

intervals are in parentheses; for comparison to later matching results, we also present non-

parametric bootstrap intervals.

        The remaining three columns are from maximization of the likelihood function (19)

with the variance parameter σ set to 500 or 1000 for two of the matched samples.19 The final


19
   Results with σ left free could not be obtained because the likelihood function increases monotonically in σ.
However, under the maintained assumptions of fixed σ and perfect matching, these estimates differ significantly
from zero and have the expected sign.




                                                                                                            21
column in Table 1 provides timeshift estimates for the NN sample. The estimates that are to

be favored a priori—two timeshifts from the well-balanced sample P1G1—indicate

preemptive acceleration of nearly one year (272-326 days in the post-map), and slightly

greater than one year (331-485 days in the Tobit full sample model), respectively. A few

remarks are in order about the implications of these results. First, preemption of one year

corresponds to approximately 2% of the sample habitat. Second, the analysis of price data in

Appendix 2 indicates a growth rate of about 1-3% quarterly, with a standard deviation of

about the same magnitude. The lower end of these growth rates seems quite improbable,

given the perception that home values were appreciating rapidly (although this should not be

seen in light of exceptions formed since 2000). Erring, therefore, on the high side and

rounding, assume that we have growth rates and variance parameters of about 0.1 in annual

units. Interest rates at the time were in the 7-9% range. Simulations based on our theory

using these parameters indicate that a one year shift in permitting time is consistent with a

perceived differential in the fear of losing development rights ( Δπ ) of about 0.2% per year.


4.3 Rank-based tests of significance of timeshift

       As an alternative estimator, consider rank-based tests for the equality of the CH and

non-CH survival curves in the matched samples, which are presented in Table 2. Recall that

these tests depend only on the order in which parcels were developed, ignoring the precise

length of each interval between development dates. The tests are thus insensitive to variations

in the overall development rate – i.e., whether development was occurring steadily, or

accelerating, or had a peak of activity.

       The first two columns in Table 2 provide the actual number of permit applications

observed in each category and a predicted development number, where the prediction is the


                                                                                                 22
sum over all time periods of the number of parcels still awaiting their first permit and the

sample-wide (i.e., CH and non-CH) rate of permit application. The main value of these

numbers is that they provide an indication of which set of parcels correspond to the earlier

developments, which cannot be deduced from the Wilcoxon χ2.

        In each case it is the CH parcels that are developed more than predicted, consistent

with our theory of preemption: the Wilcoxon χ2 statistic reported in the third column is

significant at all levels in each case except the small (75 pair) sample P1G1 and during the

pre-map phase in P10G10. In the final column, parallel statistics are presented for the

ordering of residuals from Cox proportional hazard regressions on all the unbalanced

variables in each of the larger matched sets.20 Empirical results are nearly identical to those of

the unadjusted tests, indicating that in this context the assumption that covariate influences on

timing are orthogonal to the treatment effect is not more restrictive than the assumption that

those influences act to multiply the hazard. In terms of hypothesis tests, the only difference is

that the pre-map impact for P10G10 is now significant at the p < .05 level.


Frequency of permit application in designated intervals

        A complement to the rank-based tests is an analysis of the counts of the numbers of

parcels in and out of the CH for which permits were sought in each time period (see Table 1a

in Appendix 1). These figures suggest that while the best-matched sample does not provide

evidence of preemptive development, it is immediately obvious that such a narrow test lacks

power. For example, some of the larger samples in Table 1a suggest significant differences

exist. But, the unbalanced nature of the regressors renders such estimates speculative.



20
  The Cox model is the most general proportional hazards model, and nests most of the popular fully parametric
duration models.


                                                                                                           23
        We address this matter with probit estimates of the CH-dummy coefficients from

Probit21 regressions including all of the control variables not balanced at the 90% level in each

matched sample; that is, these are maximum likelihood estimates of β 0 in

                                              ⎛                       ⎞
                       Pr ( t− ≤ t ≤ t+ ) = Φ ⎜ α + β 0CH + ∑ β i X i ⎟
                                              ⎝             i∈ϒ       ⎠
where Φ is the standard normal cumulative density function. The interval dummies offer an

alternative way to calculate the significance of preemptive development to thwart

conservation goals.

        For parsimony, we suppress these results but note that they are much weaker and

considerably noisier compared to preemption measures in Tables 1 and 2. Yet, the NN probit

estimates show an increased probability of about 6%; the P10G10 shows a 40% increase.

These estimates provide an idea of the range of these calculations, and highlight that these

point estimates of preemption are in the broad range of those implied by the timeshift

estimates.


4.4 Impact of CH status on the price of undeveloped land
      The incentives are wrong here. If a rare metal is on my property the value of my
      land goes up. But if a rare bird is on my property the value of my property goes
      down. --Sam Hamilton, former U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service administrator for
      Texas

        In our theoretical model there are two reasons why one parcel might be developed

earlier than another: a difference in π or a difference in z. Thus far, we have examined

strategies to control for the influence of z, and have found evidence that CH designation

introduced a π differential. As a robustness check of these results, we examine an alternative


21
   Logit regression adjustments were also performed, yielding the same pattern of likelihood-based significance.
The logit, however, turned out to be a much inferior fit to the data; among other things, it often failed to
converge under resampling.


                                                                                                             24
data set in which the two sources of difference in development timing should be sharply

distinguished. Parcels developed earlier due to their z values should sell for higher prices than

less desirable plots; parcels developed earlier due to preemption motives should sell for less

than those under lower regulatory risk.

       We collected data on approximately 7,000 sales of parcels that were undeveloped

during the entire time period and regressed the log of sale price per acre on the CH dummy,

time dummies, the 19 principal components of controls, and the interaction of time and CH

status dummies. The estimated coefficient on the interaction of the CH and post-map dummy

variables is of the greatest interest. If we are observing preemption, then we expect a negative

coefficient. If all of our results are due simply to insufficient control for CH land being more

valuable, the estimated coefficient should be zero, since the CH dummy variable alone will

capture the linear impact of that difference. And, if our strongest evidence, which is from

increasing development differentials after the map was published, is actually due to an

increase in the development value of unobserved features of the CH regions that occurred at

about the same time, the coefficient should be positive.

       Empirical results are presented in Table 3; time is divided only into pre- and post-map

intervals in the right-most column, corresponding to the sort of sharp treatment on with which

most of our analysis above was conducted. We find that the coefficient of interest is negative

and statistically significant at conventional levels, indicating that undeveloped land fell in

value by about 22% if it was within the critical habitat boundaries. To our best knowledge,

this is the first empirical estimate of such an influence, but it corresponds to our theoretical

model and extant intuition, as per the Hamilton quote beginning this section. When time is

divided more finely, as in column 1 of Table 4, none of the interaction terms is significant, but




                                                                                              25
those corresponding to after the map was published remain negative and statistically

significant jointly at conventional levels.

        In sum, our estimates all point to the importance of offsetting behavior among

landowners.22 While an entire analysis of the proper counterfactual to answer whether these

offsets have entirely undone (or more than undone) the spirit of ESA’s intended effects is

beyond the scope of this study, basic success rates of the ESA suggest that it is a distinct

possibility. When the ESA was passed, there were 119 species listed; since 1973, 40 species

per year have been added to the list (Peltzman, 2004). A large portion of these 1,300 species

that had been listed have their habitat on private lands, forcing regulators to rely heavily on

private landowners. The recovery process has not gone well by any measure, as Peltman

(2004) calculates that only 6 of the 1,300+ species have been recovered by the ESA. Our

exploration provides empirical estimates that shed light on reasons for this low recovery rate.


5 Conclusions
        Whether the Endangered Species Act is having its desired effect clearly depends on

the response of landowners and developers. The prospect that these agents will view aspects

of the Act as a threat to their development rights and respond by developing preemptively

opens up the possibility that the Act could actually endanger the same species it is purporting

to protect. This paper offers an estimation of the likelihood of that possibility. We develop

theory and offer a menu of theory-driven empirical models to measure preemptive

development in response to critical habitat designation.




22
   In this light, our estimates complement the original automobile safety work of Peltzman (1975) and more
recent work of Acemoglu and Angrist (2001), who examine the Americans with Disabilities Act.


                                                                                                       26
        We estimate that land designated as critical habitat was developed about a year sooner

than similar land not so designated. These estimates highlight the vast extent to which

landowners view critical habitat designation as a threat to development rights and act to

exercise those rights before regulation abrogates them. While our species potentially covers a

large land area, such a result provides the first evidence that this component of the ESA could

effectively seal the fate for species occupying a small area. This result is made even stronger

when one considers that every theoretically permissible approach to the data yields insights

consistent with preemptive land development. The policy implication is perhaps stronger than

it would first appear. Under the letter of the law, critical habitat designation on private land

provides, in most cases, no statutory protection to the species beyond that enjoyed on other

land. Thus, even a tiny preemptive response may indicate that this particular aspect of the law

is quite harmful to the species it seeks to protect.

        Besides providing the first set of empirical estimates of what may be the most

widespread form of preemption, we view a major contribution of the paper to be

methodological. The methods herein apply to a wide variety of economic decisions that

involve a sequential move process within a principle-agent relationship. More narrowly, the

estimators speak to a wide variety of land-use restrictions contemplated on the fringe of

growing cities. Beyond the development of such new estimators, one important lesson has

been learned which should be considered by future researchers in this particular area of study.

These data, although merged from public records gathered for disparate purposes, and largely

measured on spatially lumpy units, appear to be adequate for our purposes. This insight

should provide a degree of confidence to others that well developed parsimonious models can

be estimated with even the coarse land use data that are publicly available.




                                                                                             27
                                       References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Angrist, Joshua (2001). “Consequences of Employment Protection:
         The Case of the Americans with Disabilities Act.” Journal of Political Economy
         109(5): 915-957.
Bar-Ilan, A. and W. C. Strange (1996). "Investment Lags." American Economic Review 86(3):
         610-622.
Bean, M. J. and M. J. Rowland (1997). The Evolution of National Wildlife Law. Westport
         CT, Praeger Publishers.
Brook, A., M. Zint, et al. (2003). "Landowners' response to an Endangered Species Act listing
         and implications for encouraging conservation." Conservation Biology 17(6): 1638-
         1649.
Capozza, Dennis R.; Helsley, Robert W. (1990) “The Stochastic City” Journal of Urban
         Economics, 28 (2): 187-203.
Cox, D. R. and H. D. Miller (1965). The theory of stochastic processes. London, Chapman
         and Hall.
Davis, A.C. and D.V. Hinkley (2003) Bootstrap Methods and their Applications Cambridge
         Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics, Cambridge University Press.
Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994). Investment under uncertainty, Princeton: Princeton
         University Press.
Efron, B. (1979) “Bootstrap Methods: Another look at the jackknife” Annals of Statistics 7:1-
         26.
Evans, M., N. Hastings, et al. (1993). Statistical Distributions. New York, John Wiley and
         Sons.
Halperin, Max, Mohamed I. Hamdy and Peter F. Thall (1989) “Distribution-Free Confidence
         Intervals for a Parameter of Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney Type for Ordered Categories
         and Progressive Censoring” Biometrics 45: 509-521.
Heckman, J. J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1998). “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
         Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies 65(2): 261-94.
Houck, O. A. (1993). "The Endangered Species Act and its Implementation by the U.S.
         Departments of Interior and Commerce." University of Colorado Law Review, 64.
Innes, R., S. Polasky, et al. (1998). "Takings, Compensation and Endangered Species
         Protection on Private Lands." Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(3): 35-52.
Lahiri, S.N. (1992) “Edgeworth correction by ‘moving block’ bootstrap for stationary and
         nonstationary data” in R. LePage and L Billards (eds.) Exploring the Limits of
         Bootstrap 183-214, Wiley, New York.
Lawless, Jerald F. (2003) Statistical Models and Methods for Lifetime Data, 2nd edition,
         Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken NJ,
List, J. A., D. Millimet, P. Fredriksson, and W. McHone (2003). ""Effects of Environmental
         Regulations on Manufacturing Plant Births: Evidence from a Propensity Score
         Matching Estimator," Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, pp. 944-952.
Lueck, D. and J. A. Michael (2003). "Preemptive Habitat Destruction under the Endangered
         Species Act." Journal of Law and Economics 46(1): 27-60.
Mann, C. and M. Plummer (1995). Noah's Choice. New York, Alfred Knopf.
McDonald, R. and Siegel, D. (1986). “The Value of Waiting to Invest.” Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, 101(4): 707-728.


                                                                                          28
Meeker, William (1998) “Bootstrap Confidence Intervals” in Meeker and Escobars (eds.)
       Statistical methods for reliability data , Wiley, New York, 1998, pp. 204-230.
NWF (2001). “Paving paradise: sprawl's impact on wildlife and wild places in California.”
       Washington, D.C., NWF, Office of Federal and International Affairs.
Peltzman, Sam. (1975) "The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulation.” Journal of Political
       Economy, 83(4): 677-726.
Peltzman, Sam. (2004). “Regulation and the Natural Progress of Opulence,” AEI-Brookings
       Joint Center 2004 Distinguished Lecture,” Sept. 8, 2004.
Rosenbaum, P.R. and Rubin, D. B. (1983) “The central role of the propensity score in
       observational studies for causal effect” Biometrika 70: 41-55.
Rosenbaum, P.R. and Rubin, D. B. (1985) “The bias due to incomplete matching” Biometrika
       41: 103-116.




                                                                                      29
Figure 1: Invariance of timeshift to z




                             zH           zL




                                    =Δt




                                               30
Figure 2: Critical Habitat Area




                                  31
                        Figure 3a: Monthly permits (Pima County) outside of critical habitat


                       500


                       450


                       400


                       350
Construction Permits




                       300


                       250


                       200


                       150


                       100       <Mar 1997     <Nov 1997           <Dec 1998    <Aug 1999 (Final)
                                  (Listing)     (Protests)          (Map)

                        50
                                  1997                 1998             1999                2000         2001
                         0
                             0            10                  20         30                40       50          60
                                                                        Month




                                                                                                                     32
Figure 3b: Monthly permits inside of critical habitat

                             100


                              90


                              80


                              70       <Mar 1997     <Nov 1997                        <Aug 1999 (Final)
                                        (Listing)     (Protests)
      Construction Permits




                              60


                              50


                              40


                              30


                              20                                         <Dec 1998
                                                                          (Map)

                              10
                                        1997                 1998             1999                2000         2001
                               0
                                   0            10                  20         30                40       50          60
                                                                              Month




                                                                                                                           33
 Table 1: Measures of preemptive acceleration in days
     Sample          Tobit Full   Timeshift σ=500      Timeshift                       Timeshift
                      Sample           P1G1          σ=1000 P1G1                       σ=500 NN
       Full             288             248               273                            2788
                     (228-347)       (229-267)        (231-315)                       (2675-2901)
                     [221-347]         [NA]              [NA]                            [NA]
     Pre-map            300             NA                NA                              808
                     (250-349)                                                           (NA)
                     [245-346]                                                           [NA]
    Post-map            408             299               317                            1568
                     (331-485)       (272-326)        (260-374)                       (1447-1689)
                     [323-496]         [NA]              [NA]                            [NA]
     Controls           P.C.           None              None                            None
 95% confidence intervals from maximum likelihood in parentheses, from non-parametric bootstrap distribution
 in square brackets. NA means not available, indicating extreme estimator instability.


 Table 2: Wilcoxon tests of equality of survivor functions in selected matched samples
                                   APPLICATION DATE                         COX RESIDUAL
Sample                    Events    Predicted Wilcoxon χ2                     Wilcoxon χ2
 P1G1        non-CH          26         27.5             0.07
               CH            29         27.5          p≈0.763
Pre-map      non-CH          9         9.54             0.06
               CH           10         9.46          p≈0.8020
Post-map     non-CH          17        17.95             0.02
               CH            19        18.05         p≈0.8951
 P5G5        non-CH          65       234.11           258.60                     260.92
               CH           360       190.89         p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0000
Pre-map      non-CH          8        27.36            27.88                       28.01
               CH           56        26.64          p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0000
Post-map     non-CH          57       206.75           232.54                     235.01
               CH           314       164.25         p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0000
P10G10       non-CH         263       436.29           123.64                     186.08
               CH           576       402.71         p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0000
Pre-map      non-CH         141       146.13             0.44                       3.92
               CH           148       142.87         p=0.5803                    p≈0.0478
Post-map     non-CH         122       290.17           196.23                     239.09
               CH           428       259.83         p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0000
  NN         non-CH         519       984.5            265.53                     260.24
               CH          1343       877.5          p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0000
Pre-map      non-CH         272       347.15            34.57                      10.31
               CH           417       341.85         p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0013
Post-map     non-CH         247       637.35           509.60                     542.59
               CH           926       535.65         p≈0.0000                    p≈0.0000
 Terms in square brackets are bootstrap 90% confidence intervals.


                                                                                                           34
    Table 3: Hedonic regressions on CH Location Dummy and Time Interval Dummy

                                                ln($/Acre)                 ln($/Acre)
                                                           **
         CH location                           0.855838                    0.884948**
                                               (0.204682)                  (0.097543)
           List-prot                           -0.27961**
                                               (0.080044)
     Interaction with CH                        -0.07491
           location                            (0.265221)

           Prot-map                            -0.43512**
                                               (0.074627)
     Interaction with CH                        0.083693
           location                            (0.233004)

           Map-CH                              -0.48089**
                                               (0.078323)
     Interaction with CH                        -0.11414
           location                            (0.254996)

            Post-CH                            -0.48579**
                                               (0.073588)
     Interaction with CH                        -0.22019
           location                            (0.236046)

           Post-map                                                        -0.16261**
                                                                           (0.036718)
     Interaction with CH                                                    -0.22165*
           location                                                        (0.131315)

OLS standard errors in parentheses
* Statistically significant at 90% level
**Statistically significant at 95% level
Pre-listing is omitted time category in first column, pre-map in second.
19 principal components were also included in both regression models.




                                                                                        35
Appendix 1: Matching
         In any study focused on the impact of a single dummy variable (or “treatment”), the
ideal approach is to apply the treatment to a randomly selected fraction of the sample. When
the data are not from a completely randomized experiment this is impossible, and anything
that affects both which units get treated and the outcome of interest biases the estimate of the
effect of treatment. Additional information about the sample (i.e., other variables) can be
used to mitigate this bias in one of two ways. The tactic most familiar to econometricians is
multivariate regression of the outcome on the treatment dummy and control variables. The
coefficient on the treatment dummy then measures the effect of interest under the maintained
assumption that all the control variables affect the outcome in the way assumed by the
regression model, such as linearly, quadratically, or logarithmically.
         Another approach is to discard part of the sample, selecting treatment and control
groups in a way that mimics randomization of treatment. The objective is that the observable
covariates have the same distribution in the two groups, in which case they are said to be
perfectly “balanced”. If all the covariates took on only a few discrete values, and if there were
plenty of non-CH parcels, we could construct a perfectly balanced control group by matching
each CH parcel to an identical non-CH parcel. With continuous data this is impossible, and
since we have many variables it is not even possible to find for most treated units a control
that is nearby (i.e., a “curse of dimensionality”).
         We therefore adapt a procedure known as “propensity score” matching (Rosenbaum
and Rubin, 1983). This procedure involves first estimating a model in which CH status is
assumed to depend on the observed covariates. The predicted probability of being in CH (the
“propensity score”) is then used to match CH and non-CH parcels. This approach has been
widely used to measure the impact of program participation on labor market outcomes (see,
e.g., Heckman et al. 1997) and is expanding rapidly to other measurement problems (e.g., List
et al., 2003).
         In our case, superior balance was found to result if the propensity matching was
complemented by a limitation on the geographic distance between parcels.23 Although this
decision was made purely on the basis of ex post balance diagnosis, it might have been
suggested a priori as a way to take maximum advantage of the spatial correlation inherent in
much of the data – i.e., the fact that neighboring parcels have very close distances to important
amenities and disamenities, and often identical values for data measured at the census block or
similar level. Restricting the matches to geographic neighbors also mitigates bias due to
unobserved spatially correlated variables, the variation of which is not well captured in our
data.
         When it is not possible to achieve acceptable balance terms of all covariates, a hybrid
of the regression and matching approaches is used: first match, then regress the outcome
variable on the treatment dummy and those covariates that remain most imbalanced. In our
case, we report both unadjusted differences and regression adjusted results using all covariates


23
  To assess balance, we examined the simple difference in first moments for each variable, as well as histograms
and kernel density plots allowing visual assessment of higher moments. No attempt has been made to assess
balance in terms of more than one variable simultaneously. Probit-based propensity models were found to
perform consistently better than logit or linear-probability models.


                                                                                                             36
for which t-statistics reject equality of means between CH and matched control parcels at a
10% level.
         Since the matching process itself involves estimation, analytic confidence intervals are
too narrow. We therefore report both analytic intervals, which measure confidence
conditional on perfect matching, and (non-parametric) bootstrap intervals. The idea behind
bootstrapping is to sample with replacement from the data repeatedly, recalculating the
statistics of interest each time. The confidence intervals are then bound by corresponding
percentiles of the distribution of the statistics so calculated. If in fact the observed data are
independent observations, this procedure yields distributions approaching those that would be
achieved by independent sampling of the underlying universe – i.e., those that form the basis
of ideal frequentist intervals and hypothesis tests.24
         Data gathered from a geographic region are not, in fact, independent, which is one
reason why the analytic intervals are also reported and should not be ignored.25 At the very
least, our data are weakly dependent because they constitute much of a finite sample. Further,
one might reasonably argue that what we are in fact observing is a single realization of a
process spread over space – which is what the timeshift estimator assumes. In the case of a
low-order autocorrelation process in a time series, the non-parametric bootstrap can greatly
overestimate the variance of the simple estimator of the mean value (Davis and Hinkley
2003). The analogy to spatial autocorrelation is straightforward.
         It is not always clear that reported bootstrap intervals are calculated as they should be.
The ideal is to replicate every step of data processing that could possibly vary across samples.
The only sense in which we fall short of this ideal is that we removed from consideration
parcels of drainage classes that are extremely rare in the CH (see below). After drawing each
sample, we calculated a sample-specific propensity score; eliminated parcels for which any
variable took on a value outside the common-support region (i.e., the set of values bound by
smaller of the treated and control maxima and the greater of the two minima); determined
which variables required regression adjustment; and calculated the several measures of
preemption outlined in the previous section. And all of this was done with a ballpoint pen on
legal pads; it’s amazing we survived.
         To summarize and add a few details: we first remove parcels outside the common
support region, then run a probit regression to predict CH status. We then match each CH
parcel to the non-CH parcel with closest predicted probability of being CH. This gives the
“Nearest Neighbor” sample identified by the tag “NN” in the text. Other samples are formed
by restricting the matching to those with propensity scores not more than X% apart and
locations not more than X thousand international feet apart, identified by “PX GX”.26 The use
of the same X for the geometric and propensity bandwidths was decided upon after initial
exploration indicated no great improvement in balance statistics was available using different

24
   There are by now many excellent treatments of the bootstrap, but Effron (1979) remains a good starting point
for those seeking a more thorough discussion. See also Meeker (1998) and Davison and Hinkley (2003) for
recent discussions.
25
   The analytic intervals also assume independence, but the bias resulting from violation of this assumption is
likely exaggerated in the bootstrap. Intuitively, bootstrap samples that pick up several replications from each of
set of autocorrelated observations will exaggerate the frequency of values associated with those observations.
See Lahiri (1992) for a case in which this is intuition is backed by proof.
26
    In the latter cases, the matching was done with replacement, although the nearest neighbor matched sample
was created without replacement. This incongruity was accidental; preliminary exploration indicated that
keeping or dropping matched controls makes almost no difference.


                                                                                                              37
bandwidths. The timeshift, interval counts, regression adjustments to interval counts, and
rank-based tests of survival curve similarity were all calculated on each of these matched
samples, and a double-bounded Tobit regression was run on the whole sample. Non-
parametric bootstrap intervals were calculated for most estimators, but this step was omitted
for those which gave no preliminary evidence of preemption; for the timeshift estimator,
which was simply too unstable to generate meaningful numbers in many replications; and for
the a regression adjustment to the rank-based tests, which yield results very close to the
unadjusted data.
        Table 1a provides a data summary. In Table 1a, we include all of the relevant time
frames that might be of interest. The features of the matching scheme relevant to the problem
at hand appear at the bottom of Table 1a. The only matched sample that can be said truly to
have “passed” any balance test is P1G1 (columns two and three). The “P1”, recall from
Appendix 1, implies that these pairs had propensity scores separated by no more than 1%, and
the “G1” means they were within 1000 feet of each other. Thus, this sample consists of pairs
of parcels adjacent to the CH boundary, discarded if their propensity scores were not quite
close. There are 75 such pairs. The balance test they passed is reported in the bottom row, as
the zero under “Ill-balanced controls”. This zero means that for no covariate could the
hypothesis of identical means between CH and non-CH be rejected at the 10% level by a
traditional t-test.
        As the matching criteria become more liberal, the number of matched pairs rises and
the balance deteriorates, as one would expect. In the case of the nearest-neighbor matching,
which by construction matches all 3332 CH parcels, the hypothesis of equal first moments
between CH and non-CH samples could be rejected for any of the 26 control variables at the
10% level. The regression adjustments below make use of all the variables being used in this
last row.
        One further point requires mention as an indication of non-representative sampling.
The matching process seems to pick up a disproportionate number of the parcels for which
permits were sought: nearly half of the best matched sample (72 of 150) and more than a
fourth of all the others. In the region as a whole, only 13% of parcels were the subject of
permits during observation.




                                                                                           38
                    Table 1a: Development Permit Applications During Designated Intervals
 Interval                  P1G1                         P5G5                       P10G10                          NN
 (# days)
                     CH           NCH             CH           NCH            CH            NCH            CH               NCH
 Pre list             1          1           8                    1            15         3         28                      8
  (67)           (0.25-5.4) (0.25-5.4) (3.5-15.7)           (0.03-5.6)    (8.4-24.7) (0.6- 8.8) (18.6-40)              (3.4-15.7)
                                          [0-7]                 [0-4]        [4-19]   [0-21.4]   [15-38]                 [1-38]
List-prot             0          1          16                    1            64        52        120                    105
 (249)             (0-3.6)  (0.25-5.4) (9.2-25.9)           (0.03-5.6)    (49.5-81) (39- 68) (100-143)                  (86-127)
                                         [0-15]                 [0-5]       [23-75]  [3.6-193] [82-138]                 [35-571]
Prot-map             11          8          20                    6            65        91        266                    159
  (411)          (5.7-18.6) (3.4-15) (12.3-31)               (2.2– 13)    (50.4- 82) (74-111) (236-298)                (136-185)
                                         [7-24]             [3-56.55]     [27.6-74]   [6-199] [203-298]                [109-399]
All above        (6.4-19.7) (4.9-17.4) (23.7-47)            (3.5-15.7)    (122-168) (124-170) (377-453)                (242-305)
(Pre-map)                                [7-46]                [3-66]      [55-168] [10-413] [299-474]                [145-1008]
Map-final             9          5          60                    2           147        46        404                    104
  (224)          (4.2-16.2) (1.6 -11) (46.2-76)             (0.24-7.2)    (125-171) (33.8-61) (368-443)                 (85-126)
                                       [8.45-67]              [3-74.1]     [68-161] [10-327] [335-437]                  [60-329]
Post-final           14         20         254                   55           280        81        522                    143
  (565)          (7.9 - 22) (12.8-29) (228-280)             (41.8-71)     (250-311) (65-100) (481-565)                 (121-168)
                                        [21-268]               [3-65]      [54-302]   [9-405] [477-564]                 [84-254]
N Matched                   75                               798                         1534                         3332

N Permits                   72                               425                         847                          1862
   Ill -                     4                                11                          21                           26
balanced                     0                                 5                          20                           26
Controls
            90% confidence intervals based on binomial distribution in parentheses; from percentiles of bootstrap
            replications in square brackets. Number out of 26 possible control variables on which t-tests reject equality
            between samples at 50% and 10%.




                                                                                                                      39
Appendix 2: More details on data collection
         We integrated databases from several sources to develop a Geographical Information
Systems (GIS) dataset that represents parcel specific development and habitat status as well as
the date of the first construction permit awarded for each parcel during our study period.
Parcels in this dataset were spatially linked to data representing factors that may impact parcel
rental rate and habitat value.
         The parcel specific dataset was based on the Pima County Department of
Transportation (DOT) GIS database of geo-referenced parcel polygons. The data were
provided in the state-plane coordinate system and international survey feet were the basic unit
of distance. The official critical habitat of the pygmy owl was also supplied as a GIS
coverage by the DOT. We set a dummy variable (OWL) for each parcel within the critical
habitat. A parcel level dataset with the dates of all of the 58,644 construction permits
awarded from January 1, 1997 through February 26, 2001 was provided by the County
Planning and Zoning office. We identified the earliest construction permit associated with
each parcel and linked the permit dates to the parcel dataset using parcel-id.
         We grouped parcels according to when (and if) the first construction permit was
awarded for that parcel. The Pima County Assessor's office provided an assessed value and
zoning parcel database frozen as of the beginning of 1997, the start of the study period. We
linked these to the parcel database using parcel-id. The assessed value of improvements on
parcels was used as to determine if a parcel had been developed prior to the study. All parcels
that had a positive value for assessed improvements were considered developed and removed
from the dataset. Some parcels were subdivided following the 1996 dataset so they could not
be directly linked using parcel ID. Those parcels were assumed to have zero assessed
improvements. This left the number of parcels that were classified as undeveloped at the
beginning of the dataset at 111,763. The Pima County Assessor’s office also provided data on
all sales from January 1, 1997 to January 1, 2001. Sales data included the price and the date
of the sale, and were linked to the parcels through the parcel ID number. There were
approximately 100,000 sales. We removed sales with prices below 100 dollars or above 10
million dollars. We assume that these 195 outlier sales are not governed by the same
processes as the rest of the dataset.
         These operations yielded the base dataset, providing explicit habitat status,
construction permit timing, and development status of each parcel. We proceeded to
supplement this dataset with covariates selected from other GIS datasets to represent factors
that could impact the rental rate and habitat value of the parcel.
         The DOT GIS dataset included information from other county agencies, such as
Planning and Zoning, and the County Assessors Office which provided ownership, school
districts, incorporation status, and MLS market area. Dummy variables were set for the
regions (E, N, NE, NW, PE, PFW, PNW, PS, PSW, S, SE, SW, W, XNE, XSW, XW, and NO
MARKET for land falling outside of the market areas). The central (downtown Tucson)
region was not included to prevent over-specification.
         Fields indicating census tract, blockgroup, and block were included in the parcel
dataset. We linked parcels to short and long form 1990 census data using the block group of
the parcel. Census fields we used to control for rental rates included population, population
per square mile, number of households, population 65 and over, single father households,


                                                                                              40
single mother households, number of housing units, number of vacant units, number of owner
occupied homes, median home value, median residential rent, workforce, unemployed,
average minutes of commute time to work, and average salary.
         The county GIS dataset also included the locations of parks, golf courses, prisons,
modern cultural features, and highways. For computational feasibility, we grouped parcels by
census block and then calculated distances to the nearest park, golf course, prison, modern
cultural feature, and highway. The distance to downtown (Tucson City Hall) was also
calculated. Units were in international feet, due to the projection of the parcel dataset.
         Owner's names, addresses, and zip codes were provided with the parcel dataset. For
parcels with a valid zip code for the owner's mailing address, we set dummy variables to
indicate if the owner lived within Pima county and within Arizona. We also calculated
distances (in International Feet) from Tucson City hall to the centroid of the owner's zip code.
         We linked two spatial datasets representing environmental and topological
characteristics to the parcel database. Because not all of these data were available for the
entire county, parcels in the western side of the county were dropped from the dataset. Since
the western side of the county is very sparsely populated, this operation reduced the number
of parcels only slightly. It reduced the total number of parcels to 338,684 and the number of
initially undeveloped parcels to 109,819.
         We associated the data to the parcels by identifying the polygon or grid cell that the
centroid of the parcel was within. All coverages were projected to the coordinate system of
the parcels and all calculations were done in that coordinate system.
         We calculated topology using a grid of elevation data developed by the USGS EROS
Data Center and obtained from the University of Arizona ARIA image server. In the state-
plane projection, each grid cell was a 98.446 foot square (resolution was 30.0 meters in the
original projection). Elevation was reported in meters. We used the elevation dataset to
calculate slope (in degrees) and aspect (in compass degrees).
         Additional environmental variables were obtained from the USDA STATSGO soil
GIS coverage. In this coverage, map units were delineated in irregular polygons according to
soil type and environmental characteristics. We used several STATSGO fields. The surface
texture (SURFTEX) field was included, as was the percentage of plant cover (PLANTPCT).
We also utilized soil water permeability categories (HYDGRP), which ranged from A (fastest
draining) to D (slowest draining) and the USDA estimates of qualitative habitat quality
(WLGRAIN, GRASS, HERB, HARD, CONIF, SHRUB, WETPLT, SHLWAT, OPEN,
WOOD, WET, RANGE).
         Because parcel level data was supplemented with GIS and census datasets using
census boundaries, grid cells, or map polygons, a single spatial data observation from a given
dataset is shared across all of the parcels within the geographic extent of the observation.
         Upon completion of the database integration, we exported the GIS database into
tabular form, with variables indicating habitat status, initial development status, timing of
construction permits, local characteristics that could impact parcel rents, and local
characteristics linked to habitat value.




                                                                                             41
Appendix 3: Is GBM a reasonable assumption?
         The quarterly housing price index taken from the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise
Oversight for Pima County provides evidence of a GBM process at work. Consider the
following analysis. If the GBM assumption is approximately correct, then we should find an
upward curvature in the graph of average home prices or rents against time. If it holds
exactly, then regression of the change in price from one period to the next on the level of the
same price will yield the same results with and without a constant term (and with and without
power terms for the level), and will exhibit multiplicative heteroskedasticity. Finally, the
distribution of percentage change in price divided by price.
         The price index since 1986 is shown in Figure 3a, together with a purely geometric
(i.e., non-stochastic) growth curve with the growth rate estimated from the post-1986 data,
located to intersect the actual data at the mid-year. As would be the case with geometric
Brownian growth, departures from this path persist for a few years, but are eventually
countered by random events in the opposite direction. Data from earlier periods displays
similar growth curvature, but more noise. Inset into Figure 3a is the density of percentage
change in price smoothed with an Epanechnikov kernel. As with a normal distribution, the
preponderance of the density is characterized as a symmetrical, unimodal function. The tails
are too long for a normal distribution, however.
         Regression of the change in price on price level since 1986 excluding a constant term
yields an estimate for g of 0.011 ± 0.0009 (± denotes White’s robust standard error). This is
the growth rate used for the comparison curve. Adding a constant term doubles the growth
rate estimate to 0.022, and the constant term is significant (-1.18 ± 0.47). Using the data from
1975-present yields about the same growth rate with no constant term (0.013 ± 0.002), but
with a constant term the estimate of g falls to 0.003 ± 0.009. The addition of a squared price
term leaves the coefficient on price roughly equivalent, but the coefficient is estimated much
less precisely (.0113 ± .0131).




                                                                                             42
Figure 3a: Evidence on fit of GBM model to greater Tucson housing values




                                                                           43
