NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARIST RULES IN THE LIGHT OF
RECENT EXPERIENCE

Bennett T. McCallum

Working Paper No. 1271

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 19814

Prepared for AEA Session "Monetarism: Lessons From the Post—1919
Experiment," December 28, 1983. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and MonetaryEconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1277
February 1984

Monetarist Rules in the Light of
Recent Experience
ABSTRACT

Recent experience does not include a "monetarist experiment,"

as some have argued, but may slightly reinforce preexisting
reasons for doubting that the best way of formulating monetarist
policy prescriptions is in the form of a constant growth rule for

the money stock.

A more desirable rule would pertain to the

monetary base, which is much more directly under Fed control.
While a constant base growth rule might provide good macroeconomic

performance, better results should be obtainable from a rule that

at regular intervals adjusts the base growth rate upward or
downward depending on whether nominal GNP is below or above a
target path that specifies constant, non—inflationary growth for

that variable. This type of rule is activist, to an extent, but

is non—discretionary.

The implied absence of policy—making

flexibility is desirable for reasons explained in the literature
on dynamic inconsistency.

Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of
Industrial Administration
Carnegie—Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(1412) 578—23147

MONETARIST RULES IN THE LIGHT OF
RECENT EXPERIENCE
Bennett T. McCallum*

The title of this session, like a host of recent writings by
critics of monetarism, suggests that the period from late 1979 to

mid 1982 witnessed a significant "rnonetarist experiment," i.e.,

that U.S. monetary policy during that period conformed to
monetarist prescriptions. For a number of reasons, however, that
suggestion is clearly untenable.

Among these are the following:

growth rates of monetary aggregates fluctuated widely on a
month—to—month or quarter—to—quarter basis; the Fed's operating
procedures were more poorly designed for money stock control than

those in place prior to October, 1979;1 and discretionary
responses to current cyclical conditions were never foresworn. In

addition, the growth rate of the (Ml) money stock was only

lower than that of the previous decade and was higher
than that of the previous 20 years.2 It is true that the Fed
slightly

demonstrated

considerable resolve in reducing Ml growth rates from

the values of 1977—78 even though this required a spell of
unusually high interest rates, and the operating procedures
announced in October 1979 were politically helpTul in disclaiming

responsibility for these unpopular rates.

But such steps hardly

constitute an embrace of monetarism——an opinion shared, it might
be added, by officials of the Fed as well as leading proponents of

monetarism.3

tried monetarism
and it produced undesirable results" seems to me unworthy of
But that conclusion does not eliminate the
discussion.
Consequently, any argument of the form "we

2

possibility that the time period since 1979 has produced new
evidence relevant to a reasoned consideration of the desirability
of monetarist prescriptions.

It is, in other words, conceivable

that the new data points generated during that period were so
highly informative about the nature of the economy that opinions
concerning the merits of monetarist prescriptions could reasonably

have been altered. Let us then continue the discussion from that
perspective.

I.

NEW EVIDENCE

Contemplating the developments of 1979—82, one is led to the

conclusion that the main new information relevant to monetarism

does not pertain to the behavior of macroeconomic variables or

their inter—relationships.

Much of the discussion has,

admittedly, emphasized the unusually high interest rates (nominal
and ex post real) of 1980—81, the severe unemployment of 1982, the

rapid decline in inflation between 1981 and 1982, and the sharp

fall in Ml velocity during 1982.

But none of these facts is

incompatible with the basic hypotheses about the economy that are

essential to a monetarist position, namely, that money stock
movements have strong effects on nominal GNP and that there is no

permanent tradeoff between unemployment and inflation, Nor do
these facts serve to discredit——indeed, quite the contrary!——t.he
monetarist presumption that no one possesses a reliable structural

model of the economy, Instead, the new developments that deserve

attention are those pertaining to technological innovation and
regulatory change in the payments industry, prominent examples of

3

which include the introduction of NOW and sweep accounts, the
growth of money market mutual funds, and the widespread use of
repurchase agreements. These developments have, as is well—known,
led to redefinitions of traditional monetary aggregates such as Ml

and M2 and have weakened the correspondence of the former to the

concept of the medium of exchange.
developments

As a consequence, the

have engendered a widespread belief that the

economy's demand function for any operationally—defined monetary
aggregate has been subject to significant shifts and will continue
to shift in an unpredictable fashion in the future.

In saying this, I do not mean todeny that these developments

have in large part been a response to prevailing regulations and
policy.

Nor do I mean to express agreement with antimonetarist

observers who justify each departure from announced monetary
targets with a claim that money demand has shifted, or those who
believe that all tangible media of exchange will soon disappear as

modern economies adopt accounting systems of exchange. Nor do I
wish to suggest that technical progress in the payments industry

is something new, which it surely is not.

But I nevertheless

believe that •recent experiences have served to reinforce pre-

existing reasons for doubting that the best way of expressing
monetarist prescriptions is in the form of a constant growth rate

rule for the money stock. While the latter——whether measured as
Ml or M2——could certainly be made more controllable by the Fed,

wide—ranging institutional changes such as those recommended in
Milton Friedman's Program for MonetarLStability (1960) would be
required for truly tight control.5 Consequently, it will probably

14

continue to be the case that the money stock, which is not an
ultimate goal variable, is also not a directly—manipulable
monetary instrument.

II. A REVISED MONETARIST RULE

Because of this intermediate status of the

money

stock——identifiable as neither instrument nor goal variable——its
role is undesirably ambiguous.

It is thus not surprising that

money stock "targeting" as practiced by the Fed has been
characterized by ambiguity, with departures from target values
sometimes treated as something to be eliminated but often as mere
bits of information requiring rio response. It would be better, it

would appear, to have a rule that specifies behavior of the
monetary base, or stock of high—powered money, which is directly
enough under Fed control to be treated as a bona fide instrument.6

With observations on the base obtainable from Fed and Treasury

balance sheets, its magnitudes could be monitored almost
continuously and no significant departures from specified target
paths would ever need to occur.
It will be objected that the velocity of the base relative to

GNP will again be changing irregularly in the future so that a
constant growth rate for the base would be undesirable. But there
is nothing in the concept of a rule that requires the growth rate

to be constant. Personally, I suspect that constant base growth

at 1% per year over the next decade would yield satisfactory
macroeconomic performance. But still better performance should be
provided by a rule that periodically adjusts the base growth rate

5

in response to past movements in some nominal target variable,
with nominal GNP an attractive candidate.

Thus in my opinion a

desirable rnonetarist rule would adjust the base growth rate each
month or quarter, increasing the rate if nominal GNP is below its

target path and vice versa.

This target path, in turn, should

specify nominal GNP growth of about 3% per year, a figure
consistent with near—zero inflation.
There are three distinct ways, deserving of explicit mention,

in which macroeconomic performance could benefit from an
adjustable growth rate rule as compared with one of the constant—

growth rate (CGR) type.

First, the adjustable scheme could

correct for any tendency of base velocity growth to change
secularly as the pace of technological innovation increases or
decreases.

Second, there would be stronger countercyclical

effects on aggregate demand and these would be of an automatic
type.7

Third, the adjustments would counteract the tendency

——discussed in McCallum (1981)—— of' CGR rules plus fixed tax

schedules to generate dynamic instability in the stock of
government debt.

I am confident that both monetarists and anti—monetarists
will object to this proposal, partly for substantive reasons and

partly because I have termed it "monetarist."

Taking the last

objection first, the label is warranted because the proposed rule

is entirely non—discretionary and is expressed exclusively in
terms of nominal magnitudes.

Substantively, the only apparent

drawback -from a rnonetarist perspective is that the adjustable base

growth rate lacks the popular appeal of an absolutely constant

6

value.

nhie an adjustable path would be slightly harder to

monitor than a constant path if everything else were the same,
having a path expressed in terms of an instrument variable should

provide greater operational content and improved monitoring
possibilities in comparison with a constant growth path for a
variable that can only be controlled indirectly.

The substantive objections from non—monetarists will be

different, of course, and will presumably focus on the
non—discretionary aspect of the proposal.

In this regard, it is

important to recognize that while the rule is non—discretionary,
it is not non—activist.

That is, the rule specifies instrument

settings for the base growth rate that are contingent on the state

of the economy——nominal GNP relative to its target path.

It is

less activist than a rule that (for example). prescribes higher—

than—average nominal GNP growth when unemployment is above
average, but it is activist nonetheless, An important reason for
not attempting the more ambitious type of rule is the absence of a

reliable model of the economy. If such a model were available, it

would make no sense to use an intermediate target variable like
nominal GNP, rather than focussing directly on ultimate goals (B.
Friedman, 1975).

III. RULES vs. DISCRETION

There remains to be discussed why the Fed should adopt any
rule at all, rather than proceeding in a discretionary manner, as
the latter would permit the same month—to—month base growth values

as the rule would dictate but would also provide the virtue of

7

The answer is that, given the nature of the U.S.

flexibility.

economy, flexibility is not a virtue; the absence of flexibility

lead to superior performance in terms of unemploymentinflation combinations.
To make this argument as simply as
possible, I will utilize an analogy.8 Imagine parents confronted
could

with

an instance

uppermost

in their minds.

misbehavior,
as

of misbehavior by their child, whose welfare is

Shall they punish

the child for

the

thereby inflicting disutility on themselves as well

the child?

Or shall they refrain from punishment in this

particular case, while promising punishment for all future
instances of misbehavior?

From the viewpoint of the moment in

time when this decision is being faced, it is clearly optimal to
select the second of these options. But of course the same choice

will turn out to be optimal after the next instance of
misbehavior, and so on, so the resulting steady state is one in

which the parents never punish the child, whose behavior
accordingly conforms to a regime in which there is no need ever to
fear

punishment.
In an economy with widespread nominal contracting, the

problem faced each "year" is similar to that of parents confronted

with an instance of misbehavior.

The options are to impose

monetary stringency, with resulting disutility for most parties,
or

to refrain from stringency this year while promising stringency

in all future years.

But with decision—making

flexibility, the

same choice will be made in future years when the intervening
year's misbehavior becomes a thing of the past. Thus stringency

tends to be imposed

rarely, yet——since there is no permanent

stimulus to employment from monetary leniency——there is no
additional employment to compensate for the additional inflation
that results from monetary leniency.

Some parents, however, obtain superior outcomes by
sacrificing flexibility——by not making their choices after each
instance of misbehavior, but instead adopting a rule that results

in automatic punishment after each case of misbehavior.9 The Fed

could similarly obtain superior outcomes by surrendering
flexibility in favor of a rule of the type described above, To do
so

would not only result in improved

economic performance, but

would also represent genuine policy behavior——as opposed to

attempts to optimize——of the type that central bank
independence is intended to produce. Thus, despite the political
pressures described by Kane (1982) and others, the Fed should have
case—by—case

a powerful motive to adopt a policy rule: if choices

are

to

be

made on a case—by—case basis, there is noreason why they should

be made by an independent agency instead of the current
administration.

9

REFERENCES

Barro, Robert J., and Gordon, David B., "A Positive Theory of

Monetary Policy in a Natural—Rate Model," Journal of
Political Economy, August 1983, 91, 589—610.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H., "Strategies and Tactics for
Monetary Control," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, Vol. 18, ed. by K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer.
Amsterdam: North Holland, 1983.

Friedman, Benjamin M., "Targets, Instruments, and Indicators of
Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, October
1975, 1, LL3....i473.

Friedman, Milton, A Program for Monetary Stability.
Fordham University Press, 1960.

New York:

Kane, Edward J., "Selecting Monetary Targets in a Changing
Financial Environment," Monetary Policy Issues in the 1980s,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1982.

Kydland, Finn E., and Prescott, Edward C., "Rules Rather than
Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of
Political Economy, June 1977, 85, 473—91.

McCallum, Bennett T., "Monetarist Principles and the Money Stock
Growth
American Economic Review Papers and
Rule,"
Proceedings," May 1981, 71, 134—138.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Hoehn, James G., "Instrument Choice for
Money Stock Control with Contemporaneous and Lagged Reserve
Requirements,"
urna1ofMoneyCredjtLafldBaflkjfl,
February 1983, 15, 9—101.

U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee, Monetarism and the
Federal Reserve's Conduct of Monetary Policy.
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982.

Washington:

10

FOOTNOTES

*

Professor of Economics, Carnegie—Mellon University; Research
Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research; and Adviser,

Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

I am indebted to Marvin

Goodfriend and Allan Meltzer for helpful suggestions and to
the National Science Foundation (SES 82—08151) for financial
support.
1.

This is suggested by the analytical results in McCallum and
Hoehn (1983) as well as the discussion in Brunner and Meltzer
(1983) and elsewhere.

2.

From December, 179, through June 1982, the average Ml growth

rate was 6.1%.

During 1970—79 the figure was 6.6%; for

1960—79 it was 5.2%.

(Data from Economic Report of the

President, February 1983).
3.

See, for example, contributions by Voicker, M. Friedman, arid

Meltzer in the Joint Economic Committee'sMonetarism and the
Federal Reserve's Conduct of Monetary Policy (1982).
'4.

These hypotheses are discussed in McCallum (1981).

That

neither the second or third of the four cited facts is
inconsistent with monetarist principles should not need to be
argued.

The first fact would be inconsistent with the

"Ricardian" brand of monetarism if it were established that
the high interest rates of 1980—81 resulted from unmonetized

deficits, but such is only one hypothesis.

Also, less

extreme forms of monetarism are more typical. And as for the

11

fourth fact, a change in velocity does not imply a shift in
money demand behavior——a sharp drop in interest rates (as

in

1982) should induce a velocity decline according to most
theories.

Furthermore, evidence of behavioral shifts taken

from studies of conventional money demand functions is
unsatisfactory because estimates of the usual (Goldfeld)
specification are implausible, implying as they do that many

quarters are needed for portfolio adjustments that can be
effected almost instantaneously with negligible cost.
5.

Furthermore, it would appear that extremely good substitutes

for bank deposits can be developed by intermediaries not
subject

6.

to any given set of regulations.

The importance of conrollability and the absence of ambiguity

crucial roles in Milton Friedman's argument for a rule
expressed in terms of the money stock, rather than the price
play

level (1960, pp. 86—89).
long

monetary base has

been recommended by Brunner and Meltzer.

possible

7.

Emphasis on the

Another

instrument is total reserves.

If the economy is in

fact Keynesian in nature, these counter—

cyclical effects would be likely to be helpful.
fact purely classical, they should be neither

If it is

in

helpful nor

harmful.
8.

This analogy was suggested to me by Stanley Fischer.
argument
developed
elaborated

that is is supposed to elucidate

The

was originally

by Kydland and Prescott (1977)

and was usefully

by Barro and Gordon (1983).

The reader is

referred to these papers for a more formal

analysis,

12

including a more precise specification of the assumed nature

of the economy.

The argument abstracts from cyclical

fluctuations only for simplicity.
9.

This is only a hypothetical possibility, of course; I do not
claim to know of'

any actual cases.

