NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DSGE MODELS IN A DATA-RICH ENVIRONMENT
Jean Boivin
Marc Giannoni
Working Paper 12772
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12772

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

We would like to thank Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Alejandro Justiniano, Alexei Onatski, Frank Schorfheide,
Chris Sims, Mark Watson, Michael Woodford, and especially Michael Johannes for helpful discussions.
We also thank Mauro Roca and Huidan Lin for outstanding research assistance. We are grateful to
Frank Smets and Raf Wouters for sharing their data and programs. Any remaining errors are our responsibility.
We would like to thank the National Science Foundation for financial support (SES-0214104, SES-0518770).
Giannoni thanks the Fondation Banque de France and the research department of the Banque de France
for their support and hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Jean Boivin and Marc Giannoni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment
Jean Boivin and Marc Giannoni
NBER Working Paper No. 12772
December 2006
JEL No. C10,C32,C53,E1,E32,E37
ABSTRACT
Standard practice for the estimation of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models maintains
the assumption that economic variables are properly measured by a single indicator, and that all relevant
information for the estimation is summarized by a small number of data series. However, recent empirical
research on factor models has shown that information contained in large data sets is relevant for the
evolution of important macroeconomic series. This suggests that conventional model estimates and
inference based on estimated DSGE models might be distorted. In this paper, we propose an empirical
framework for the estimation of DSGE models that exploits the relevant information from a data-rich
environment. This framework provides an interpretation of all information contained in a large data
set, and in particular of the latent factors, through the lenses of a DSGE model. The estimation involves
Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) methods. We apply this estimation approach to a state-of-the-art
DSGE monetary model. We find evidence of imperfect measurement of the model's theoretical concepts,
in particular for inflation. We show that exploiting more information is important for accurate estimation
of the model's concepts and shocks, and that it implies different conclusions about key structural parameters
and the sources of economic fluctuations.
Jean Boivin
HEC Montréal
3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Montréal (Québec)
Canada H3T 2A7
and NBER
jean.boivin@hec.ca
Marc Giannoni
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 824
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mg2190@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Recent macroeconomic research has devoted considerable eﬀorts to the development and estimation
of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models that are internally consistent, and based
on first principles. Some recent micro-founded DSGE models, which involve numerous frictions and
various types of shocks, appear to replicate the data in important dimensions (see, e.g., Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2003, 2004)). For instance, Smets and Wouters
(2004) report that a DSGE model with a wide range of shocks fits the data well and performs well
in terms of out-of-sample forecasts. Motivated by these promising results, such models are now
increasingly perceived as a valuable input to policy making.1
In estimating these models, researchers have so far maintained the assumption that all relevant
information for the estimation is adequately summarized by a relatively small number (i.e., between
three and seven) of data series.2
This is at odds, however, with the fact that central banks and financial market participants
monitor and analyze literally hundreds of data series. Moreover, there is growing empirical evidence
suggesting that a large set of macroeconomic variables may in fact be crucial to properly capture
the economy’s dynamics. In a macroeconomic forecasting context, Stock and Watson (1999, 2002)
and Forni, Hallin, Lippi and Reichlin (2000) among others find that factors estimated from large
data sets of macroeconomic variables lead to considerable improvements over small scale VAR
models.3 Bernanke and Boivin (2003) and Giannone, Reichlin and Sala (2004) show that this
large information set appears to matter empirically to properly model monetary policy. Bernanke,
Boivin and Eliasz (2005) argue that inference based on small-scale VARs, by omitting relevant
1

For instance, the Bank of Canada is “completing the development of a new projection model–
a sticky-price dynamic stochastic general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the Canadian economy” (see
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/fellowship/highlights_res.htm). Papers that study optimal policy in estimated
medium-sized DSGE models include Juillard, Karam, Laxton and Pesenti (2005), Levin, Onatski, Williams and
Williams (2005).
2
The only exception we are aware of is Adolfson, Laséen, Lindé and Villani (2005) which estimates a relatively
large model of a small open economy using fifteen data series. Leeper and Sims (1994) estimated their model with
three and ten data series, but report that they were unable to obtain a reasonable fit with ten series.
3
Stock and Watson (1999), comparing a wide range of inflation forecasting exercises, found that their bestperforming forecast involves a composite index of aggregate activity based on 168 individual activity measures. They
argue that the forecasting gains from using this index are economically large and statistically significant over the
1970-1996 sample period. Similar evidence has been found in Forni et al. (2001), Stock and Watson (2002), Bernanke
and Boivin (2003) and Boivin and Ng (2003), among others.

1

information, may be importantly distorted. For instance, they provide evidence in favor of Sims’
(1992) explanation of the “price puzzle,” – i.e., the finding based on small-scaled VARs that prices
tend to increase following a monetary policy tightening – according to which conventional VARs
do not account for the information that the central bank has about future inflation. They show
that the information from a large set of indicators is indeed important to properly identify the
monetary transmission mechanism. These empirical models with large data sets remain however
largely non-structural. This limits our ability to determine the source of economic fluctuations, to
perform counterfactual experiments, or to analyze optimal policy.
Why would such information be relevant in the context of available DSGE models? If the model
of the economy is well specified and all theoretical concepts are directly observed by the agents and
the econometrician, there is no scope for using additional data series in the estimation of DSGE
models. But if some of the key concepts of the model are imperfectly observed or if the data are
informative about some exogenous shocks or other state variables, exploiting the information from
additional series could be important.
While the assumption that some or all theoretical concepts are observed by the econometrician
is routinely made in the estimation of DSGE models, it may not be realistic. The upper panel
of Figure 1 plots three detrended quarterly measures of employment (in logs) from 1964 to 2002.4
Figure 2 reports the (de-meaned) quarterly growth rates of popular price measures: the GDP
deflator, the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator, and the consumer price index
(CPI). While these series display broadly similar patterns, they reveal noticeable diﬀerences from
one quarter two the next. In fact, as indicated in the lower panels of the figures, the coherences — i.e.,
the correlations in the frequency domain — between any two of the series are high at low frequencies,
but they are markedly lower, though nonzero, at higher frequencies. If all of the fluctuations in these
indicators were attributable to fundamental macroeconomic shocks, one would expect for instance
these indicators of inflation to move in sync. However, most high-frequency inflation spikes are not
common to all three series considered.
Gaps between several indicators of macroeconomic variables may reflect measurement error.
4

The measure SW is taken from Smets and Wouters (2004), and is described in section 3.2 below. The other two
indicators represent employment numbers based respectively on the household and the establishment surveys.

2

For employment, the systematic discrepancies between its two main measures – one obtained
from the establishment survey and the other from the population survey – which have received
a lot of attention in the aftermath of the 2001 recession,5 underscore the fact that employment
is imperfectly measured.6 Aggregate prices are also notoriously diﬃcult to measure. One of the
most commonly used measure, the CPI, has undergone various changes in methodology since the
1996 Boskin commission, to mitigate important shortcomings. But recent research emphasizes
that the current CPI might still be subject to important biases, stemming for instance, from
the diﬃculty of measuring quality improvements or properly adjusting for outlet substitution.7
Imperfect measurement may also aﬀect real output, consumption, investment, real wages.
At another level, there may be conceptual diﬀerences between the model variables and the
data used to measure them. One could of course imagine macroeconomic models to be suﬃciently
detailed so as to specify a separate role for, e.g., each of the available price indices (such as the GDP
deflator, PCE deflator, CPI, core-CPI, and so on). In practice, however, this distinction is rarely
made, as there are advantages to analyzing relatively simple models. If follows that researchers
often pick a particular price index in a more or less arbitrary way.
Failing to account empirically for the imprecise link between theoretical concepts and observable
macroeconomic data can invalidate model estimation and the assessment of whether a particular
theory fits the facts. Following Sargent (1989), this has led some researchers to recognize explicitly
the presence of measurement error in their empirical framework.8 However, even when they allow for
measurement error, all existing studies that estimate structural models are, to our knowledge, based
on at most a single (and sometimes arbitrary), observable time series corresponding to each variable
of the model. That is, whether or not one considers measurement error in the model estimation,
it is typically assumed that a small number of data series contain all available information about
concepts of the model such as output and inflation.
5

See, e.g., Bernanke (2004).
The BLS actually reports standard errors for the employment measures based on both surveys in the Employment
Report. The non-farm payroll employment number, being based on a larger sample, is statistically more precise. But
it is also subject to biases, such as the double-counting of jobs.
7
See Hausman (2003), Hausman and Leibtag (2004) and Bils (2004).
8
See, e.g., Altuğ (1989), McGrattan (1994), Anderson, Hansen, McGrattan and Sargent (1996), McGrattan,
Rogerson and Wright (1997), Schorfheide (2000), Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramírez (2004). Another practical
motivation for adding measurement error is to avoid the stochastic singularity problem that arises when there are
fewer theoretical shocks than observable series.
6

3

Once one acknowledges that the data provides only an imperfect indicator of the concept, it is
plausible to think that other data series carry useful additional information. Viewed in this light,
existing estimations of DSGE models appear to be based implicitly on an arbitrary choice of data.
Given each indicator-specific idiosyncrasy, properly exploiting the information from several indicators – rather than from a single one – should help to better separate an estimate of the economic
concept (such as employment or inflation) from the indicator-specific “measurement error.”9 This
should also provide us with a better estimate of the underlying economic shocks.
Moreover, some exogenous shocks or other state variables, that are typically assumed to be
completely unobserved by the econometrician, might in fact be partially observed. One example
is the productivity shock underlying many DSGE models. In existing estimations, it is treated
as completely latent, which amounts to assuming implicitly that no observable measure contains
independent information about this shock, beyond the handful of variable used in the estimation.
But measures of labor productivity, oil prices, or commodity prices may all be correlated with total
factor productivity, and thus serve as noisy indicators containing independent information.10 In
principle, since this could be the case for all exogenous shocks, many more indicators could carry
important information for the estimation.
In this paper, we propose a general empirical framework to estimate DSGE models that exploits
the information from a potentially large panel of data series in a systematic fashion. We relax
the common assumption that theoretical concepts are properly measured by a single data series,
and instead treat them as unobserved common factors for which observed data series are merely
imperfect indicators. We also include information from indicators that potentially have an unknown
relationship with the state variables of the model.
The proposed empirical framework has several advantages. First, as a consequence of the
factor structure, the latent model concepts and the series-specific component (or “measurement
errors”) can be consistently identified from the cross-section of macroeconomic indicators, and not
exclusively from the dynamic structure implied by the DSGE model. Consequently, unlike in the
9

In the same spirit, Prescott (1986) used these two indicators to calibrate the labor elasticity of output in his RBC
model.
10
This is in part the rationale for the inclusion of commodity prices in VARs to “fix” the price puzzle (see Sims
(1992)).

4

standard treatment mentioned above, allowing for measurement error does not necessarily help the
model fit the data. Using multiple indicators in the model estimation also allows us to consider
a potentially large number of imperfectly measured concepts without restricting the number of
structural shocks that can be identified within the model. Rather than taking a stance on whether
“measurement errors” or structural shocks should be part of the model, we can remain agnostic
and determine empirically their relative importance. A by-product is an empirical assessment of
the information content of each indicator.
Second, we can exploit the information from indicators that are not directly and unambiguously
linked to a specific concept of the model. If the additional information considered is relevant,
it should make our estimation more eﬃcient. This is particularly important to determine more
accurately the state of the economy, and helps in forecasting.
Third, our framework can be interpreted as a dynamic factor models à la Stock and Watson
(1999, 2002), Forni et al. (2000), Forni, Lippi and Reichlin (2003), Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz
(2005), and Giannone, Reichlin and Sala (2004), in which we impose the full structure of the DSGE
model on the transition equation of the latent factors. This has the added benefit of allowing us
to provide a very clear economic interpretation of all estimated latent factors: in our setup, these
factors correspond to state variables of the model (i.e., predetermined variables or shocks). In
contrast, in empirical studies of factor models, the latent factors do not have a clear interpretation,
since they are identified only “up to a rotation.” Taken as a whole, the set of the factors obtained
in empirical studies spans the space of common components in the data, but each factor does not
uniquely characterize a common component. Our framework, in contrast provides an interpretation
of all information contained in a large data set through the lenses of a DSGE model.
The estimation involves Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) techniques which deal eﬀectively
with the dimensionality problem by working with marginal densities and avoiding gradient methods.
Because of the large dimension of models in a data-rich environment, direct estimation by maximum
likelihood is usually infeasible in practice. The specific algorithm that we propose extends the
standard implementation of Bayesian MCMC methods11 to account for the relationship between a
potentially large number of indicators and a relatively small number of model concepts.
11

See, e.g., Geweke (1999), Schorfheide (2000), Smets and Wouters (2003, 2004), Levin et al. (2005).

5

We apply our estimation procedure to a state-of-the-art DSGE model based on microeconomic
foundations. The model is taken from Smets and Wouters (2004), which builds on the model of
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). One important finding is that by considering information from a larger data set in our model estimation, and by relaxing the link between some
indicators and the model’s concepts, we are able to considerably improve the estimates of the
model’s latent concepts such as inflation, of state variables and shocks. Our results suggest that
the additional information provided by the data-rich environment is highly relevant for the model
estimation. Estimates of critical model parameters such as a pseudo-elasticity of intertemporal
substitution in consumption, the degree of habit formation, the degree of inflation indexing as
well as estimated variances of exogenous shocks diﬀer importantly depending on the assumed link
between theory and data. This arises even though the estimated latent variables display patterns
generally consistent with the indicators typically used to measure them. The diﬀerent estimates
also imply very diﬀerent conclusions about the sources of economic fluctuations. As more data
series are used in the model estimation, we find that fewer shocks are necessary to explain economic fluctuations, and that shocks to the eﬃciency of investment goods become a main source of
business cycle fluctuations.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 lays down the formal setup for an
arbitrary linear(ized) DSGE model. It explains how we relate the structural model to the large
data set, and discusses implications of the setup for a canonical real business cycle (RBC) model.
The section then proceeds with a description of the general estimation methodology. Detailed
information about the estimation is left in an appendix. Section 3, presents an application of our
approach in the context of a state-of-the-art DSGE model, the model of Smets and Wouters (2004),
and discusses the estimation results and their implications. Section 4 concludes.

2

Data-Rich Environment

We now present a formal framework that merges a general class of dynamic general equilibrium
models with a data-rich empirical model. We then discuss the implications of this framework, both
in general terms and in the context of a canonical RBC model.

6

2.1

General Framework

Let us consider a general linear (or linearized) rational expectations model of the form
⎡

⎤

⎡

⎤

⎢ zt+1 ⎥
⎢ zt ⎥
AEt ⎣
⎦ = B⎣
⎦ + Cst
Zt+1
Zt
st = M st−1 + εt

(1)
(2)

where Et [x] ≡ E [x|It ] denotes the expectation of some variable x conditional on the information
set It available at date t, zt is a vector of non-predetermined endogenous variables, Zt is a vector containing predetermined endogenous variables or lagged exogenous variables (i.e., satisfying
Et Zt+1 = Zt+1 ), st is a vector of exogenous variables following the process (2), εt is a vector
of mean-zero unforecastable exogenous disturbances (such that Et εt+j = 0 for all j > 0) with a
diagonal variance-covariance matrix Q, and A, B, C and M are conformable matrices of coeﬃcients. Below, we will consider examples of structural dynamic general equilibrium models based
on microeconomic foundations that can be cast in the form (1)—(2). Models with additional lags,
lagged expectations, or expectations of variables father in the future can be written as in (1) by
expanding the vectors zt and Zt appropriately. We assume that the information set in period t is
It = {zτ , Zτ +1 , sτ , ετ , for τ ≤ t; A, B, C, Q} so that all agents considered in the model are assumed
to know the model, its parameters, and the realizations of all variables determined in the present
and past.12 We solve the model using standard numerical techniques,13 and express the solution as

zt = DSt

(3)

St = GSt−1 + Hεt ,

(4)

12
This can be generalized in various ways at the expense of complications for the estimation problem described
below. One can for instance assume that some or all of the agents in the model also face imperfect information about
the state of the economy, and thus need to solve a filtering problem (see, e.g., Pearlman, Currie, and Levine, 1986,
Svensson and Woodford, 2003, 2004) that may or may not be the same as the one of the econometrician described
below. The model could still be written in the form (1), except that the vectors zt , Zt , and st would include also
estimates on the part of agents of the respective variables. We leave an analysis of imperfect information on the part
of economic agents for future work.
13
See, e.g., Blanchard and Kahn (1980), King and Watson (1998), Klein (1997), McCallum (1998), Sims (2000).

7

where

⎡

⎤

⎢ Zt ⎥
St ≡ ⎣
⎦
st

is the state vector and the matrices D, G, H are function of the underlying model’s structural
parameters.
In many applications, the system (1) contains identities and Zt includes redundant variables
such as lags of variables in zt . We will be interested in a subset Ft of the variables in zt , St (all
known at date t), which refers only to variables characterizing the economy in period t. The (nF × 1)
vector Ft will typically include endogenous variables of interest for which indicators are observable.
Specifically, we define

⎡

⎤

⎢ zt ⎥
Ft ≡ F ⎣
⎦
St

where F is a matrix that selects the appropriate elements of the vector [zt0 , St0 ]0 . Given (3), we can
rewrite the variables of interest as a linear combination of the state vector

Ft = ΦSt ,

where

⎡

(5)

⎤

⎢ D ⎥
Φ≡F⎣
⎦
I

(6)

is entirely determined by the model parameters and the selection of variables in Ft . The evolution
of Ft is given by (4)—(6).
In order to estimate the model we consider nX observable macroeconomic variables collected
h
i0
XF
the indicators of the
in a vector Xt . We collect in a nXF × 1 subvector XF,t = x1F,t , ..., xnF,t
¤
£ 1
0
variables of interest Ft = ft , ..., ftnF , where nXF ≥ nF , and assume that the observed indicators
relate to the variables of the model according to

xiF,t = λiF ftj + eiF,t

8

(7)

for i = 1, ..nXF , j = 1, ...nF , where for each i, λiF is a coeﬃcient, and eiF,t denotes a meanzero indicator-specific component, which may be viewed as representing measurement error or
conceptual diﬀerences between the theoretical concept ftj and the respective indicator xiF,t . We
omit throughout a constant to simplify the notation. We assume that these indicator-specific
components are potentially serially correlated, but that they are uncorrelated across indicators.
The set of equations (7) can be rewritten in matrix form as

XF,t = ΛF Ft + eF,t ,

(8)

where eF,t is a nXF × 1 vector of mean-zero indicator-specific and potentially serially correlated
components, and ΛF is an (nXF × nF ) matrix of coeﬃcients. As each element of XF,t is supposed
to be an indicator of one of the elements of Ft , each row of the matrix ΛF will have at most one
nonzero element. However, to the extent that each variable in Ft can be imperfectly measured by
many indicators, each column of ΛF can have many nonzero elements.
The observation equation (8) is appropriate in the case that several observable indicators relate
directly to the same variable of interest, and that each of the indicator-specific components is uncorrelated with that of other indicators. For instance, if inflation based on the personal consumption
expenditure deflator and the CPI correspond to the same concept of inflation in the model, then one
may want to include both indicators in XF,t . However, if these indicators refer actually to diﬀerent
concepts, then at least one of them should not be included in XF,t . Such an indicator, even though
it does not relate directly to any variable in Ft should still depend on the evolution of the state
vector St .
More generally, to the extent that the theoretical model is true, a potentially very large number
of indicators observed – e.g., asset prices, commodity prices, monetary aggregates and so on –
should depend on the state vector St . Again, it may be useful to consider such indicators in the
estimation, as they may be informative about the state of the model economy. To exploit the
information provided by such indicators in the model estimation, we assume that the remaining
data series of Xt which do not correspond to any particular variable of Ft are collected in a nXS × 1

9

vector XS,t and are related to the state vector according to

XS,t = ΛS St + eS,t ,

(9)

where eS,t is a nXS × 1 vector of mean-zero components that are not related to the model’s state
vector, and ΛS is an (nXS × nS ) matrix of coeﬃcients. Equation (9) allows all indicators not
associated with any particular variable of the model to potentially provide information about the
state vector St . We propose to capture the information from the data in XS,t in a non-structural
way, letting the weights in ΛS be determined by the data.
While the weights ΛF relating the variables of interest to their indicators can be interpreted
as structural – i.e., policy invariant – the weights ΛS relating the state vector to all other indicators do not need to be so.14 Even though (9) may not be reliable to determine the eﬀects of
alternative policies on the variables in XS,t , information about these variables can be very useful
for the estimation of the state vector and model parameters under historical policy. Once the state
vector and model parameters are correctly estimated – using the information provided by (9) –
counterfactual exercises can legitimately be performed for all variables Ft , St , XF,t , without using
(9) any more.
Combining (8)—(9) and using (5), we obtain the observation equation

Xt = ΛSt + et

where

⎡

⎤

⎢ XF,t ⎥
Xt ≡ ⎣
⎦,
XS,t

⎡

⎤

⎢ eF,t ⎥
et ≡ ⎣
⎦,
eS,t

(10)

⎡

⎤

⎢ ΛF Φ ⎥
Λ≡⎣
⎦.
ΛS

We assume that indicator-specific components eF,t and eS,t are uncorrelated across indicators but
14

In fact the weights ΛS mix the weights that the variables in XS,t would attribute to their theoretical counterpart,
with the coeﬃcients that relate these theoretical concepts to the state vector St .

10

serially correlated, so that

eF,t = ΨF eF,t−1 + vF,t

(11)

eS,t = ΨS eS,t−1 + vS,t

(12)

where the vectors vF,t and vS,t are assumed to be normally distributed with mean zero and variance
RF and RS , respectively, and where the matrices RF , RS and ΨF , ΨS are assumed to be diagonal.15
Our empirical model consists of the transition equation (4) – which is fully determined by
the underlying DSGE model –, the selection equation (5), and the observation equation (10)-(12)
which relates the model’s theoretical concepts to the data. It contains as an important special
case the measurement error framework proposed by Sargent (1989). In the latter framework, each
variable in Ft corresponds to a unique observable indicator in XF,t , so that the observation equation
reduces to Xt = Ft + et = ΦSt + et . In this case nXS = 0, ΛF = InF , Λ = Φ. A further trivial special
case is one in which model variables are assumed to be directly measured, so that the observation
equation reduces to Xt = Ft = ΦSt , as in most existing estimations of DSGE models.
The key innovation here is to generalize Sargent (1989)’s framework to the case where the vector
of observables, Xt , may be much larger than the vector Ft of variables in the model, i.e. nX >> nF ,
and that their exact relationship, summarized by Λ, may be partially unknown. The interpretation
is that this large number of macroeconomic variables are noisy indicators of model concepts and
thus share some common sources of fluctuations. This implies an observation equation with a factor
structure similar to the one assumed in the recent non-structural empirical literature which uses
a large panel of macroeconomic indicators. However, an important diﬀerence with this literature
is that, in the present framework, the evolution of the unobserved common components obeys the
15
We may allow the vector eS,t to be correlated across indicators, as we may want to include in the vector XS,t
indicators that are driven by some common factors which are not included in the model’s vector of state variables.
This could happen for instance if several indicators included in XS,t are part of a same category of indicators, but that
their theoretical counterpart is not fully fleshed out in the model. In this case we would assume that the component
of these indicators which is not correlated with the model’s state vector has the following factor structure

eS,t = ΓSe,t + ẽS,t
where ẽS,t is a nXS × 1 vector of mean-zero indicator-specific (i.e., uncorrelated across indicators) and potentially
serially correlated components, and Se,t is a vector of common components in the set of indicators XS,t , which are
uncorrelated with the model’s state vector St .

11

structure of a DSGE model.
The use of large information sets provides our framework with two important advantages over
the existing implementation of DSGE model estimation. First, as the latent variables and the
measurement can be identified from the cross-section of macroeconomic indicators, it allows one to
identify a much richer pattern of “measurement errors,” even in the presence of many structural
shocks. This reduces the risk of biased estimation. Second, it has the potential to yield a more
eﬃcient estimation procedure. To illustrate these points, consider the following special case of the
framework presented above. Suppose that, according to theory, a variable of interest, ft , satisfies

ft = ρft−1 + η t ,

(13)

where |ρ| < 1 and the exogenous disturbance η t is iid.16 Suppose moreover that we observe an
indicator x1t of ft . In the case that x1t constitutes a perfect measure of ft , i.e., that the observation
equation (10) is trivially x1t = ft , the variable of interest ft is known, and the parameter ρ can
easily be estimated by OLS or maximum likelihood. Suppose instead that x1t is a noisy indicator
of ft and that the observation equation takes the form

x1t = ft + e1t

(14)

where e1t is iid.17 In the case that ρ 6= 0, standard techniques such as proposed Sargent (1989)
can be applied to estimate fˆt and disentangle it from the “measurement error,” using the Kalman
filter. For this to work, however, we need the stochastic process of ft to be diﬀerent from the one
that drives the measurement error. In contrast, when ρ = 0, standard techniques cannot be applied
to recover the variable of interest ft , as x1t = η t + e1t is the sum of two variables with the same
stochastic process.18 However, if one or more additional indicators

xit = ft + eit
16

(15)

This is a special case of (4)—(5), where ft = Ft = St , εt = η t , Φ = 1, G = ρ and H = 1.
This is a special case of (10) where Xt = x1t , ΛF = 1, Λ = Φ = 1, and et = e1t .
18
The likelihood function in this case involves the sum of the variances of ηt and e1t , so that each variance cannot
be identified separately.
17

12

for i = 2, .., nX are available, then it is possible to estimate ft even if it is serially uncorrelated.
In fact, ft is a common factor that can be identified through the cross section, on the basis the
observation equations (14)—(15), while the dynamic model (13) is used for identification of the
shocks ηt .
More generally, when no more than one indicator is used for any concept of the model – i.e.,
when nX = nF , as in existing implementations – both the structural shocks and the unobserved
variables have to be identified entirely from the restricted dynamics of the DSGE model, summarized
by equations (4)—(5). In that case, having more structural shocks in the model limits the number of
independent sources of measurement errors that can be contemplated and it is diﬃcult to formally
test whether the resulting model is properly identified or not. Typically, researchers avoid these
problems by assuming either no measurement error or few structural shocks. But as argued in the
introduction, measurement error or conceptual diﬀerences between the measured indicators and
the theoretical variables might be quite prevalent, and if so, ignoring them would lead to biased
inference.
In contrast, one key feature of factor models with multiple indicators is that the factors can
be identified by the cross-section of macroeconomic indicators alone. This implies that in our
framework with a factor structure, the large number (nX >> nF ) of indicators provides enough
restrictions to identify the latent variables, and the series-specific terms from the observation equation (10). As a result, we can allow for a large amount of measurement errors without restricting in
any way the number of structural shocks that can be identified in the model. Rather than taking
a stance on which source of variations should be part of the model, we can remain agnostic and
determine empirically their importance.
Even when the factors can be identified solely from the model dynamics, as in Sargent (1989),
considering the information from the large data set provides another important advantage, namely
eﬃciency of the factor estimation. A key property of factor models is that the variances of the
factor estimates are of order 1/nX where nX is again the number of indicators in Xt . A consistent
estimate of the factors can thus be obtained as nX −→ ∞ (see Forni et al. (2000), and Stock
and Watson (2002), Bai and Ng (2004).) This suggests that exploiting information from a large
number of macroeconomic indicators can reduce considerably the uncertainty in the estimated
13

latent variables, which in turn implies a more eﬃcient estimation of model parameters. Estimation
eﬃciency is then important, in particular for forecasting exercises and policy analysis, as forecasting
performance is directly related to precision in model estimates.
It is important to note that by expanding the vector Xt of indicators we are not facilitating
the model’s ability to fit the data. To the contrary, given the factor structure, the more indicators
we have in Xt , the more we require the state variables (here k̂t and at ) to explain the common
components in the data series, while at the same time satisfying their law of motion given by (20).

2.2

An Illustrative Example: A Simple RBC Model

To clarify how the empirical framework just discussed can be applied to the estimation of a DSGE
model, we first discuss a simple example, the canonical RBC model (see, e.g., King, Plosser and
Rebelo (1988)). This model allows us also to relate to much of the literature on estimated DSGE
models which has often considered variants of the basic RBC model. In section 3, we estimate a
more elaborate model that adds numerous frictions to a RBC model of this kind. In the basic RBC
model considered here, households maximize their lifetime utility which depends on consumption,
ct , and leisure, 1 − lt ,
E0

∞
X
t=0

β t [log (ct ) + v log (1 − lt )] ,

0 < β < 1, v > 0

(16)

0 < α < 1, 0 < δ < 1

(17)

subject to the following restrictions
eat kt1−α ltα = ct + kt+1 − (1 − δ) kt ,
at = ρat−1 + vt ,

0<ρ<1

(18)

where the exogenous productivity shock at follows a mean-zero AR(1) process. Equation (17)
indicates that output, which is generated using the capital stock kt (chosen at date t − 1), hours
worked, lt , and total factor productivity, at , is the sum of private consumption and gross investment.
Solving this household problem yields a set of first-order necessary conditions which, together with
(17) and a transversality condition, characterize the equilibrium evolution of the variables ct , lt ,

14

and kt , for given exogenous disturbances and an initial value of the capital stock. As is well known,
this model admits a unique deterministic steady state in which all endogenous variables remain
constant. As a closed-form solution does generally not exist, the model is commonly log-linearized
around the steady state. The model’s approximate dynamics around the steady state can be written
as
⎡

⎤
⎤⎡
⎡
ˆlt
⎢
⎥
⎢ d11 d12 ⎥ ⎢ k̂t
⎣
⎦ = ⎣
⎦⎣
ĉt
d21 d22
at
⎤
⎡
⎡
⎤⎡
⎢ k̂t ⎥
⎢ g hρ ⎥ ⎢ k̂t−1
⎦ = ⎣
⎣
⎦⎣
at
at−1
0 ρ

⎤
⎥
⎦

⎤

(19)
⎡

⎤

⎥ ⎢ h ⎥
⎦ + ⎣ ⎦ vt
1

(20)

h
h
i0
i0
which is of the form (3)—(4) with zt = ˆl, ĉt , St = k̂t , at , and the matrices D, G, H are function

only of the model parameters. Here, the circumflex denotes percent deviations from the steady
state (e.g., ĉt ≡ log (ct /c̄)).
To illustrate the richness of our empirical framework, we consider several variants of the observation equation (10).
No measurement error. A common approach to the estimation of DSGE models is to suppose
that we have perfect indicators of the variables of interest. In the case that an indicator Xt =
hours1t (e.g., based on the establishment survey) is viewed as measuring perfectly the concept ˆlt ,
we may write the selection equation (5) as Ft = ˆlt = [d11 , d12 ] St , so that the observation equation
(10) reduces to
hours1t = ˆlt = d11 k̂t + d12 at .

(21)

In this case, estimation of the model (19)—(20) with the above observation equation would attribute
all variations in the indicator hours1t to the only source of exogenous fluctuations, the productivity
shock.19
19

Given that the RBC model considered here has only one source of exogenous fluctuations, using more than one
observable series would result in the model rejection, in the absence of measurement error. In fact, as Ingram et al.
(1994) point out, since the number of exogenous disturbances is smaller than the number of endogenous variables,
one can find particular combinations of endogenous variables that are deterministic, so that their variance-covariance
matrix is singular. The model is said to be stochastically singular in this case. As this is not true in the data, the
model is sure to be rejected.

15

Standard treatment of measurement error. In the case that hours1t is considered as a noisy
indicator of hours, the observation equation needs to be augmented with a measurement error term,
hours1t = ˆlt + e1t = d11 k̂t + d12 at + e1t ,
and the standard approach proposed by Sargent (1989) is commonly applied.20 According to this
approach, the restrictions of the dynamic model and the Kalman filter are used to estimate the
unobserved variables ˆlt , k̂t , at and the measurement error. However, as illustrated in the previous
simple example, such an approach may have trouble disentangling the structural disturbances –
the innovations to at – from the measurement error, et , and thus may not be able to identify the
latent variable of interest, ˆlt . Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to test in practice whether or not the
latent variables and the model parameters are actually identified.
An alternative treatment of noisy indicators: Using multiple indicators of given concepts. Once one recognizes that the data often contains noisy indicators of the concepts that
one seeks to measure, there is scope for using additional indicators to get better estimates of the
model’s parameters and concepts. This can be done generally and systematically in our empirical
framework. It suﬃces to include all relevant indicators in the vector Xt , and to let them be related
to the respective concepts in Ft . For instance, while the establishment survey may provide a good
indicator of the concept of hours worked (hours1t ), it is likely to include measurement error that
is uncorrelated with measurement error in the hours as implied by the household survey (hours2t ).
Accounting for the information contained in these two measured series may thus help us get a
better estimate of the concept of hours worked and the model parameters.21 The observation (10)
then takes the form
⎡
20

⎤

⎡

⎤

⎡

⎤⎡

⎤

⎡

⎤

d12 ⎥ ⎢ k̂t ⎥ ⎢ e1t ⎥
⎢ hours1t ⎥ ⎢ 1 ⎥ ˆ
⎢ d11
⎣
⎦ = ⎣ ⎦ lt + et = ⎣
⎦⎣
⎦+⎣
⎦.
λ
hours2t
λd11 λd12
at
e2t

See, e.g., Altuğ (1989), McGrattan (1994), Hall (1996), McGrattan, Rogerson and Wright (1997), and Ireland
(2004).
21
In the same spirit, Prescott (1986) used these two indicators of hours worked to calibrate the labor elasticity of
output in his RBC model.

16

All indicators of hours are thus assumed to have one common factor, ˆlt , on which they “load” with
a particular weight. We typically normalize one of the loading coeﬃcients to 1 so as to normalize
the scale of the fluctuations in the latent variable ˆlt to be of the same order of magnitude as the
respective indicator, but leave the other loading coeﬃcient free to be estimated, in case the fluctuations in the second indicator are of a diﬀerent magnitude. By exploiting both the cross-sectional
and the time series characteristics of the data, and noting that the latent variables are assumed
to generate the common variation in both indicators, while the “measurement error” is specific to
each series, we can more easily estimate the latent variables here than in the standard treatment
of measurement error. The observation equation mentioned here only exploits information about
employment, but one could easily augment it with indicators of other variables.
Using information to estimate the state vector through an unknown link.

So far, we

have assumed that ΛS is a zero matrix. We have thus implicitly assumed, as do current estimations
of DSGE models, that the data series in XS,t , which do not measure any specific variable of the
vector Ft – here, hours worked – do not contain any additional information about the remaining
latent variables.22 However, if the theoretical model is true, all economic data series should at
least partly determined by the state vector. Data on stock prices, commodity prices, oil prices,
monetary aggregates and so on could thus be informative about the current state of the economy,
even though the model does not explicitly specify model such concepts. Exploiting their information
content should result in a more eﬃcient estimation. In our simple example, if oil prices (P oilt ) are
systematically related to the state vector of the model economy, we can augment our observation
equation as follows

⎡

⎢ hours1t
⎢
⎢ hours
2t
⎢
⎣
P oilt

⎤

⎡

d12
⎥ ⎢ d11
⎥ ⎢
⎥ = ⎢ λd
11 λd12
⎥ ⎢
⎦ ⎣
λS1 λS2

⎤

⎡

⎡

⎢ e1t
⎥
⎥ ⎢ k̂t ⎥ ⎢
⎥⎣
⎦+⎢
⎢ e2t
⎥
⎣
⎦ at
e3t

where the new parameters λS1 and λS2 are to be estimated.
22

⎤

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

Several studies, including Christiano (1988), Altuğ (1989) and McGrattan (1994), assume that the capital stock
is observed, so that it would be in Ft . They however assume that other variables are latent. McGrattan (1994),
for instance, using a more elaborate variant of the RBC model presented here assumes that output, investment,
government purchases, hours of work, the capital stock and various tax rates are observed, while housing starts and
past hours (weighted) are assumed to be latent.

17

2.3

Estimation Procedure

We now discuss the general procedure for the estimation of the parameters and the latent variables
(in zt , Zt , st ) of the structural model (1). This model results in an equilibrium characterized by
(3)—(5). We suppose that the observation equation takes the form (10), where we allow Xt to
potentially contain a rich set of macroeconomic indicators, and where Λ involves possibly few a
priori restrictions. Doing so obviously comes at a cost. The high-dimensionality of the problem
and the presence of unobserved variables considerably increase the computational burden of the
estimation. In particular, methods that rely on explicitly maximizing the likelihood function or the
posterior distribution appear impractical (see Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005)).
To circumvent this problem, we consider a variant of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithm.23 There are two key general features of these simulation-based techniques that help
us in the present context. First, rather than working with the likelihood or posterior directly,
these methods approximate the likelihood with empirical densities, thus avoiding gradient methods.
Second, by exploiting the Cliﬀord-Hammersley theorem, these methods sample iteratively from a
complete set of conditional densities, rather than from the joint density of the parameters and the
latent variables. This is particularly useful when the likelihood is not known in closed form, as it is
the case in our application. Moreover, by judiciously choosing the break up of the joint likelihood
or posterior distribution into the set of conditional densities, the algorithm deals eﬀectively with
the high dimensionality of the estimation problem.
Like in existing Bayesian implementations of the MCMC algorithm, the structural parameters
of equation (1) are drawn using a Metropolis step, since their distribution conditional on the
unobservable state variables and the parameters of equations (3)—(4) are not known in closed form.
The unobservable states are drawn using Carter and Kohn (1994) forward-backward algorithm.
The remaining parameters are drawn directly from their known conditional distributions. The
precise description of the algorithm is provided in Appendix A.
23
See Johannes and Polson (2004) for a survey of these methods and Geweke (1999). Recent applications to the
estimation of DSGE models include DeJong, Ingram and Whiteman (2000), Schorfheide (2000), Otrok (2001), Smets
and Wouters (2003, 2004), Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramírez (2004), Justiniano and Preston (2004), and
Justiniano and Primiceri (2006).

18

3

Application: Estimating a DSGE Model

3.1

Model

We now apply the data-rich environment just described to a state-of-the-art DSGE model based on
microeconomic foundations. The model that we consider is taken from Smets and Wouters (2004).
It builds on the canonical RBC model presented in the previous section, as well as Rotemberg and
Woodford (1997), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and others, by adding various frictions
and allowing for nine diﬀerent types of exogenous disturbances. The canonical RBC model can be
viewed as a special case of the Smets and Wouters (2004) model in the absence of frictions and of
shocks, except for the total factor productivity shock. The Smets and Wouters model has received
much attention recently, in part because of its success in fitting actual data, both in the U.S. and
in the Euro area (see Smets and Wouters, 2003, 2004). As Smets and Wouters (2004) report, this
micro-based model performs also surprisingly well in terms of out-of-sample predictions, in some
cases outperforming standard VAR and Bayesian VAR models.
A derivation of the non-linear model from first principles can be found in Smets and Wouters
(2004). Here, we merely summarize the important log-linearized equilibrium conditions of the
model. The model involves optimizing households that consume goods and services, supply specialized labor on a monopolistically competitive labor market, rent capital services to firms, and
decide how much capital to accumulate. Firms choose the desired level of labor and capital inputs,
and supply diﬀerentiated products on a monopolistically competitive goods market. Prices and
wages are re-optimized at random intervals as in the Calvo (1983) model. When they are not reoptimized, prices and wages are partially indexed to past inflation rates. While Smets and Wouters
(2004) assume an exogenously moving inflation target, so as to allow in a crude way for changes in
the monetary policy rule and in average inflation over the 1957 - 2002 period, we do not consider
such time-varying target, as we estimate the model using data from 1982 to 2002.
More precisely, the model assumes that there exists a continuum of households who derive
utility from consumption and leisure. The utility function is non separable in consumption and
leisure as in King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988) and Basu and Kimball (2000), to allow for a steady
state growth path driven by labor-augmenting technological progress, and involves consumption in

19

excess of an external, time-varying habit stock. While households may be heterogenous regarding
their wage profile and hours worked, there exists a complete set of state-contingent securities
which allows households to pool their risks, so that they all make the same consumption and
investment decisions. The Euler equation for optimal consumption decisions log-linearized around
the deterministic steady state with constant growth and zero inflation is given by

Ct =

h
1
σc − 1
Ct−1 +
Et Ct+1 +
(Lt − Et Lt+1 )
1+h
1+h
σ c (1 + λw ) (1 + h)
(1 − h)
−
(it − Et π t+1 ) + εbt
(1 + h) σ c

(22)

where Ct and Lt represent percent deviations of consumption and hours worked from their respective
steady state, it denotes deviations of the quarterly nominal interest rate from its steady-state level,
and π t is quarterly inflation. The parameter h ∈ (0, 1) measures the degree of habit formation and
σ c > 0 indicates the curvature of the utility function with respect to consumption, and (1 + λw )
is the steady-state markup of the real wage due to market power on the labor market. In the
absence of habit formation, (22) states that consumption depends negatively on the ex-ante real
interest rate with a coeﬃcient σ −1
c (corresponding to the elasticity of intertemporal substitution)
and positively on expected future consumption. When h > 0, current consumption is also higher
the higher past consumption. When σ c > 1, hours worked and consumption are complementary.24
Finally the exogenous disturbance εbt is a preference shocks that aﬀects the entire utility function
and that is assumed to follow and AR(1) process with degree of serial correlation ρb .
On the labor market, households are assumed to re-optimize their wages given the demand for
their labor services, with a probability 1 − ξ w . When choosing their optimal wage they take into
account the probability that wages will not be re-optimized for some periods. Whenever they cannot
re-optimize their wages, they index them to lagged inflation with a degree of indexation γ w ∈ (0, 1) .
Optimal wage setting by households results in the following aggregate linearized equation for the
24

See Basu and Kimball (2000) for details.

20

real wage

wt =

β
1
β
1 + βγ w
γ
Et wt+1 +
wt−1 +
Et π t+1 −
π t + w π t−1
1+β
1+β
1+β
1+β
1+β
∙
¸
λw (1 − βξ w ) (1 − ξ w )
σc
L
−
(Ct − hCt−1 ) + εt + ηw
wt − σ L Lt −
t
(1 + β) (λw + (1 + λw ) σ L ) ξ w
1−h

(23)

where wt is the percent deviation of the real wage from the steady state path, εL
t is a shock to
the disutility of labor, which follows an AR(1) process with degree of serial correlation ρL , and η w
t
is an iid shock to the wage mark-up. The parameter β ∈ (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor,
σ −1
L > 0 is the elasticity of work eﬀort with respect to the real wage. The term in square brackets
corresponds to the gap between the actual real wage and the real wage that would prevail in the
case of flexible prices and flexible wages. A positive gap tends to reduce the actual real wage, and
the eﬀect is stronger the smaller the degree of wage rigidity, ξ w , the lower demand elasticity for
specialized labor, (1 + λw ) /λw , and the higher the elasticity of labor supply with respect to the
real wage, σ −1
L .
Households choose the capital stock which they rent to firms. To increase the supply of capital
services, they can either invest in future capital, or increase the utilization rate of installed capital.
Investment in capital takes one period to be installed and involves adjustment costs which assumed
to be function of the change in investment, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005). As in
Greenwood, Hercowitz and Krusell (1998) and Fisher (2002), the relative eﬃciency of investment
goods is also assumed to be aﬀected by an exogenous shock εIt which follows an AR(1) process with
degree of serial correlation ρI . The log-linearized Euler equation for optimal investment is given by

It =

¢
1
β
1/ϕ ¡
It−1 +
Et It+1 +
Qt + εIt
1+β
1+β
1+β

(24)

where It denotes real investment and Q is the real value of capital, in percent deviations from
steady state, and ϕ is a measure of adjustment costs. The real value of capital follows in turn

Qt = − (it − Et π t+1 ) +

1−τ
r̄k
k
E
Q
+
Et rt+1
+ ηQ
t
t+1
t ,
1 − τ + r̄k
1 − τ + r̄k

(25)

so that the real value of capital relates negatively on the ex-ante real rate of interest, and positively
21

on the expected future real value of capital and the expected future rental rate of capital rtk .
The mean rental rate of capital r̄k and the depreciation rate of capital, τ , are assumed to satisfy
¡
¢
β = 1/ 1 − τ + r̄k . The exogenous shock η Q
t , assumed to be iid, is meant as a shortcut for changes

in the external finance premium. The capital accumulation equation then involves both the flow of
investment, and its relative eﬃciency
Kt = (1 − τ ) Kt−1 + τ It−1 + τ εIt−1 .

(26)

There is a continuum of firms that hire aggregates of labor and capital (adjusted for eﬀective
utilization) as inputs, combine them using a Cobb-Douglas production function with constant returns to scale, and a capital share α ∈ (0, 1) , and supply a diﬀerentiated intermediate good on a
monopolistically competitive market. In producing their goods, all intermediate firms face a fix
cost and a common stationary technology shock, εat , assumed to be AR(1) with degree of serial correlation ρa , and labor augmenting technological progress growing at a constant rate. Intermediate
goods are then aggregated into a single final good used for consumption or investment. Minimizing
the firms’ cost of production results in the linearized demand for labor
Lt = −wt + (1 + ψ) rtk + Kt−1 .

(27)

This implies that for a given stock of capital, the labor demand depends negatively on the real
wage and positively on the capital stock and the rental rate of capital, where ψ > 0 is the inverse
of the elasticity of the capital utilization cost function.
Similarly to households on the labor market, firms are assumed to re-optimize their prices given
the demand for their goods, with a probability 1 − ξ p . When they cannot re-optimize their prices,
they index them to lagged inflation with a degree of indexation γ p ∈ (0, 1) . Optimal price setting
by firms results in the following aggregate linearized equation for inflation
¡
¢¡
¢
i
γp
1 − βξ p 1 − ξ p h k
β
¡
¢
πt =
Et π t+1 +
π t−1 +
αrt + (1 − α) wt − εat + η pt .
1 + βγ p
1 + βγ p
1 + βγ p ξ p

(28)

As in the canonical New Keynesian supply equation, actual inflation depends on expected future

22

inflation and on the marginal cost, here represented by the expression in brackets. The marginal
cost depends in turn on the real rental rate of capital, the real wage, the productivity shock. To the
extent that prices are indexed, current inflation is also aﬀected by lagged inflation. The exogenous
shock η pt is assumed to be iid and refers to exogenous fluctuations in the price mark-up.
The linearized goods market equilibrium condition can then be written as
k
k
Yt = (1 − τ ky − gy ) Ct + εG
t + τ ky It + r̄ ky ψrt
h
i
a
k
= φ εt + αKt−1 + αψrt + (1 − α) Lt

(29)
(30)

where ky is the steady-state capital-output ratio, gy is the steady-state government spendingoutput ratio, and φ is one plus the share of fixed cost in production, and ψ is again the inverse of
the elasticity of the capital utilization cost function. Government spending (in percent deviation
from steady state, times gy ), εG
t , is assumed to evolve exogenously and to follow and AR(1) process
with serial correlation ρG . While the first equation corresponds to the aggregate demand side for
output, the second equation results from aggregate production.25
The model is closed with a specification of an empirical monetary policy reaction function.
Here, we assume that monetary policy follows the generalized Taylor rule
it = (1 − ρ) [rπ0 π t + rπ1 π t−1 + ry0 Yt + ry1 Yt−1 ] + ρit−1 + η it

(31)

where η it is an iid monetary policy shock. The specification considered here diﬀers slightly from
the one in Smets and Wouters (2004): while we suppose that the central bank responds to actual
output fluctuations (in deviations from the steady-state trend), Smets and Wouters (2004) assume
that the central bank responds to deviations of output from the output that would obtain in the
case of flexible prices and flexible wages.26
The model is thus summarized by the ten equations (22)—(31). It involves ten endogenous
25

In the first equation, we corrected the equilibrium condition indicated in Smets and Wouters (2004), adding the
term r̄k ky ψrtk as in Onatski and Williams (2004).
26
Their “output gap” may be considered more appropriate as it corresponds to the welfare relevant output gap,
in the context of this model. It however diﬀers substantially from empirical measures of “output gap” or the CBO’s
measure. In addition, their measure of output gap requires the specification of a significantly larger model, as the
flexible-price, flexible-wage counterpart to the equations mentioned above need to be adjoined to the model, to
determine the flexible-price, flexible-wage level of output.

23

variables Yt , Ct , It , Lt , Kt , Qt , rtk , π t , wt , it , and nine exogenous disturbances, five of them autoQ w p i
L
I
correlated (εat , εbt , εG
t , εt , εt ) and four iid (η t , η t , η t , η t ). The system can then be written as in

(1), and can be solved using numerical techniques to obtain a solution of the form (3)—(4), where
zt is a vector of endogenous non-predetermined variables, Zt contains predetermined endogenous
variables as well as lagged exogenous variables, and εt is the vector of innovations to the 10 shocks.
In the estimation, we will use indicators of the following vector of variables of interest
Ft = [it , Yt , Ct , It , π t , wt , Lt ]0 .

This vector is related to the state vector
h
i0
L I Q p w i I
St = it−1 , Yt−1 , Ct−1 , It−1 , π t−1 , wt−1 , Kt−1 , εat , εbt , εG
t , εt , εt , η t , η t , η t , η t , εt−1
through (5)-(6). This state vector follows a law of motion of the form (4).

3.2
3.2.1

Implementation of the Estimation
Data

Smets and Wouters (2004) estimate their model using quarterly U.S. data starting in 1957. However,
given the evidence provided about the instability of interest rate rules of the form (31), especially
around the end of the 1970’s and early 1980’s (see, e.g., Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000), Boivin
(2005), Boivin and Giannoni (2006)), we estimate the model starting in 1982:1 and ending in 2002:3.
Our large data set contains 91 macroeconomic indicators.27 Details are provided in Appendix B.
Seven data series, included in a vector X1,t are however worth emphasizing as they are used to
normalize the seven concepts of the model included in the vector Ft . They are the series used by
Smets and Wouters (2004) for the estimation of their model. For each of these series, we normalize
the corresponding weights in Λ to 1. Output (Yt ) is normalized to real GDP. Consumption (Ct )
and investment (It ) are normalized respectively to personal consumption expenditures and fixed
27

These are indicators of real output, compensation and wages, employment and hours, consumption, investment,
interest rates, money, credit, prices, and some miscellaneous indicators.

24

private domestic investment.28 The labor input (Lt ) corresponds to hours worked per person.29
All preceding series are expressed in per capita terms by dividing with the population over the age
of 16. The real wage (wt ) is normalized with the hourly compensation for the nonfarm business
sector, divided by the GDP deflator. We express all these series in natural logs and remove a linear
trend, so that they are expressed in percentage deviations from the trend, consistently with the
model concepts. Inflation (π t ) is measured as the quarterly percentage change in the GDP deflator.
The nominal interest rate (it ) is the Federal funds rate. Both inflation and the interest rate are
demeaned, to be consistent with the model’s concepts.
Smets and Wouters (2004) assume that in steady-state, the above series are all growing at
the rate of labor-augmenting technological progress, and they estimate their model imposing the
common trend. This assumption is unfortunately rejected by the data (see Del Negro, Schorfheide,
Smets and Wouters, 2004). To circumvent this issue, we detrend all series before the model estimation, so that the model parameters are estimated on the basis of deviations from the steady
state.
3.2.2

Prior distributions of the parameters

As mentioned above, we estimate the DSGE model using Bayesian MCMC methods. We assume
the same prior distributions as in Smets and Wouters (2004). These priors are summarized in Table
1 and are discussed in more details in Smets and Wouters (2004). Six of the structural parameters
are calibrated, as they are diﬃcult to estimate from percent deviations from the steady state.
The discount rate β is set at 0.99, the quarterly depreciation rate τ is set at 0.025, the share of
consumption (1 − τ ky − gy ) and investment (τ ky ) are set at 0.65 and 0.17, which implicitly define
gy and ky . The capital-income share in the production function, α is set at 0.24. The parameter λw
is fixed at 0.5. One diﬀerence with respect to Smets and Wouters (2004) involves the parameters
of the policy rule which we assume takes the form of a generalized Taylor rule. The (long-run)
response of the (annualized) federal funds rate to (annualized) inflation is assumed to be normally
28
The nominal series for consumption and investment are deflated with the GDP deflator, as in Altig, Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Lindé (2003), and Smets and Wouters (2004).
29
As in Smets and Wouters (2004), average hours of the nonfarm business sector are multiplied with the civilian
employment to account for the limited coverage of the nonfarm business sector, compared to GDP.

25

distributed with a mean of 1.5 and a variance of 0.5, and the response to detrended output is
assumed to have a mean of 0.5 and variance of 0.2. The degree of inertia in monetary policy, or the
response to the lagged interest rate is beta distributed with a mean of 0.75 a standard deviation
of 1. Finally, fairly loose priors are assumed on the degree of measurement error. More details are
provided in Appendix A.
3.2.3

Alternative specification of the observation equation: Four cases

We now proceed with the model estimation. To assess the importance of measurement error
and of additional information, we consider four cases, each involving diﬀerent restrictions on the
observation equation (10), i.e., on the link between the model concepts and the data.
• Our first case, denoted Case SW corresponds to the standard estimation with a small set of
data series, assuming that there is no measurement error. This case eﬀectively attempts to
replicate the results of Smets and Wouters (2004).30 The seven key model variables included
in Ft are assumed to be perfectly observed, and only the associated time series mentioned
above – included in X1,t – are used in the estimation. In terms of our general notation, the
observation equation (10) reduces to X1,t = Ft = ΦSt .
As argued above, it is plausible that the indicators in X1,t measure only imperfectly the model
concepts. If this is true, the estimates of the model parameters and of the shocks should be distorted.
We thus consider three diﬀerent cases in which we allow the indicators collected in X1,t to include a
series-specific component (or measurement error) that is unrelated to the actual economic concept,
Ft . We however maintain throughout the assumption that the nominal interest rate is perfectly
observed.
• In our benchmark case with imperfect measurement, denoted Case A, we reestimate the
model with the same seven data series but allowing for “measurement error” (except for the
nominal interest rate). The observation equation is thus X1,t = Ft + e1,t = ΦSt + e1,t where
30

As mentioned above, our estimation diﬀers slighlty from the baseline case of Smets and Wouters (2004) for the
following reasons: We consider a slightly diﬀerent policy rule, we detrend the data before estimating the model
parameters instead of estimating a common trend (the growth rate of technology) with the rest of the model, we
assume that the inflation target is fixed, and we use a shorter sample.

26

the first element of e1,t is set equal to zero. The setup corresponds to the one in Sargent
(1989), where the restrictions of the dynamic model are used to estimate the latent variables
in Ft .
As discussed in Section 2, Case A is likely to be aﬀected by identification problems due to
the diﬃculty in disentangling the structural disturbances εt from the measurement errors e1,t , in
the face of a large number of shocks and measurement errors. Such problems can be addressed
by considering a larger data set which can more easily identify the latent variables of interest by
separating the series-specific components from the common factors, Ft . In the next cases, we thus
maintain the observation equation X1,t = Ft + e1,t , but append to it another observation equation
including additional indicators.
• In Case B, we add seven new indicators collected in a vector X2,t , which have a known link to
the variables in Ft . These additional indicators are selected on the grounds that they cannot
be a priori rejected as indicators of the variables of interest.31 The observation equation for
this second set of indicators is of the form X2,t = Λ2 Ft + e2,t , where each element of e2,t is
allowed to follow an AR(1) process. The matrix Λ2 , which we estimate, is restricted to have
as many nonzero elements per column as there are new indicators in X2,t of the corresponding
variable in Ft . It has however no more than one nonzero element per row as each indicator is
assumed to load on only one variable.
• Our final case, Case C, exploits the information from our entire data set in a flexible way. The
fourteen primary indicators contained in X1,t and X2,t remain linked to the model’s concepts
as in case B, but we augment the vector X2,t with eight additional indicators of inflation
which we link to the variable π t , as documented in Appendix B. In addition, we introduce in
X3,t information from all other indicators and assume that X3,t is related to the state vector
St in a nonstructural way, according to the observation equation X3,t = ΛS St + eS,t . The
elements of X3,t are the 25 principal components of all remaining data series listed in our
31

For consumption, the new indicator is real personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, for
investment we add real gross private domestic investment, for inflation we add the indicators based on the deflator for
personal consumption expenditures, the CPI, and the CPI less food and energy. For employment, we add the number
of employees in the nonfarm business sector, as based on the establishment survey, and the number of workers as
based on the household survey.

27

Appendix B. Each element of eS,t is assumed to follow an AR(1) process, and the loading
matrix ΛS is left unrestricted and is estimated.
The motivation for this last specification comes from the fact that if the theoretical model is
true, the data series in X3,t should be related at least in part to the state vector. These indicators
are publicly available. They are thus arguably part of the information set according to which
economic agents in the DSGE model base their decisions. If these indicators contain information
about the state of the economy that is not included in X1,t and X2,t , then exploiting this information
should help us obtain even more accurate estimates of the state of the economy and of the model
parameters.
In case A, we assume the “measurement error,” e1,t , to be serially uncorrelated, as this restrictions is necessary to identify the model parameters. Whenever we let e1,t to be serially correlated
in this case, we obtain estimated model parameters that are perfectly aligned with the prior distributions, suggesting that the data is uninformative, i.e., that the parameters are unidentified. As
conjectured in Section 2, this highlights the fact that for models with a large number of structural
shocks, and using a small set of observable variables, the extent to which measurement error can be
allowed is severely limited using standard techniques. For comparison with this standard approach
(case A), we assume that the measurement error in the primary indicators is also iid in cases B
and C (even though we can relax this assumption in these cases, and still be able to identify the
model parameters). We however allow the measurement errors of the secondary indicators (e2,t or
eS,t ) to be serially correlated. By restricting the indicator-specific error terms to be iid, we may
understate the magnitude of the series-specific component in the primary indicators X1,t . This
guarantees that the departures from the standard setups (cases SW and A) are relatively small.
Nonetheless, as we show below, even for such small departures there are important benefits from
exploiting information from a richer data set.

3.3

Empirical Results

We now describe the empirical results. We first provide evidence indicating that some of the seven
primary indicators contain a nontrivial amount of series-specific idiosyncrasies, so that estimation

28

allowing for it should be warranted. We next argue that estimating the model with a richer data
sets provides a number of benefits among which a more accurate estimate of the state of the model
economy.
3.3.1

Evidence of indicator-specific component (or “measurement error”)

According to the observation equation (10), each of the indicators can be decomposed into a “macroeconomic component,”ΛSt , which is informative about the latent macroeconomic concepts, and an
indicator-specific component (or “measurement error”), et .
Table 2 reports correlations between the indicators collected in X1,t , X2,t , and the corresponding
model concept. Looking at the seven primary indicators, X1,t , there is evidence of substantial
“measurement error” for the indicator of inflation. The correlation between the growth rate of
the GDP deflator and the estimate of inflation ranges between 0.73 and 0.86 depending on the
number of indicators used in the model estimation. For other indicators in X1,t , the extent of
“measurement error” appears small. Figure 3 plots the posterior distribution of these correlations,
in case A. Similar figures – not reported – are obtained for cases B and C. Clearly there is
considerable “measurement error” in the growth rate of the GDP deflator. But the figure shows
also that at any confidence level, the correlations are slightly lower than 1 for all indicators except
for the Federal funds rate which is assumed to be perfectly correlated with it .
The lower panel of Table 2 suggests that the additional indicators X2t provide relevant information for the model concepts: while their correlations with the corresponding model variables
are relatively low in case A, they increase when they are used in the estimation (cases B and C).
Interestingly, the PCE deflator provides a better indicator of the concept of inflation than the GDP
deflator, when judged on the basis of their correlation with the estimated concept of inflation, in
cases B and C.
Figures 4 and 5 report the estimated time series of the seven main endogenous variables for
each of the cases SW, A, B and C. In case SW, the estimated series correspond to the primary
indicators which are represented with solid lines. In the other cases, the model’s concepts except
for the short-term interest rate are estimated latent variables. Overall, these plots confirm the
results found in Table 2: the estimated latent variables and most corresponding primary indicators
29

display very similar patterns, but there are wide discrepancies between inflation and the growth
rate of the GDP deflator (Figure 5). These gaps, which reach in some quarters more than one
percentage point (in annualized inflation).can have very important implications for the assessment
of the inflation situation and for monetary policy actions. As we will see below, such diﬀerences
can also result in diﬀerent assessments about the sources of fluctuations in inflation.
One important diﬀerence between the growth rate of the GDP deflator and our estimated inflation series and is that the latter show more muted high-frequency fluctuations. In case A, estimated
inflation is smoother than the data, as iid measurement errors pick up part of the high frequency
fluctuations. In cases B and C, however, this occurs because the high-frequency fluctuations in the
growth rate of the GDP deflator have little correlation with those of other inflation indicators, as
we saw in Figure 2. While the quarterly growth rate of the GDP deflator and the CPI both display high-frequency fluctuations, some of these short-lived spikes do not occur at the same time in
both series, so that they are considered as indicator-specific components. Therefore the estimated
inflation, which in cases B and C corresponds to a common component of all inflation indicators,
does not involve such high frequency fluctuations. Interestingly, the estimated inflation series are
similar in cases B and C, suggesting case B includes an important part of the relevant information
contained in our entire data set, for the assessment of inflation.
3.3.2

Benefits of richer data sets

As we just argued, at least one indicator often used in the estimation of DSGE models contains
significant idiosyncratic fluctuations unrelated to the macroeconomic concepts which we attempt to
measure. Failing to account for such indicator-specific noise in model estimation could potentially
distort the estimates of all model parameters, of the model concepts, as well as of the shocks. It is
therefore important that we acknowledge indicator-specific fluctuations in estimating such models.
However even if one accounts for such “measurement error,” one still needs to choose how many
indicators to use in the model estimation. While we do not attempt to determine the optimal choice
of indicators, we now show how using multiple indicators can be valuable.

30

Precision of model concepts. Once we recognize that the indicators provide only imperfect
measurements of the model concepts, we become necessarily uncertain about the state of the economy in any given period. Table 3 reports measures of the uncertainty surrounding the main model
variables in cases A, B, and C. In particular, it reports for each variable, the average over time
of the standard deviation (taken at each date) of the estimated variable. The standard deviations
are based on the empirical distribution of the estimates generated by the estimation draws. For
cases B and C, we report the standard deviations relative to those of case A, so that numbers
below 1 indicated a reduction in uncertainty. When the model is estimated using only the seven
primary indicators, X1,t , (case A), the standard deviation in the estimate of (annualized) quarterly
inflation amounts to 0.50. However, when we append the second set of indicators X2,t (case B),
the uncertainty surrounding this concept drops by 9%. This reduction in uncertainty about actual
inflation is particularly valuable given the extent of “measurement errors” in its indicators.
The uncertainty surrounding the other variables is arguably less important given their small
“measurement error.” Nonetheless, using the second set of indicators X2,t in the model estimation
also reduces considerably the uncertainty surrounding the estimate of such concepts. The standard
deviation of real output, consumption and hours worked all fall respectively by 7%, 7%, and 24%
in case B.
In case C, as all indicators of our data set are used in a nonstructural way for the model
estimation, the uncertainty surrounding some of the estimated model concepts shrinks even further.
Most notably, the uncertainty about the estimate of inflation is in this case 35% smaller than that
of the case A. Figure 6 plots the estimated inflation rate in cases A, B, and C, together with the
5%-95% confidence bands. The latter bands become sensibly tighter as we more from case A to B
and C.
Forecasts. Conditional on the DSGE model and the observation equation being correctly specified, the model characterized by (3)—(5) and (10) provides the best possible forecasts of the macroeconomic concepts. Anyone convinced that the model is well specified should thus perform forecasts
using the model restrictions.
However, one may be skeptical about the model, and may thus be interested in forecasting

31

not the latent model concepts – which are model-dependent –, but rather the data releases of
the primary indicators X1,t . We thus compare the performance in forecasting these data releases
in cases A, B and C. In all cases, we use the model estimated over the entire sample to forecast
each indicator one quarter ahead, over the 1982:1-2003:2 period.32 Table 4 reports the root-meansquared error (RMSE) of the forecasts. For cases B and C, we report the RMSE relative to case A.
The last row provides an overall measure of forecast error: the log determinant of the forecast-error
covariance matrix. The table shows a substantial drop in the RMSE of the forecasts from case A to
case B for the indicators of real consumption, investment and the growth rate of the GDP deflator.
For instance, the RMSE in forecasting actual releases of GDP deflator inflation drops by 5% when
we include the indicators in X2,t for the model estimation.33 As we include all data series in the
model estimation (case C), the RMSE for inflation falls another 5%.
One may find it surprising that cases B and C provide such improvements in forecasting even
for releases of the GDP deflator. In fact, the estimated inflation series in cases B and C are not
designed to explain the GDP deflator, but the behavior of multiple indicators of inflation. It is
akin to the common component to all indicators of inflation. As a result, even if the model in case
C is able to forecast accurately true inflation, there is no guarantee that it ought to forecast the
growth rate of the GDP deflator, given that a large fraction of the fluctuations in this series are
estimated to be “measurement error” (see Table 2). More generally, one may be surprised by the
fact that cases B and C can forecast so well the seven primary indicators. In fact, while case A is
designed to explain the fluctuations in these seven primary indicators, cases B and C are designed
to explain fluctuations in a larger set of indicators.
One explanation for the relatively good performance of cases B and C is the fact that by
exploiting information from a large number of indicators in the model estimation, these cases are
able to estimate more precisely the state of the economy, and thus the key latent variables, as
shown in the previous section. More precision in estimating these variables implies then more
precise forecasts of the indicators.
32

Because of the time involved in the estimation of each case and the relatively short sample, we did not re-estimate
the model at each period. The end of sample is in fact 2003:2 minus the forecasting horizon considered.
33
Note that the improved forecasting performance in case B is not due a more flexible measurement error process.
In fact, we assume that the “measurement error” of the primary indicators X1,t is iid for all three cases.

32

As argued, once one recognizes the fact that indicators are measured with error, or contain
indicator-specific components unrelated to the macroeconomic variables, it may be very valuable
to exploit the information in additional indicators. Such information can help assess the state of
the economy and variables of interest more precisely. Such additional information may even be
useful in forecasting more accurately actual data releases. Given the fact that we found inflation
indicators to be noisy, and given the prominent role that inflation plays in policy analysis, it is
crucial to obtain an accurate and precise assessment of inflation. Overall these results support our
conjecture that there is a scope to exploit more information in the estimation of DSGE models.
3.3.3

Implications for estimates of structural parameters

We argued that when we estimate the model with a larger set of indicators, we obtain more precise
estimates of the model variables. An important remaining question is whether these alternative
empirical models lead to diﬀerent conclusions about the structure of the economy and the source
of business cycles.
Table 1 reports the parameter estimates (the median of the posterior distribution) together with
the estimated standard errors. Several parameter estimates are stable across all cases considered.
However, as we depart from the case SW and we allow for imperfect measurement using the same
indicators, there are some notable changes: in case A, the model calls for slightly more habit per¡ ¢
¡ ¢
sistence (h), price stickiness ξ p , wage indexation (γ w ) and inflation indexation γ p . In contrast,

when we include additional indicators in the model estimation (cases B and C), the parameter
estimates indicate much less habit persistence. In addition, the elasticity of real consumption to
changes in the real interest rate implied by the consumption Euler equation – which we call the
pseudo-EIS – increases from 0.099 in case A to 0.167 in case B.34 Hence, as we use multiple indica-

tors, we find that consumption becomes more sensitive to fluctuations in the real interest rate. The
rigidity in price re-optimization, ξ p , falls slightly so that that the elasticity of current inflation to
marginal costs in (28) reaches 0.012 and 0.018 is cases B and C, compared to only 0.007 in case A.
¡ ¢
Importantly, the degree of inflation indexing γ p , which is critical for the eﬀect of various shocks

34
In the presence of habit persistence, there is no natural elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) in consump1−h
tion. We thus refer to (1+h)σ
as a pseudo-EIS.
c

33

on inflation and its persistence, falls considerably when we use multiple indicators: it reaches 0.36
in case C compared to 0.72 in case A.
3.3.4

Sources of business cycle fluctuations

Another important diﬀerence among cases A, B, C and the benchmark case SW relates to the
estimated variances of the exogenous shocks. Overall, these variances tend to be much smaller
when “measurement error” is allowed for in the model estimation, because part of the fluctuations
in the individual series is explained by an indicator-specific component. For most shocks, the
estimated variances fall as we move from case SW to case C (except for the labor supply shock
which is found to be most important in case A). This can be seen further in Figures 7 and 8 which
plot the estimated time series for the state variables such as the capital stock and the exogenous
shocks. As the figures show, the estimated shocks display generally much smaller and smoother
fluctuations when the indicators-specific components are allowed for, i.e., in cases A, B, C. The
fluctuations in the exogenous shocks appear also the smallest in the case C, when all data series
are used in the estimation.
An appropriate estimate of the shocks is crucial to assess the state of the economy at any given
date, and for conducting, e.g., monetary policy. But the figures reveal quite diﬀerent histories of the
shocks depending on the case considered. Changes in these variances across the cases considered
yield diﬀerent conclusions about the drivers of business cycle fluctuations. When the indicators
used are assumed to be measuring the theoretical concepts perfectly (case SW), the nine shocks
considered play a role in explaining the behavior of seven primary indicators. While the specification
of Smets and Wouters (2004) requires all of these shocks to explain the fluctuations in the data,
allowing for “measurement error” suggests that some shocks may be less important than previously
thought.
For instance, in the benchmark case SW, price markup shocks (or cost-push shocks, η pt ) account
for 86% of the inflation fluctuations at the 1-quarter horizon and are still responsible for 52% of
inflation fluctuations after 3 years (Table 5). However, their role is sensibly reduced in case C: such
shocks explain only 56% of inflation fluctuations at the 1-quarter horizon and 23% after 3 years.
Instead, total factor productivity shocks (εat ) become an important source of inflation fluctuations
34

in case C. They account for 21% of inflation fluctuations after 1 quarter (compared to only 8% in
case SW) and for 52% of inflation fluctuations after 3 years (compared to 30% in case SW).

4

Conclusion

Recent DSGE models have achieved important successes in terms of their ability to fit the data
and to forecast. As a result, such models have become relevant for policy analysis. Despite the
sophistication of these models, existing empirical applications have maintained one important assumption: that a small number of data series is suﬃcient to estimate the model. This is however
at odds both with the fact that market participants and central banks monitor a large number
of data series to assess the state of the economy, and with the growing evidence from empirical
factor models according to which a large set of macroeconomic variables may in fact be needed to
characterize the evolution of the economy.
In this paper, we have proposed a general framework that exploits the information from a datarich environment for the estimation of a general class of DSGE models. The fact that observed
indicators may constitute imperfect measures of economic concepts relevant in the model provides
a scope for using additional indicators in the empirical model. A particularly attractive feature
of this framework, which we believe is crucial for policy considerations, is that it facilitates the
interpretation of observed economic developments through the use of a structural model. It can
also provide forecasts conditional on a variety of scenarios about structural disturbances, and on
alternative policies.35 Such advantages of the proposed framework cannot be achieved with existing
more reduced-form factor models.
We have used this framework to estimate a state-of-the-art DSGE model that has been recognized for its empirical success. Our results suggest that much more accurate estimates of the
model’s concepts, in particular of inflation, of the state variables and of the exogenous shocks can
be obtained by exploiting more information in the model estimation. A proper estimation of the
35

Recall that while the empirical framework estimates both structural parameters (i.e., the policy-invariant parameters of the theoretical model), and non-structural parameters (e.g. the loading coeﬃcients), it is well suited to
perform counterfactual experiments on the model’s concepts, for all model parameters and theoretical concepts can
be estimated under historical policy, as in standard DSGE models. The framework may however not be adequate to
generate counterfactual evolution of indicators related in a non structural way to the model’s concepts.

35

state of the economy appears in turn to be very useful to improve forecasts of important macroeconomic variables, and even popular data releases such as the growth rate of the GDP deflator.
Moreover, we showed that the inference drawn from the estimated model depends crucially on
whether additional information is exploited or not. In particular, by comparing the standard implementation of the estimation using few indicators with our preferred specifications involving a
larger set of indicators, we reach diﬀerent conclusions about the kind of shocks that drive business
cycles fluctuations.
The results in this paper open the way to many interesting avenues for future research, which
we are pursuing. First, while the results reported provide an important scope for using more
information in the estimation of DSGE models, more work needs to be done to determine how to
optimally choose the indicators to include in the empirical model. We have proposed a couple of
specifications (case B and C) that are successful in providing an accurate description of the state of
the economy, and for forecasting. But other specifications within the general framework proposed
here may perform even better.
Second, a real-time implementation of the proposed empirical framework should be of interest
to central bankers, to the extent that it would allow them to process a large amount of information
in real-time, assess the state of the economy systematically through the lenses of fully-specified
structural model, and to provide forecasts, conditional on a variety of scenarios.
Finally, many researchers have recently given attention to the development of optimal policy
rules or optimal target criteria for the conduct of monetary policy, in the context of DSGE models.
Such optimal rules often involve forecasts of important macroeconomic variables over the next few
quarters.36 Improved forecasts obtained through better estimates of the state of the economy,
using a rich data set, should thus be a key ingredient for such optimal target criteria. This may
help making the tools available for the conduct of optimal monetary policy more attractive to
policymakers by incorporating their concern for the developments in a large number of data series.
36

Giannoni and Woodford (2003, 2004), for instance, characterize such optimal policy rules and target criteria for
simpler models than the one presented here. They show that the most important forecasts needed as inputs for the
implementation of monetary policy are over short horizons.

36

References
[1] Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laséen, Jesper Lindé, and Mattias Vilani (2005), “Bayesian Estimation
of an Open-Economy DSGE Model with Incomplete Pass-Through,” manuscript, Sveriges
Riksbank.
[2] Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Lindé (2003), “Technology Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations,” manuscript, Northwestern University.
[3] Altuğ, Sumru (1989), “Time-to-Build and Aggregate Fluctuations: Some New Evidence,”
International Economic Review 30(4): 889-920.
[4] Anderson, Evan, Lars P. Hansen, Ellen R. McGrattan, and Thomas J. Sargent (1996), “Mechanics of Forming and Estimating Dynamic Linear Economies,” in H. Amman, D. Kendrick,
and J. Rust, ed. Handbook of Computational Economics, North-Holland.
[5] Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball (2000), “Long-Run Labor Supply and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution for Consumption,” manuscript, University of Michigan.
[6] Bauwens, Luc, Michel Lubrano and Jean-Francois Richard (1999), Bayesian Inference in Dynamic Econometric Models, Oxford University Press.
[7] Bernanke, Ben (2004), “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the
Bond Market Association Annual Meeting, New York, April 23.
[8] Bernanke, Ben, and Jean Boivin (2003), “Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50(3): 525-546.
[9] Bernanke, Ben, Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz (2005), “Measuring Monetary Policy: A Factor Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,”Quarterly Journal of Economics
120(1): 387-422.
[10] Bils, Mark (2004), “Measuring the Growth from Better and Better Goods,” NBER wp 10606.
[11] Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Charles M. Kahn (1980), “The Solution of Linear Diﬀerence
Models under Rational Expectations,” Econometrica 48(5): 1305-1311.
37

[12] Boivin, Jean (2005), “Has U.S. Monetary Policy Changed? Evidence from Drifting Coeﬃcients
and Real-Time Data,” NBER working paper 11314. (Forthcoming in Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking).
[13] Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006), “Has Monetary Policy Become More Eﬀective?,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3): 445-462.
[14] Boivin, Jean, and Serena Ng (2003), “Are More Data Always Better for Factor Analysis?”
NBER wp 9829 (forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics).
[15] Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 12(3): 383-398.
[16] Carter, Christopher K., and Robert Kohn (1994), “On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models,” Biometrika 81(3): 541-53.
[17] Christiano, Lawrence J. (1988), “Why Does Inventory Investment Fluctuate So Much?” Journal of Monetary Economics 21: 247-280.
[18] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113(1):
1-45.
[19] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000), “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(1):
147-80.
[20] DeJong, David N., Beth F. Ingram, and Charles H. Whiteman (2000), “A Bayesian Approach
to Dynamic Macroeconomics,” Journal of Econometrics 98: 203-223.
[21] Del Negro, Marco, Frank Schorfheide, Frank Smets, and Raf Wouters (2004), “On the Fit and
Forecasting Performance of New-Keynesian Models,” FRB of Atlanta, manuscript.
[22] Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez (2004), “Estimating Nonlinear Dynamic Equilibrium Economies: A Likelihood Approach,” manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
38

[23] Fisher, Jonas D. M. (2002), “Technology Shocks Matter,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
working paper no. 14.
[24] Forni, Mario, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi, and Lucrezia Reichlin (2000), “The Generalized
Dynamic Factor Model: Identification and Estimation,” Review of Economics and Statistics
82(4): 540—554.
[25] Forni, Mario, Marco Lippi and Lucrezia Reichlin (2003), “Opening the Black Box: Structural
Factor Models versus Structural VARs,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 4133.
[26] Geweke, John F. (1999), “Using Simulation Methods for Bayesian Econometric Models: Inference, Development and Communication”, Econometric Reviews 18: 1-126.
[27] Giannone, Domenico, Lucrezia Reichlin, and Luca Sala (2002), “Tracking Greenspan: Systematic and Unsystematic Monetary Policy Revisited,” CEPR Discussion Paper 3550.
[28] Giannone, Domenico, Lucrezia Reichlin, and Luca Sala (2004), “Monetary Policy in Real
Time,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 161-200.
[29] Giannoni, Marc P., and Michael Woodford (2003), “How Forward-Looking is Optimal Monetary Policy?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35(6), part 2: 1425-1469.
[30] Giannoni, Marc P., and Michael Woodford (2004), “Optimal Inflation Targeting Rules,” in Ben
S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford (eds.), The Inflation-Targeting Debate, p. 93-162, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
[31] Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercovitz, and Per Krusell (1998), “Long-Run Implications of
Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87(3): 342-362.
[32] Hall, George J. (1996), “Overtime, Eﬀort, and the Propagation of Business Cycle Shocks,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 38: 139-160.
[33] Hamilton, James D. (1994), Time Series Analysis, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
[34] Hausman, Jerry (2003), “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the CPI”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(1): 23-44.
39

[35] Hausman, Jerry, and Ephraim Leibtag (2004), “CPI Bias from Supercenters: Does the BLS
Know that Wal-Mart Exists?” NBER wp 10712.
[36] Ingram, Beth F., Narayana R. Kocherlakota, and N. E. Savin (1994), “Explaining Business
Cycles: A Multiple-Shock Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics 34(3): 415-428.
[37] Ireland, Peter (2004), “A Method for Taking Models to the Data,” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 28(6): 1205-1226.
[38] Jacquier, Eric, Michael Johannes, and Nicholas Polson (2004), “MCMC Maximum Likelihood
For Latent State Models,” manuscript, Columbia University, January.
[39] Johannes, Michael, and Nicholas Polson (2004), “MCMC Methods for Continuous-Time Financial Econometrics,” manuscript, Columbia University, September.
[40] Juillard, Michel, Philippe Karam, Douglas Laxton, and Paolo Pesenti (2005), “Welfare-Based
Monetary Policy Rules in an Estimated DSGE Model of the US Economy,” manuscript, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
[41] Justiniano, Alejandro, and Bruce Preston (2004), “Small Open Economy DSGE Models: Specification, Estimation and Model Fit,” manuscript, Columbia University, September.
[42] Justiniano, Alejandro, and Giorgio Primiceri (2006), “The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” NBER working paper no. 12022.
[43] Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles R. Nelson (1999), State-Space Models with Regime Switching,
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
[44] King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio T. Rebelo (1988), “Production, Growth and
Business Cycles, I: The Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics 21(2/3):
195—232.
[45] King, Robert G., and Mark W. Watson (1998), “The Solution of Singular Linear Diﬀerence
Systems under Rational Expectations,” International Economic Review 39(4): 1015-1026.

40

[46] Klein, Paul (1997), “Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a System of Linear Expectational Diﬀerence Equations,” discussion paper, IIES, Stockholm University.
[47] Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1982), “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica 50(6): 1345-1370.
[48] Leeper, Eric M., and Christopher A. Sims (1994), “Toward a Modern Macroeconomic Model
Usable for Policy Analysis,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1994, 81-117.
[49] Levin, Andrew T., Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah Williams (2005), “Monetary
Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 20: 229-287.
[50] McCallum, Bennett T. (1998), “Solutions to Linear Rational Expectations Models: A Compact
Exposition,” Economics Letters 61: 143-147.
[51] McGrattan, Ellen R. (1994), “The Macroeconomics Eﬀects of Distortionary Taxes,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 33: 573-600.
[52] McGrattan, Ellen R., Richard Rogerson and Randall Wright (1997), “An Equilibrium Model
of the Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal Policy,” International Economic
Review 38: 267-290.
[53] Onatski, Alexei, and Noah Williams (2004), “Empirical and Policy Performance of a ForwardLooking Monetary Model,” manuscript, Columbia University and Princeton University.
[54] Otrok, Christopher (2001), “On Measuring the Welfare Cost of Business Cycles,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 47(1): 61-92.
[55] Pearlman, Joseph G., David Currie, and Paul Levine (1986), “Rational Expectations Models
with Partial Information,” Economic Modelling 3: 90-105.
[56] Prescott, Edward C. (1986), “Theory Ahead of Business-Cycle Measurement,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25: 11-44.

41

[57] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 297-346.
[58] Sargent, Thomas J. (1989), “Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,”
Journal of Political Economy 97: 251-287.
[59] Schorfheide, Frank (2000), “Loss function-based evaluation of DSGE models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 15(6): 645-670.
[60] Sims, Christopher A. (1992), “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Eﬀects
of Monetary Policy,” European Economic Review 36(5): 975-1000.
[61] Sims, Christopher A. (2000), “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models,” manuscript,
Princeton University.
[62] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003), “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General Equilibrium Model for the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1(5), 11231175.
[63] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2004), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach,” manuscript, April.
[64] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1999), “Forecasting Inflation,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 44: 293-335.
[65] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2002), “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diﬀusion
Indexes,” Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 20(2): 147-162.
[66] Svensson, Lars E. O., and Michael Woodford (2003), “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 50: 691—720.
[67] Svensson, Lars E. O., and Michael Woodford (2004), “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy
under Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28: 661—690.

42

A

Appendix: MCMC Algorithm

This appendix describes our implementation of the MCMC algorithm used for the estimation of all
cases described in Section 3. The general class of rational expectation models we consider can be
represented as follows:
⎡

⎤

⎡

⎤

⎢ zt+1 ⎥
⎢ zt ⎥
AEt ⎣
⎦ = B⎣
⎦ + Cst
Zt+1
Zt
st = M st−1 + εt

(32)
(33)

and the general form of the solution is:

zt = DSt

(34)

St = GSt−1 + Hεt ,

(35)

where St ≡ [Zt0 , s0t ]0 is the state vector, and the matrices D, G, and H are non-linear functions
of the parameters in matrices A, B, C and M , obtained through numerical solutions techniques.
As explained in the text, the variables of interest, collected in the vector Ft constitute a linear
combination of the state variables
Ft = ΦSt ,
and the matrix Φ depends on the model parameters and the selection of variables in Ft . The
measurement equation is given by
Xt = ΛSt + et ,
where

and

⎤

⎡

⎢ ΛF Φ ⎥
Λ≡⎣
⎦.
ΛS
et = Ψet−1 + vt .

43

(36)

Equations (35) and (36) form a state-space representation of the solution of the model. The vectors
εt and vt are assumed to be normally distributed with mean zero and variance Q and R respectively.
The matrices R and Ψ are diagonal.
The goal is to estimate jointly the structural parameters of the theoretical model ΘM =
{A, B, C, M, Q} and the measurement equation parameters Λ, Ψ and R. Let Υ = {Λ, Ψ, R},
Θ = {ΘM , Υ} and X̃T = (X1 , X2 , ..., XT ). Our problem consists of characterizing the marginal
posterior distribution of Θ. Given the high dimensionality of the problem and the need to integrate out the unobservable states, directly maximizing the posterior distribution is diﬃcult and
impractical for some models such as the one that we consider in this paper. Instead, the estimation approach that we consider provides an empirical approximation to this joint density. By
judiciously breaking up this posterior distribution into the product of conditional densities, and
sampling iteratively from the complete set of conditional densities, it eﬀectively deals with the
high dimensionality of the problem. As has been shown in the MCMC literature, the empirical
distribution of the parameters resulting from the algorithm that we describe below converges to
the joint posterior distribution of Θ.
More specifically, provided with an initial value of the parameters, Θ(0) , the algorithm proceeds
³
´
³
´
by drawing iteratively from p Υ|ΘM , X̃T and p ΘM |Υ, X̃T . We now provide more details on
each step of the algorithm.

A.1

´
³
(g−1)
Step 1: Drawing from the conditional distribution p Υ(g) |ΘM , X̃T

³
´
To draw from p Υ|ΘM , X̃T , we exploit the fact that conditional on S̃T , Υ represents the para-

meters in a set of linear equations, the posterior distribution of which is known for standard prior
´
³
(g) (g−1)
(g)
(g−1)
distributions. To do so, we draw separately from p(S̃T |ΘM , X̃T ) and p Υ(g) |S̃T , ΘM , X̃T .
A.1.1

(g)

(g−1)

Step 1a: Drawing from the conditional distribution p(S̃T |ΘM

, X̃T )

We use the forward-backward algorithm of Carter and Kohn (1994). As in Kim and Nelson (1999,
p. 191), the conditional distribution of the whole history of factors can be expressed as the product

44

of conditional distributions of factors at each date t as follows:
−1 ³
³
´
³
´ TY
´
p S̃T |Θ, X̃T = p ST |Θ, X̃T
p St |St+1 , Θ, X̃T .
t=1

³
´
This relies on the Markov property of St , which implies that p St |St+1 , St+2 , ..., ST , Θ, X̃T =
´
³
p St |St+1 , Θ, X̃T .
Because the state-space model (35)—(36) is linear and Gaussian, we have

ST |Θ, X̃T
St |St+1 , Θ, X̃T

¢
¡
∼ N ST |T , PT |T
¢
¡
∼ N St|t,St+1 , Pt|t,St+1 ,

where

ST |T
PT |T
St|t,St+1
Pt|t,St+1

³
´
= E ST |Θ, X̃T

(37)

= Cov(ST |Θ, X̃T )
³
´
= E St |St+1 , Θ, X̃T
´
³
= Cov St |St+1 , Θ, X̃T ,

and where the notation St|t refers to the expectation of St conditional on information dated t or
earlier. To obtain these, we first calculate St|t and Pt|t , t = 1, 2, ..., T , by Kalman filter, conditional
on Θ and the data through period t, X̃t , with starting values of zeros for the factors and the identity
matrix for the covariance matrix (Hamilton, 1994). The last iteration of the filter yields ST |T and
PT |T , which together with the first line of (37) allows us to draw a value for ST . Treating this drawn
value as extra information, we can move “backwards in time” through the sample, using the Kalman
filter to obtain updated values of ST −1|T −1,ST and PT −1|T −1,ST ; drawing a value of ST −1 using the
third line of (37); and continuing in similar manner to draw values for St , t = T − 2, T − 3, ...1.37
37
The Kalman filter is implemented to handle the serial correlation in et . In particular, in the Kalman filter
iterations, the observation equation is rearranged as:

Xt∗ = (ΛF − ΨΛ) St−1 + Λut + vt
with Xt∗ = Xt − ΨXt−1 .

45

A.1.2

´
³
(g)
(g−1)
Step 1b: Drawing from the conditional distribution p Υ(g) |S̃T , ΘM , X̃T

Conditional on the observed data and the estimated factors from the previous iteration, a new
iteration is begun by drawing a new value of the parameters. With known factors, (36) amounts to
a set of regressions with autoregressive errors. We can thus apply the algorithm proposed by Chib
(1993).
This conditional model is non-linear in the parameters. However, since conditional on Λ or
Ψ, the model is linear, we can characterize this distribution through a complete set of conditional
distributions that are linear in the parameters. More precisely, we assume that a priori Λ and R
are independent of Ψ. Conditional on Ψ and since R is diagonal, we can apply OLS equation by
∗ = X
∗
equation to obtain Λ̂k and v̂k . We define Xk,t
k,t − Ψkk Xk,t−1 and Sk,t = St − Ψkk St−1 , set

Rkl = 0, k 6= l, and assume a proper (conjugate) but diﬀuse Inverse-Gamma (3, 0.001) prior for
Rkk . Standard Bayesian results (see Bauwens, Lubrano and Richard, 1999, p. 58) deliver posterior
of the form:
¡
¢
Rkk |X̃T , S̄T , Ψ ∼ iG R̄kk , J × T + 0.001

³
´−1
³P
´
P
P
J
∗0 S̃ ∗
0 M̄ −1 Λ̄ , Λ̄ = M̄ −1
∗0 S̃ ∗ Λ̂
Λ̂
S̃
−
Λ̄
,
where R̄kk = 3+ Jj=1 v̂k0 v̂k + Jj=1 Λ̂0k S̃k,T
k
k
k
k
j=1 k,T k,T
k,T
k k
k
P
∗0 S̃ ∗ . Here M −1 denotes the variance parameter in the prior on the coand M̄k−1 = M0 + Jj=1 S̃k,T
0
k,T

eﬃcients of the k-th equation, Λk , which, conditional on the drawn value of Rkk , is N (0, Rkk M0−1 ).
¢
¡
We set M0 = I. We draw values for Λk from the posterior N Λ̄k , Rkk M̄k−1 .
Conditional on Λ and since R is diagonal, we can apply OLS equation by equation to obtain

Ψ̂kk . Letting ek be the vector whose elements are given by ek,t = Xk,t −Λk St , and its lagged version
ek,−1 , and assuming that the prior on Ψkk is N (0, 1), the posterior distribution of Ψkk is N (Ψ̄kk ,
³
´
´
³
−1 PJ
−1 PJ
0
0
N̄k−1 ) where Ψ̄kk = N̄k−1 Rkk
Ψ̂
and
N̄
e
e
=
1
+
R
e
e
k
j=1 k,−1 k,−1 kk
j=1 k,−1 k,−1 .
kk

A.2

´
³
(g)
(g−1)
Step 2: Drawing from the conditional distribution p ΘM |Υ
, X̃T

The elements of the matrices ΘM are individually drawn from a proposal scalar Student t-distribution,
with mean centered around the previous draws of the parameters, i.e. the corresponding elements

46

(g)

of ΘM , and a variance calibrated to yield appropriate acceptance rates.38 Let Θ∗M be the resulting
draws. Based on the solution of the model obtained from this last draw, the following ratio is
computed:

(g+1)

With probability min(1, r), ΘM

³
´
p Θ∗M |Λ, R, X̃T
´
r= ³
(g)
p ΘM |Λ, R, X̃T

(g+1)

= Θ∗M , and otherwise ΘM

(g)

= ΘM .

Steps 1 and 2 are repeated for each iteration g. Inference is based on the distribution of
© (g) ªG
Θ
, where b is large enough to guarantee convergence of the algorithm. As noted, the
g=b
empirical distribution from the sampling procedure should well approximate the joint posterior or
©
ªG
normalized joint likelihood. Calculating medians and quantiles of Θ(g) g=b provides estimates of
the model parameters and the associated confidence regions.
38

See Johannes and Polson (2004) for practical recommendations on the choice of the proposal density and the
desired acceptance rate.

47

Appendix B - Data Description
All series were taken from DRI/McGraw Hill Basic Economics Database or directly from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics. The format is: series number; transformation code and series
description as appears in the database. The transformation codes are: 1 – no transformation; 2 –
Detrended log per capita; 3 – detrended logarithm level 4 – logarithm; 5 – first difference of
logarithm; 6 – Adjustement specific to average hours and hourly earnings; 0 – variable not used
in the estimation (only used for transforming other variables). A * indicate a series that is deflated
with the GDP deflator (series #145).
Cases SW and A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

1
2
2
2*
5

Interest Rate: Federal Funds (Effective) (% per annum, NSA)
Real Gross Domestic Product (billions of chained 2000 dollars, SAAR)
Real Personal Consumption Expenditures (Chained 2000, NIPA)
Gross Private Domestic Investment - Fixed Investment (billions of chained 2000 dollars, SAAR)
Price Deflator - Gross Domestic Product (NIA)
Real Wage (Smets And Wouters)
Hours Worked (Smets And Wouters)

2
2*
5
5
5
2
2

Personal Consumption Expenditures Excluding Food And Energy
Gross Private Domestic Investment (billions of chained 2000 dollars, SAAR)
Price Deflator - Private Consumption Expenditure (NIA)
CPI-U: All Items Less Food (82-84=100, SA)
CPI-U: All Items (82-84=100,SA)
Civilian Labor Force: Employed, Total (Thous.,SA)
Employees, Nonfarm - Total Nonfarm

Case B
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Case C: Known link
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

Price Index - Personal Consumption Expenditures - Durable Goods (2000=100), SAAR
Price Index - Personal Consumption Expenditures - Nondurable Goods (2000=100), SAAR
Price Index - Personal Consumption Expenditures - Services (2000=100) , SAAR
CPI -U: Durables (82-84=100, SA)
CPI -U: Commodities (82-84=100, SA)
CPI -U: Medical Care (82-84=100, SA)
CPI -U: Transportation (82-84=100, SA)
CPI -U: Apparel & Upkeep (82-84=100, SA)

Case C: Unknown link
23

2 Real Gross Domestic Product – Services (billions of chained 2000 dollars, SAAR)

24

2 Real Gross Domestic Product – Structures (billions of chained 2000 dollars, SAAR)

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2*
2
2
6*
6*
1
1

Industrial Production Index - Products, Total
Industrial Production Index - Final Products
Industrial Production Index - Consumer Goods
Industrial Production Index - Durable Consumer Goods
Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Consumer Goods
Industrial Production Index - Business Equipment
Industrial Production Index - Materials
Industrial Production Index - Durable Goods Materials
Industrial Production Index - Nondurable Goods Materials
Industrial Production Index - Total Index
Capacity Utilization - Manufacturing (SIC)
Nominal Total Compensation Of Employees (NIA)
Personal Income Chained 2000 Dollars (BCI)
Personal Income Less Transfer Payments (Chained) (#51) (Bil 92$,Saar)
Average Hourly Earnings, Production Workers: Manufacturing,
Average Hourly Earnings, Production Workers: Construction,
Unemployment Rate: All Workers, 16 Years & Over (%,SA)
Unemploy. by Duration: Average(Mean)Duration In Weeks (SA)

43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2*
4
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
5
5
5
5
1
1
3
3
3

Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.Less Than 5 Wks (Thous.,SA)
Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.5 To 14 Wks (Thous.,SA)
Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.15 Wks + (Thous.,SA)
Unemploy. by Duration: Persons Unempl.15 To 26 Wks (Thous.,SA)
Employees, Nonfarm - Total Private
Employees, Nonfarm - Goods-Producing
Employees, Nonfarm - Mining
Employees, Nonfarm - Construction
Employees, Nonfarm - Mfg
Employees, Nonfarm - Durable Goods
Employees, Nonfarm - Nondurable Goods
Employees, Nonfarm - Wholesale Trade
Employees, Nonfarm - Government
REAL PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES (Index 2000=100): Durable Goods (NIPA Table 2.3.3)
Nondurable Goods
Services
Gross Private Domestic Investment - Fixed Nonresidential , Billions Of Dollars , SAAR
Housing Starts:Nonfarm(1947-58);Total Farm&Nonfarm(1959-)(Thous.,SA)
NAPM Inventories Index (Percent)
NAPM New Orders Index (Percent)
NAPM Vendor Deliveries Index (Percent)
New Orders (Net) - Consumer Goods & Materials, 1996 Dollars (Bci)
Interest Rate: Federal Funds (Effective) (% Per Annum,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,3-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Bills,Sec Mkt,6-Mo.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,1-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,5-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Interest Rate: U.S.Treasury Const Maturities,10-Yr.(% Per Ann,Nsa)
Bond Yield: Moody's Aaa Corporate (% Per Annum)
Bond Yield: Moody's Baa Corporate (% Per Annum)
Money Stock: M1(Curr,Trav.Cks,Dem Dep,Other Ck'able Dep)(Bil$,Sa)
Money Stock:M2(M1+O'nite Rps,Euro$,G/P&B/D Mmmfs&Sav&Sm Time Dep(Bil$,
Money Stock: M3(M2+Lg Time Dep,Term Rp's&Inst Only Mmmfs)(Bil$,Sa)
Money Supply - M2 In 1996 Dollars (Bci)
Monetary Base, Adj For Reserve Requirement Changes(Mil$,Sa)
Depository Inst Reserves: Total, Adj For Reserve Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
Depository Inst Reserves: Nonborrowed,Adj Res Req Chgs(Mil$,Sa)
Commercial & Industrial Loans Oustanding In 1996 Dollars (Bci)
Wkly Rp Lg Com'l Banks:Net Change Com'l & Indus Loans(Bil$,Saar)
Consumer Credit Outstanding - Nonrevolving(G19)
Gross Private Domestic Investment, Price Deflators (2000=100) , Saar
CPI-U: All Items Less Medical Care (82-84=100,Sa)
CPI-U: All Items Less Shelter (82-84=100,Sa)
CPI-U: Services (82-84=100,Sa)
NAPM Commodity Prices Index (Percent)
U. of Michigan Index of Consumer Expectations(BCD-83)
Composite Cyclical Indicator (1996) - Leading
Composite Cyclical Indicator (1996) - Lagging
Composite Cyclical Indicator (1996) - Coincident

Table 1: Priors and estimates of structural parameters

ϕ

Prior Distribution
Type
Mean St.Err.
Normal 4
1.5

σc

Normal

1

0.375

h

Beta

0.7

0.1

σL

Normal

2

0.75

φ

Normal

1.25

0.125

1/ψ

Normal

0.2

0.075

ξω

Beta

0.75

0.05

ξp

Beta

0.75

0.05

γω

Beta

0.5

0.15

γp

Beta

0.5

0.15

ρ

Beta

0.75

0.1

rπ0

Normal

1.8

0.1

rπ1

Normal

-0.3

0.1

ry0

Normal

0.188

0.05

ry1

Normal

-0.063

0.05

SW

Case A

Case B

Case C

5.36
( 0.88)
1.54
( 0.24)
0.71
( 0.07)
2.34
( 0.60)
1.42
( 0.08)
0.32
( 0.06)
0.81
( 0.02)
0.88
( 0.01)
0.39
( 0.12)
0.66
( 0.08)
0.76
( 0.02)
1.78
( 0.08)
-0.22
( 0.09)
0.22
( 0.03)
-0.13
( 0.03)

5.88
( 1.11)
1.45
( 0.23)
0.75
( 0.07)
2.18
( 0.65)
1.24
( 0.07)
0.27
( 0.06)
0.77
( 0.03)
0.90
( 0.02)
0.45
( 0.14)
0.72
( 0.19)
0.67
( 0.05)
1.81
( 0.10)
-0.22
( 0.12)
0.23
( 0.03)
-0.11
( 0.03)

6.17
( 1.13)
1.79
( 0.44)
0.54
( 0.27)
2.42
( 0.69)
1.37
( 0.07)
0.26
( 0.06)
0.78
( 0.04)
0.88
( 0.01)
0.43
( 0.14)
0.50
( 0.15)
0.72
( 0.04)
1.72
( 0.10)
-0.30
( 0.10)
0.24
( 0.03)
-0.12
( 0.04)

3.81
( 1.04)
1.63
( 0.44)
0.50
( 0.27)
2.41
( 0.68)
1.26
( 0.07)
0.27
( 0.06)
0.82
( 0.03)
0.86
( 0.02)
0.48
( 0.14)
0.36
( 0.14)
0.70
( 0.03)
1.66
( 0.09)
-0.39
( 0.09)
0.22
( 0.03)
-0.12
( 0.03)

Implied parameters
1−h
pseudo EIS: (1+h)σ
0.110
0.099
0.167
0.204
c
(1−βξp )(1−ξp )
slope of PC:
0.011
0.007
0.012
0.018
(1+βγ p )ξp
The parameter estimates are given by the median of the posterior distribution
Results are based on 100 000 replications. Standard errors are reported in ().

50

Table 1 (continued): Priors and estimates of parameters describing shock processes

ρa

Prior Distribution
Type
Mean St.Err.
Beta
0.85
0.1

SW

Case A

Case B

Case C

0.93
0.97
0.98
0.98
( 0.04)
( 0.02)
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
0.85
0.1
0.62
0.62
0.71
0.69
ρb Beta
( 0.06)
( 0.07)
( 0.11)
( 0.12)
0.85
0.1
0.95
0.97
0.97
0.97
ρG Beta
( 0.02)
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
( 0.01)
0.85
0.1
0.83
0.77
0.84
0.86
ρL Beta
( 0.10)
( 0.09)
( 0.09)
( 0.09)
0.85
0.1
0.80
0.80
0.78
0.86
ρI Beta
( 0.05)
( 0.05)
( 0.05)
( 0.03)
2
0.12
0.03
0.02
0.02
σ 2a invGam 0.25
( 0.02)
( 0.01)
( 0.00)
( 0.01)
2
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
σ 2b invGam 0.25
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
( 0.01)
2
0.20
0.08
0.06
0.06
σ 2G invGam 0.25
( 0.04)
( 0.02)
( 0.02)
( 0.02)
2
0.06
58.15
0.31
0.01
σ 2L invGam 0.25
( 0.90) ( 44.03) ( 11.50) ( 0.01)
2
7.69
8.59
9.29
2.16
σ 2I invGam 0.25
( 4.55)
( 4.17)
( 5.08)
( 0.99)
2
14.13
2.41
2.86
0.40
σ 2Q invGam 0.25
( 10.86) ( 3.71)
( 5.89)
( 0.40)
2
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
σ2p invGam 0.25
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
2
0.10
0.04
0.09
0.08
σ 2ω invGam 0.25
( 0.01)
( 0.04)
( 0.04)
( 0.02)
1.5
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.02
σ 2i invGam 0.25
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
( 0.00)
The parameter estimates are given by the median of the posterior distribution
Results are based on 100 000 replications. Standard errors are reported in ().

51

Table 2: Correlation between estimated latent concepts and observable measures
Indicator
Concept Case A Case B Case C
Fed funds rate
Rt
1.00
1.00
1.00
Yt
0.99
0.98
0.98
Real GDP
Ct
0.98
0.99
0.99
Real Consumption
It
0.99
0.99
0.99
X1,t Real fixed Investment
πt
0.73
0.86
0.86
GDP defl. inflation
wt
0.99
0.99
0.98
Real wage
Lt
0.99
0.98
0.99
Hours worked
PCE ex. food and Energy
Ct
0.98
0.99
0.98
It
0.94
0.95
0.94
Gross Real Investment
πt
0.70
0.92
0.93
PCE deflator inflation
πt
0.53
0.82
0.81
X2,t core-CPI inflation
πt
0.54
0.83
0.82
CPI inflation
Lt
0.89
0.92
0.92
Employment HH Survey
Lt
0.81
0.85
0.85
Payroll Employment
The entries are the correlation between the observable indicators and
the median estimate of the corresponding estimated latent variable.

52

Table 3: Uncertainty about estimated model variables
Concept

Case A Case B Case C
st. dev. Relative to case A
Interest rate
Rt 0.000
–
–
0.93
1.01
Output
Yt 0.342
0.93
1.01
Consumption
Ct 0.450
0.94
0.89
Investment
It 0.908
0.91
0.65
Inflation (annualized) π t 0.500
1.04
1.06
Real wage
wt 0.478
0.76
0.97
Hours worked
Lt 0.311
The entries for case A are the standard deviations across estimation draws
of the latent variables for each date, and averaged over time. For cases B and C,
these standard deviations are divided by those in case A, so that numbers below 1
indicate reductions in uncertainty. Standard deviations apply to annualized data series.

Table 4: One-step ahead forecasting errors
Primary indicator

Case A Case B Case C
RMSE Relative to case A
Fed funds rate
0.52
1.08
1.12
0.55
1.00
1.02
Real GDP
0.59
0.93
0.97
Real Consumption
1.64
0.97
0.88
Real Investment
0.95
0.90
GDP defl. inflation 0.20
0.75
1.03
0.96
Real wage
0.49
1.02
1.04
Hours worked
Overall
-9.26
-9.38
-9.41
The entries for case A are root mean squared error (RMSE) of the forecasts. For
cases B and C, the RMSE are divided by those in case A. Numbers below 1
indicate forecasting improvements. The overall measure is for all cases the log determinant
of the variance-covariance matrix of the forecasting errors for the seven primary indicators.

53

Table 5: Variance decompositions of model variables at 3-year horizon
Shock \ Endog. variable
Productivity
Preference
Govt. Expenditures
Labor supply
Investment
Equity premium
Cost-push prices
Cost-push wages
Monetary policy
Productivity
Preference
Govt. Expenditures
Labor supply
Investment
Equity premium
Cost-push prices
Cost-push wages
Monetary policy
Productivity
Preference
Govt. Expenditures
Labor supply
Investment
Equity premium
Cost-push prices
Cost-push wages
Monetary policy
Productivity
Preference
Govt. Expenditures
Labor supply
Investment
Equity premium
Cost-push prices
Cost-push wages
Monetary policy

i
Y
Case SW
0.21 0.08
0.10 0.24
0.03 0.14
0.00 0.00
0.22 0.38
0.00 0.01
0.15 0.05
0.06 0.04
0.23 0.05
Case A
0.17 0.10
0.09 0.17
0.01 0.11
0.15 0.10
0.35 0.46
0.00 0.00
0.12 0.04
0.03 0.02
0.08 0.01
Case B
0.17 0.06
0.08 0.19
0.01 0.08
0.00 0.00
0.35 0.56
0.00 0.00
0.10 0.03
0.07 0.03
0.22 0.05
Case C
0.30 0.09
0.06 0.21
0.00 0.07
0.00 0.00
0.26 0.48
0.00 0.00
0.05 0.02
0.09 0.04
0.24 0.08

54

C

I

π

w

L

0.02
0.78
0.04
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.03
0.06
0.06

0.11
0.06
0.08
0.00
0.71
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.30
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.52
0.11
0.01

0.09
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.24
0.56
0.01

0.22
0.22
0.14
0.00
0.28
0.01
0.02
0.07
0.04

0.07
0.62
0.07
0.15
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.03
0.01

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.02
0.83
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.29
0.02
0.01
0.24
0.09
0.00
0.31
0.04
0.00

0.08
0.04
0.00
0.42
0.10
0.00
0.12
0.24
0.00

0.09
0.16
0.13
0.18
0.38
0.00
0.02
0.03
0.01

0.06
0.67
0.08
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.07
0.07

0.02
0.02
0.04
0.00
0.90
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00

0.32
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.44
0.13
0.01

0.05
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.00
0.11
0.69
0.01

0.09
0.20
0.10
0.00
0.47
0.00
0.01
0.08
0.05

0.10
0.64
0.08
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.06
0.08

0.02
0.02
0.05
0.00
0.88
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.01

0.52
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.23
0.16
0.01

0.12
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.06
0.73
0.01

0.09
0.22
0.08
0.00
0.42
0.00
0.01
0.10
0.08

Indicators of Employment
5

0

-5
SW measure
Household survey
Est. survey
-10

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Pairwise Coherence of Indicators of Employment
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
SW-HH
SW-EST
HH-EST

0.2
0

0

pi/8

pi/4

3pi/8

pi/2
Frequency

5pi/8

3pi/2

7pi/8

Figure 1: Indicators of employment (de-trended) and pairwise coherence.

55

pi

Indicators of Inflation
10
GDP deflator
PCE deflator
CPI
5

0

-5
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Pairwise Coherence of Inflation Rates
1
GDP-PCE
GDP-CPI
PCE-CPI

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

pi/8

pi/4

3pi/8

pi/2
Frequency

5pi/8

3pi/2

7pi/8

Figure 2: Indicators of quarterly inflation rates (de-meaned) and pairwise coherence.

56

pi

Real GDP, Y

Consumption, C

1000

600
400

500
200
0
0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

0
0.9

1

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

GDP deflator growth,
π

Investment, I
1000

600
400

500
200
0
0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

0
0.4

1

0.6

Real wage, w

0.8

1

Hours worked, L

1000

600
400

500
200
0
0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

0
0.9

1

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

Figure 3: Extent of measurement error. Distribution of correlations between main indicators and
corresponding model variables (Case A)

57

Data

A

B

Interest rate: i

Output: Y

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5
-10

C

1985

1990

1995

-10

2000

1985

Consumption: C

1990

1995

2000

Investment: I

10

40
20

0

0
-20

-10

1985

1990

1995

-40

2000

1985

Real wage: w
10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5
1985

1990

1995

1995

2000

Employment: L

10

-10

1990

-10

2000

1985

1990

1995

Figure 4: Estimated endogenous variables (Cases SW, A, B, and C)

58

2000

Inflation: π
4
Data
A
B
C

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3
1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Figure 5: Estimated inflation (de-meaned; Cases SW, A, B and C)

59

2002

Case A
4
2
0
-2
1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

1996

1998

2000

2002

1996

1998

2000

2002

Case B
4
2
0
-2
1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

Case C
4
2
0
-2
1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

Figure 6: Estimated inflation and 5%-95% confidence band (Cases A, B, C)

60

SW

A

B

C
a

ε : Productivity shock

K : Capital stock
4
2

2

1

0
-2

0

-4

-1
1985

1990

1995

2000

1985

b

1990

1995

2000

G

ε : Preference shock

ε : Gov. expenditure shock

0.4
2

0.2
0

0

-0.2
-2
1985

1990

1995

2000

1985

L

1990

1995

2000

I

ε : Labor supply shock

ε: Invest.-specific shock
10

10
0

0

-10

-10
1985

1990

1995

2000

1985

1990

1995

Figure 7: Estimated capital stock and shocks (Cases SW, A, B and C)
61

2000

Q

p

η : Equity premium shock

η : Price markup shock

4

0.2

2
0

0

-0.2

-2
-4

-0.4
1985

1990

1995

2000

1985

ηω: Wage markup shock

1990

1995

2000

ηi: Monetary policy shock
0.4

1

0.2

0.5

0

0

-0.2
-0.4

-0.5
1985

1990

1995

SW

2000

1985

A

B

1990

C

Figure 8: Estimated shocks (Cases SW, A, B, and C)

62

1995

2000

