NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF AN EARNINGS SUBSIDY FOR LONG-TERM WELFARE RECIPIENTS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE SSP APPLICANT EXPERIMENT
David Card
Dean R. Hyslop
Working Paper 12774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12774

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

We are grateful to SDRC for research support and for making the SSP data available, and to Douglas
Tattrie for assistance with the data and comments on earlier work. The conclusions in this paper are
the sole responsibility of the authors, and do not represent the opinions or conclusions of SDRC or
the sponsors of the Self Sufficiency Project or those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by David Card and Dean R. Hyslop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Dynamic Effects of an Earnings Subsidy for Long-Term Welfare Recipients: Evidence
from the SSP Applicant Experiment
David Card and Dean R. Hyslop
NBER Working Paper No. 12774
December 2006
JEL No. I38
ABSTRACT
In the SSP Applicant Experiment, a random sample of new welfare entrants was informed that if they
remained on welfare for a year they would become eligible for a generous earnings subsidy. Those
who satisfied the waiting period and then left welfare and began working full time within the following
year were entitled to receive payments for up to 36 months whenever they were off welfare and working
full time. A simple optimizing model suggests that the program rules created an unusual sequence
of incentives to: (1) prolong the initial spell on welfare for at least 12 months to become eligible for
the subsidy offer; (2) establish subsidy entitlement by finding full time work and leaving welfare in
the 12 to 24 month period after initial entry; and (3) choose work over welfare during the three years
that subsidies were available. Consistent with these implications, comparisons between the experimental
treatment group and a randomly assigned control group show that the program increased welfare participation
in the first year after initial entry and lowered it over the following 5 years. We develop an econometric
model of welfare participation and program eligibility status that allows us to identify the behavioral
effects associated with the program rules. We find important responses to all three incentives. We
also find that the impact of the program persisted after subsidy payments ended, although the effect
decayed over time.
David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu
Dean R. Hyslop
New Zealand Treasury
PO Box 3724
Wellington
NEW ZEALAND
dean.hyslop@treasury.govt.nz

1
Introduction
During the 1990s the Canadian government funded a large scale social experiment to evaluate the
feasibility of a high-powered earnings subsidy for welfare leavers. The program, known as the Self
Sufficiency Project (SSP), was targeted to single parents who had been on public assistance for at least a
year.1 A concern with a benefit like SSP is that it encourages people who would otherwise leave welfare
quickly to prolong their stay, offsetting the intended goal of the program. As part of the SSP evaluation
an innovative experiment was conducted on new welfare applicants to measure this effect. The treatment
group was informed that they would become eligible for SSP if they remained on public assistance for a
year, while a randomized control group entered the regular welfare program. Results from this
experiment provide the first experimental evidence on the magnitude of the “entry effects” attributable to
program benefits offered to welfare recipients.2
In addition to the one year waiting period for potential eligibility, the SSP subsidy offer had a
second important time limit. Individuals who were still on welfare after a year then had 12 months to find
a full time job and leave welfare. Those who did so became entitled to receive subsidy payments in any
month they were working full time and off welfare over the following three years. Those who did not lost
all future eligibility, and returned to the regular welfare system.
Data for the treatment and control groups of the Applicant Experiment were collected for seven
years after random assignment, providing information on the short-term and longer-run impacts of the
program on welfare participation and labor market outcomes. Simple comparisons between the groups
show that the offer of SSP raised welfare participation by 2-3 percentage points at the end of the waiting
period (Card and Robins, 2005). In subsequent months, however, the welfare participation rate of the

1

2

See Michalopoulos et al. (2000).

See Ford et al. (2003) for a description of the Applicant experiment and summary of its main impacts. The
importance of considering the potential effect of program benefits on the size of the program caseload has been
emphasized in studies of the negative income tax (e.g., Ashenfelter, 1983) and in theoretical analyses of welfare
participation (Moffitt, 1996). The existing literature on “entry effects” is summarized in Card and Robins (2005).

2
program group fell below that of the control group, with a peak impact of about -11 percentage points in
the period from 24-30 months after initial entry. This impressive gap faded over time, and by 84 months
the welfare participation rates of the treatment and control groups were nearly equal. The time profile of
impacts in the post-waiting period of the SSP Applicant experiment parallels the profile in the SSP
Recipient experiment, which offered subsidy payments with no waiting period to people who had been on
welfare for a year or longer. Appropriately normalized, however, the magnitude of the impacts in the
Applicant experiment is larger, since less than one-half of the treatment group satisfied the waiting period
requirement and were actually eligible for the subsidy offer (Ford et al., 2003).
The goal of this paper is to specify and estimate an empirical model of welfare participation that
allows up to identify the behavioral responses to the complex series of rules in the Applicant experiment.
In particular, we focus on the incentives created by the 12 month waiting period, the subsequent 12 month
window to establish entitlement, and the 3-year subsidy entitlement period. Although the time pattern of
the experimental impacts illustrates the changing net effect of these three incentives, there is no way to
infer the individual contributions without a more fully specified model.3 More broadly, our analysis
underscores the need to understand the incentives effects of complex program rules when considering
welfare policy changes in a dynamic environment.
Section II of the paper presents a simple theoretical model of the effect of the SSP Applicant
Experiment on the choice between welfare and work. Building on a model developed in Card and Hyslop
(2005) for the SSP Recipient experiment, we show that Applicant Experiment created three incentives:
(1) an “eligibility” incentive for people in the program group to remain on welfare for a year to become
eligible for the subsidy; (2) an “establishment” incentive for members of the program group who satisfied
the waiting period requirement to find a job and leave welfare within the next 12 months; and (3) an

3

For example, simple comparisons between the treatment and control groups of the SSP Applicant Experiment
cannot distinguish these separate incentive effects, since the later effects only apply to a subset of the treatment
group. As noted by Ham and Lalonde (1996), even with a randomly assigned intervention the estimation of dynamic

3
“entitlement” incentive for those who established SSP entitlement to work full time and remain off
welfare during the three years that the subsidy payments were available.
We then present a relatively simple econometric model that incorporates the behavioral reactions
to these three incentives. The model has three components: a selection model for the probability of
remaining on welfare to the end of the waiting period and becoming eligible to receive the SSP offer; a
hazard model for determining when and if those who satisfied the waiting period begin receiving SSP
payments; and a dynamic panel data model for welfare participation, with separate treatment effects
representing the impacts of the establishment and entitlement incentives. This model allows us to
distinguish the impacts of the three SSP incentives and to isolate the effect of the earnings subsidy on
welfare entry and exit rates among those who achieved eligibility.
Our empirical results show that the time profile of the experimental impacts observed in the
Applicant study is attributable to a combination of the eligibility incentive (which increased welfare
participation during the waiting period), the establishment incentive (which led to a rapid rate of welfareleaving among members of the program group who satisfied the waiting period requirement), and the
longer-term entitlement incentives of the program. We also find evidence that the impact of the subsidy
persisted after SSP payments ended, although the effect appears to have decayed substantially by the end
of the follow-up period (2-3 years after all payments ended).
A limitation of our modeling approach is the narrow focus on welfare participation, rather than on
a broader set of outcomes, such as welfare and employment status. Over most of the sample period the
time profiles of experimental impacts on welfare participation and full time employment are mirror
images. Thus we believe that our basic findings can be translated directly into implications for
employment. An interesting exception is the effect of the waiting period requirement. Although the
waiting period seems to have increased welfare participation in the first year after initial entry, there is no

impacts requires a full specification of the process generating individual welfare histories.

4
evidence of a corresponding decrease in employment (see Card and Robins, 2005). Instead, there was a
rise in the fraction of people who were on welfare and working full time, accounting for nearly all of the
excess fraction on welfare at the close of the waiting period. Most of the people in the program group
who delayed exit from the welfare system apparently remained on welfare in anticipation of the subsidy’s
availability. Such behavior suggests that monitoring systems would have to be improved if SSP subsidies
were made a permanent feature of the welfare system.

I. The SSP Applicant Demonstration - Description and Overview of Impacts
a. Canadian Income Assistance and the SSP Experiment
The income support system for low income families in Canada during the early 1990s, known as
Income Assistance (IA), reduced benefits dollar-for-dollar for any earnings beyond a modest set-aside
amount.4 The implicit 100 percent tax rate on earnings and the availability of other benefits for IA
recipients (e.g., dental services) reduced the incentives for IA recipients to ever leave the system. Rising
welfare caseloads in the 1980s led to concerns that the system was promoting long-term dependency, in
part because of the limited financial incentives for work. In this context the Self Sufficiency Project
(SSP) was conceived as a test of a generous time-limited earnings subsidy. The SSP demonstration was
designed to evaluate the effects of an earnings subsidy available to long-term IA recipients, and consisted
of two main experimental studies: the SSP “Recipient” study (SSP-R), conducted on a sample of longterm welfare recipients;5 and the SSP “Applicant” study (SSP-A), conducted on a sample of new welfare

4

The IA program is operated at the provincial level, but all the provincial programs share several important features,
including a dollar-for-dollar benefit reduction rate. See Human Resources and Development Canada (1993) for a
detailed inventory and description of income support programs in Canada in the early 1990s.

5

In addition, there was a smaller demonstration conducted on a subset of the Recipient sample, the SSP “Plus”
study, that included both financial incentives and program services. See Lin et al (1998) for a comprehensive
description of the SSP Recipients program and results from the first 18 months of the experiment, Michalopoulos et
al (2000) for a summary of results in the first 36 months, and Michalopoulos et al (2002) for the final report on the
experiment.

5
applicants. The Recipient study was designed to examine both the short- and long-run impacts of the
subsidy on the existing stock on long-term welfare recipients; whereas the Applicant study was designed
to examine the impacts of the subsidy offer on a new cohort of welfare applicants, with particular focus
on possible “entry effects” caused by individuals delaying their exit from IA in order to become eligible
for the SSP offer.
Although this paper focuses on the SSP-Applicant study, it is useful to first briefly summarize the
Recipient study. SSP-R was conducted in the provinces of British Columbia and New Brunswick, and
involved randomizing a group of single parent IA recipients who had been on welfare for at least a year
into either a program group, who were offered the SSP subsidy, or a control group, who remained in the
regular welfare system. At least three features of the SSP subsidy offer distinguish it from other workbased subsidy programs. First, payments were restricted to individuals who were off IA and working full
time. Second, individuals had to take up the subsidy offer by finding full-time work and leaving IA
within a year of joining the program, otherwise they lost all future entitlement. Third, the SSP subsidy
was time-limited: those who established eligibility were entitled to receive the subsidy in any month over
the next three years that they were working full time and off IA.
The Applicant study offered the same package of subsidy benefits as SSP-R to a group of new
welfare entrants in British Columbia, who were informed that if they remained on IA for the next year
(and so become “long term” recipients), they would become eligible for the SSP offer. The primary goal
of SSP-A was to determine whether the potential availability of SSP benefits would lead to a significant
change in IA leaving behavior by new welfare entrants (see Berlin et al, 1998). A secondary goal was to
offer a longer-term perspective on the costs and benefits of SSP. In particular, if SSP became a
permanent feature of the Canadian welfare system, eventually all recipients would be single parents who
had entered IA and met the one-year waiting period.
Table 1 summarizes the main features of the Applicant study, including the eligibility criteria for
the experimental sample and details of the subsidy formula. Sample members were selected from a pool

6
of single parents aged at least 19 who had recently started a “new” spell of IA. Specifically, they could
not have received IA payments in the previous 6 months.6 After random assignment, members of the
program group received a treatment consisting of a letter and brochure explaining the SSP program. They
were also mailed a reminder letter 7 months after random assignment. Those who satisfied the waiting
period requirement by remaining on welfare for a year were then informed of their eligibility for the
subsidy offer and invited to attend a group session to explain the mechanics of the supplement program.7
The SSP subsidy formula is equivalent to a negative income tax with a 50 percent tax rate, a
minimum income level somewhat above average welfare benefits (but independent of family size) and a
full-time hours requirement.8 The subsidy was designed to significantly enhance the financial incentives
for work. For example, in 1996 a single parent with one child in British Columbia was entitled to a basic
Income Assistance grant of around $1,000 per month. If she were to leave IA and work 35 hours per
week at a minimum wage job ($7 per hour), she would earn $1,061 before tax, providing almost no
financial incentive to leave welfare. If she was also entitled to SSP, however, she would receive an
additional $1,037 in supplement payments (equal to half the difference between her earnings and the
benchmark level of $3,135), doubling the payoff to work. Since subsidy payments were taxable, and also
affected daycare costs under the provincial cost formula, the payoff net of taxes and transfers was only
about two-thirds as big as the pre-tax payoff, but still relatively large (see Lin et al, 1998, Table G.1).
During the 7 years of the Applicant experiment there were several changes in the economic

6

No further limitations were placed on the sample. Thus, the experimental sample is in principle representative of
the population of IA applicants in British Columbia. Roughly 90 percent of people who were contacted to
participate in the experiment signed an informed consent decree and completed the baseline survey, and were then
randomly assigned (Lin et. al, 1998, p.8).

7

As explained below, the actual eligibility rule was that people had to receive IA in 12 of the 13 months since their
initial entry into IA. This rule allowed for 1 month gaps caused by such features as the receipt of child support
payments, which could be large enough to offset IA payments for a month.

8

In a conventional negative income tax with constant tax rate t and a minimum income G, an individual with
earnings y receives a subsidy of G-ty. This is equivalent to an earnings supplement equal to t times the difference
between actual earnings and the “break-even” level B = G/t .

7
environment that potentially affected the results of the experiment. First, there was a general upward trend
in economic conditions in Vancouver between 1994 and 2000: the unemployment rate dropped from
around 9% to 6%, and the minimum wage increased from $6 per hour to $7.60 per hour. Second, and
potentially more important for the impact of SSP, in 1996 there were significant changes to welfare policy
in British Columbia. A key change was the introduction of a $103 per child monthly benefit for all low
income families (i.e., irrespective of income assistance status) that was matched by an equal reduction in
IA benefits. Other changes included a reduction in the generosity of the earnings disregard for welfare
recipients; and changes to the IA application process and eligibility criteria, including a 6-month
disqualification period from IA benefits for any person who quit a job without “just cause”. All of these
changes tended to reduce the relative generosity of IA, and could confound the interpretation of the
Applicant experiment. The quit disqualification also potentially affected the dynamic incentives
associated with taking a job, and thus could affect the behavior of the SSP program and control groups
differentially.
Although the SSP payment formula is relatively straightforward, the other eligibility
requirements, including the waiting period and the time limit on starting subsidy payments, are more
complex. Before turning to a more detailed analysis of these incentives, we summarize some of the key
experimental findings from the SSP-Applicant study.

b. The SSP-Applicant Sample Characteristics
Data for the Applicant experiment evaluation were derived from three sources. Information on
IA participation and payments was obtained from provincial administrative records. SSP participation
and supplement payment data were collected from SSP administrative records. Finally, demographic and
labor market outcome data were obtained from surveys conducted at regular intervals, beginning with a
baseline survey just prior to random assignment, and follow-up surveys at 12, 30, 48, and 72 months postassignment. The experimental sample consisted of 3,315 individuals, 1,667 in the control group and

8
1,648 in the program group. Of these, we have excluded 32 observations whose records show either no
IA receipt in the six months before or after the date of random assignment, or an unusual gap between the
date of entry into IA and the date of random assignment.9 This leaves us with an analysis sample of 3,283
observations: 1,651 in the control group, and 1,632 in the program group.
Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of various subgroups in our analysis sample. As
background, the first column of the table shows the average characteristics of lone parents in Vancouver ,
based on data from the 1996 Canadian Census. Columns 2 and 3 show the mean characteristics of the
SSP control and program groups respectively. As expected given random assignment, the baseline
characteristics of the program and control groups are statistically indistinguishable. The SSP-A sample is
90 percent female, with an average age of 32.5 years and an average of 1.5 children. About a quarter of
sample members had never been married, 30 percent were foreign-born, and one-third grew up in single
parent families. There are some notable differences between the Applicants’ samples and all lone parents
in the Vancouver area. Applicants are more likely to be female and foreign born, more likely to have preschool children, and less likely to be working or to hold a University degree. In general these differences
are expected, since welfare applicants presumably over-represent the population with lower earnings
potential. There are also some interesting contrasts between the SSP-A sample and the sample of long
term welfare recipients in the SSP-Recipient study (see Table 2 in Card and Hyslop, 2005). Those in the
Applicant sample had more previous work experience, were more likely to be working at the baseline,
were more likely to have been ever married, and had much lower previous welfare use. These and other
differences confirm that new welfare applicants differ substantially from the existing stock of long term

9

We exclude 5 observations who had no IA receipt within 6 months of random assignment (3 controls and 2
programs); 1 control group observation whose first month of IA receipt was 5 months prior to random assignment;
23 observations who began receiving IA 4 months prior to random assignment (12 controls and 11 programs); and 3
program group observations whose records show that they first received IA in the month after random assignment.

9
recipients, and underscore the importance of understanding how SSP affected new welfare applicants.10
Most (70 percent) of the SSP-A sample were randomly assigned in the month after their IA
reference spell began, but 7 percent were assigned in the same month their spell started, 20 percent were
assigned 2 months after the start of the spell, and 3 percent were assigned after 3 months. This means
there is some variation between “months since random assignment” and “months since initial entry into
welfare”. Since SSP eligibility rules relate to timing from the start of an individual’s spell, in this paper
we normalize all dates to be relative to the start of the reference spell.11
The next four columns (4–7) of Table 2 describe the characteristics of the ineligible and eligible
subsets of the control and program groups – i.e. the subsets that did-not and did satisfy the waiting period
requirement. (Of course members of the control group were not actually eligible.) Overall, 57 percent of
the program group satisfied the waiting period requirement to become eligible compared to 54 percent of
the control group, implying a 3 percentage point (or 3/46=6.5 percent) delayed exit response to the SSP
offer. Conceptually, the eligible program group includes both “delayed exiters” and people who would
have satisfied the waiting period requirement even in the absence of SSP, whereas the eligible control
group includes only the latter. Nevertheless, the mean characteristics of the eligible program group and
eligible controls are quite similar, reflecting the relatively small fraction of delayed exiters.
The SSP-eligible program group members can be further classified according to whether or not
they established entitlement for the subsidy by finding fulltime work and leaving IA within a year after
the close of the waiting period. Columns 8 and 9 describe the characteristics of the subgroups that “didnot” and “did” become entitled respectively. A little over 40 percent of the eligible group established

10

SSP-A was only conducted in one of the two sites used in SSP-R. However, this does not explain much of the
difference in characteristics of the sample members in the two experiments.
11

The Data Appendix discusses this and other data issues. In particular, we adopt the convention that month 0
corresponds to the first month of IA receipt in the reference spell. The delay between entry into IA and random
assignment varied complicates the interpretation of the program group’s behavior, since people could have been on
IA for up to 3 months before finding out about their program status (see Card and Robins, 2004 for a discussion).

10
SSP entitlement, which represents about one-quarter of the overall program group. Comparing these two
subgroups with the ineligible subgroup who left IA within a year of initial entry (in column 6), the
ineligible group has the most favorable labor market characteristics at the baseline interview (e.g., the
highest level of previous work experience, highest likelihood of a college degree, and lowest fraction with
a child under 6), whereas the eligible non-entitled subgroup has the worst labor market characteristics,
and the eligible entitled subgroup is somewhere in between. This ranking is consistent with the two-sided
selection of the eligible entitled group: those most “job ready” presumably left IA before achieving
eligibility, whereas the least “job ready” of the eligible subgroup could not move to full-time employment
quickly enough to become entitled to SSP.

c. Experimental Impacts on Welfare
The experimental impact of the SSP program on IA participation is described in Figure 1a. This
figure shows average IA participation rates of the control and program groups, together with the estimated
program impact (calculated as the difference between the program and control group), in each month
from the start of the IA reference spell (month 0) until the end of the time window in which data are
available for all sample members (month 84). The delayed-exit effect of the SSP offer is illustrated by
the positive program impact on IA participation in months 3-13: this impact rises to 3 percentage points
near the end of the waiting period. After month 13 the IA participation rate of the program group drops
relatively quickly, leading to a negative program impact that peaks at -11 percentage points in month 27.
This negative impact persists but declines steadily to only 3 percentage points in month 60, at which point
all SSP payments have ended. The impact continues to decline gradually and is negligible by month 84.
Figures 1b and 1c plot the IA exit and entry rates of the control and program groups over this
same period.12 Because of the selective nature of the risk sets for exit and entry, the differences between

12

The exit and entry rates are simply calculated as the fractions of exits from IA, and entries to IA, respectively in

11
the rates of the two groups are not strictly experimental impacts. However, the patterns of differences
between the program and control groups are consistent with the impacts on IA participation. Specifically,
the program group’s exit rate was up to 1 percentage point lower than the control group’s over the initial
eligibility period, then averaged about 2 points higher in the following 12-18 months, about 1 point
higher from month 18 to month 72, and finally turned negative (about –0.5 points) in the final 12 months
or so of the period. The higher exit rate of the program group over the interval from 60-72 months is
suggestive of a persistent program impact beyond the end of SSP payments. The IA entry rates in Figure
1c show broadly similar patterns. The program group’s welfare entry rate was 1-2 percentage points
higher than the control group’s over the initial eligibility period, then averaged about 0.5 points lower in
the next year or so. The gap in entry rates was on average slightly negative over the period from month
24 to month 60, and was essentially zero over the final 24 months of the sample period.
We next examine the behavior of the “entitled” program subgroup (i.e., those who actually
received SSP subsidy payments) around the beginning and the end of their SSP entitlement period.
Figure 2a shows the IA participation rate, full time employment rate, and the fraction receiving SSP
payments during the event window from 12 months before the first month of SSP receipt to 12 months
after. The fraction receiving supplement payments rises from 0 to 1 in the month of first receipt (month
0), then falls steadily to around 0.7 by month 6 and stabilizes. The full time employment rate is about 0.2
between 12 and 4 months prior to receiving any supplement, then rises steeply to about 0.7 in the month
prior to first SSP receipt and settles around this level over the following 12 months. IA participation falls
gradually during the 12 months prior to initial supplement receipt, from close to 1 to about 0.8 just before
the start of SSP payments, and then falls sharply over the next 3 months, reaching a low of about 0.1.
This reflects the SSP program rule that subsidy recipients had to leave welfare, coupled with lags in the
IA payment process, which issues checks based on retrospective eligibility.

After the initial dip, the

each month. These rates are then smoothed to reduce the level of noise by calculating the simple 3-month centered
moving average rate for each.

12
fraction on IA rises slightly over the subsequent 6-12 months. Overall, it appears that that employment
anticipates SSP subsidy receipt by1-2 months, while exit from IA tends to lag receipt of the subsidy by 12 months, as was the case for the Recipient study (shown in Card and Hyslop, 2005).
In Figure 2b we conduct a similar event study around the expiration date of SSP entitlement.
During the last year of entitlement the average full time employment rate falls from 0.7 to near 0.6 in the
33rd month (after the first SSP payment). Surprisingly, however, there is no drop-off at month 36. In
contrast, the fraction receiving SSP payments, which moves in parallel with the full time employment rate
over months 24-33, shows the expected drop to zero in month 37. IA participation also rises slightly
between months 26 and 32, but shows no change at month 36. Nor is there any evidence of a rise in
welfare entry rates, although the series is relatively noisy. These results contrast with the results of a
similar event study for the Recipient experiment (Card and Hyslop, 2005), which shows a sharp drop in
full time employment and a corresponding spike in IA entry at precisely the end of SSP entitlement. The
lack of a change in IA behavior at the end of entitlement in the Applicant experiment is consistent with
the smooth trend in the program impact in Figure 1a between months 48 and 60, and suggests that
responses to the program did not immediately stop when payments ended.

II. A Simple Model for the Behavioral Impacts of the SSP-Applicants Experiment
In this section we outline a simple theoretical model of work and welfare participation in the
presence of the subsidy program to help clarify the incentive effects of the SSP-Applicant experiment.
This model extends the search model developed in Card and Hyslop (2005) for the SSP-Recipient
experiment to incorporate the effects of the 12-month waiting period in the applicant experiment.
Specifically, the model identifies three distinct incentive regimes. During the initial 12 month waiting
period, people in the program group have an eligibility incentive to delay exit from IA. Those who
satisfy the waiting period requirement then face an incentive to establish entitlement to SSP by leaving
welfare and entering full time work within the next 12 months. Finally, among those who establish

13
entitlement, there is an ongoing entitlement incentive to work full time and stay off IA for the next 3
years.
The model is a standard discrete time search model (e.g., Mortensen, 1977, 1986) in which a risk
neutral single parent has two mutually exclusive options, welfare participation or full time employment,
and individuals maximize expected future income using a monthly discount rate of r. Welfare pays a
monthly benefit $b and yields a flow payoff of b. Full time employment at a monthly wage of $w yields
a flow payoff of w-c, where c reflects the disutility of work relative to welfare (e.g. child care costs, work
expenses, the value of foregone leisure, potential stigma effects, etc.). The model assumes constant job
arrival and job destruction rates, and that wage offers are drawn from a stationary distribution.13
In the absence of a wage subsidy program optimal behavior in this model is characterized by a
stationary value function U(w) that gives the discounted expected value associated with a job paying
wage w, and a value V0 of welfare participation. Individuals employed at a wage w accept any offer
paying more than w, while those on welfare accept any job paying more than their reservation wage R,
defined by U(R)=V0. Since on-the-job search is as efficient as search while unemployed, the optimal
reservation wage is R=b+c.
Consider now the behavior of individuals who are all potentially eligible for SSP (i.e., have
satisfied the waiting period requirement). From the moment of initial eligibility individuals have 12
months to find a job and leave welfare. Let Vi(t) represent the value of still being on welfare (and not yet
entitled to SSP) after t≤12 months. For someone who has established entitlement for SSP and is working,
let Ue(w,d) represent the value of a job paying wage w, assuming that d≤36 months of SSP entitlement
have been used up. Finally, for those who have established SSP entitlement and are not working let Ve(d)
the value function with d months of elapsed entitlement. The rules of SSP provide a link between these

13

A key simplifying assumption is that wage opportunities do not depend on previous work effort. Based on the fact
that the average marginal wage for hours of work attributed to SSP does not rise relative to the mean wage of the
control group, we believe this assumption is reasonable.

14
functions and the value functions in the absence of the program. In particular, Vi(t)=V0 for t≥13, and
Ue(w,d)=U(w) and Ve(d)=V0 for all d>36, because of the 12 month time limit on the establishment period
and 36 month limit on the entitlement period. A revealed preference argument implies Ue(w,d)≥U(w) for
all w and any d≤36, since the subsidy paid to a worker earning a wage w is non-negative. Furthermore,
Vi(t) is decreasing in t since less time is available to establish entitlement, and Ue(w,d) and Ve(d) are both
decreasing in d since the entitlement period is finite.
People who are SSP-entitled and working accept any job offer paying more than their current
wage, while those who are on welfare with d months of elapsed entitlement accept any job paying more
than Re(d), defined by Ve(d) = Ue(Re(d),d). Since people can quit jobs that are no longer acceptable once
their SSP entitlement ends, the optimal reservation wage for an SSP-entitled worker equates the net
income from a reservation-wage job to the flow value of welfare, b+c. Since b and c are fixed, Re is
independent of d and is defined by Re+s(Re) = b+c, where s(w) represents the subsidy for working at a
wage rate w.14
Furthermore, SSP-eligible individuals who are still on welfare in month t and not yet established
SSP entitlement have a reservation wage R(t) satisfying the condition Vi(t) = Ue(R(t),1). From this
equality and the fact that Vi(t) is decreasing in t it follows that R(t) is decreasing in t: i.e., a person who is
eligible for SSP but has not yet become entitled has a lower and lower reservation wage as they approach
the end of the 12 month time window for establishing entitlement. Moreover, the reservation wage in the
first month of eligibility, R(1), is strictly less than the reservation wage once entitled, since a full-time job
for someone who is not yet entitled provides the same flow benefits as for someone who is entitled, and
also guarantees future eligibility: i.e. Re > R(13) ≥ R(14) .... ≥ R(24).
Consider now the behavior of people in the Applicant experiment prior to the close of the 12

14

Since s(w)≥0, the reservation wage for those with SSP-entitlement is below the reservation wage R in the absence
of the program. Indeed since R=b+c, we have that Re+s(Re) = R. Note that Re could be below the minimum wage,
however SSP rules required participants to earn at least the minimum wage.

15
month waiting period. After t months from initial entry into welfare, a member of the program group has
two value functions: ViP(t), the value of welfare in month t≤12 conditional on not having left welfare; and
UiP(w,t), the value of taking a job paying wage w in month t and also losing eligibility. First, note that
ViP(12) = Vi(0) ≥ V0, since SSP-eligibility is achieved after 12-months, and so the value of not working in
month 12 is the value of not working conditional on eligibility with 0 months of elapsed eligibility.
Similarly, ViP(t) ≥ V0 for t=1, ..., 12, since there is positive option value to being on welfare and
potentially SSP-eligible relative to being on welfare without SSP-eligibility. Second, note that UiP(w,t) =
U(w) for t=1, ..., 12, since if someone takes a job before achieving SSP-eligibility their eligibility is lost –
i.e., the value of working is the same as in the absence of SSP. The reservation wage for a potentially
eligible person on welfare after t months, RP(t), satisfies the condition: ViP(t) = UiP(RP(t),t) = U(RP(t)) ≥
V0. This implies that RP(t) ≥ R, since the value of welfare for someone who remains potentially SSPeligible is greater than in the absence of SSP. Furthermore, the reservation wage rises during the preeligibility period because the present discounted value of the option value associated with achieving SSPeligibility increases as the eligibility date approaches – i.e. RP(t+1) ≥ RP(t) ≥ R, for t=1, ..., 11.
The effects of SSP on the welfare/work decision can be summarized by the difference between
the reservation wage profiles of a representative welfare recipient in the presence or absence of SSP.
Figures 3a-c show the reservation wage R=b+c in the absence of SSP, together with the sequence of
reservation wages for a recent welfare entrant who is offered potential SSP eligibility, under three
scenarios. Figure 3a shows the sequence for someone who leaves welfare during the initial 12 month preeligibility period and therefore loses SSP eligibility. Figure 3b describes the sequence for someone who
stays on welfare for the full 12 month waiting period and becomes eligible for the SSP offer, but fails to
establish entitlement during the next 12 month window. Finally, Figure 3c shows the sequence for
someone who becomes eligible for SSP and successfully establishes entitlement for the subsidy in month
te. In each case, the reservation wage reverts to that in the absence of SSP (R=b+c), either when potential
or actual eligibility is lost, or when entitlement expires.

16
The path of the optimal reservation wage from this model illustrates the three different incentive
regimes experienced by members of the SSP-A treatment group. First, during the 12 month waiting
period members of the treatment group have a high and increasing reservation wage relative to members
of the control group, leading to a slower exit rate from welfare. Although the SSP rules allowed
individuals to be off-welfare for a single month during the first year and still maintain eligibility, loss of
eligibility is essentially determined by the first exit from welfare during this period. This has implications
for modeling the pre-eligibility waiting period, which we discuss in the next section in the context of our
econometric modeling. Second, for program group members who become eligible, the reservation wage
immediately drops and starts declining until entitlement is established in month te (or 24 months after the
start of the reference spell for those who don’t establish entitlement), leading to a faster rate of transition
from welfare to work than would be expected in the absence of SSP. Finally, those who establish
entitlement then adopt a higher reservation wage, but still lower than in the absence of SSP, implying that
they are more likely to leave welfare and re-enter work than otherwise similar members of the control
group. The jump in the reservation wage at te suggests that some people who accepted low-paying jobs to
establish entitlement may quit and return to welfare almost immediately. Once SSP eligibility or
entitlement ends, the reservation wage returns to its level in the absence of the program and the behavioral
effects of SSP disappear. Again, as a result of the jump in the reservation wage at the close of
entitlement, people holding jobs paying less than the reservation wage in the absence of SSP may quit and
re-enter welfare.
Although this model forms the basis for our interpretation of the impacts of the SSP-A study, it
provides a clearly simplified characterization of participant behavior, and does not capture several
important facets of the environment in which it operated. First, the model assumes that the cost of work
is constant over time and unaffected by previous work experience. A model with habit persistence might
imply that individuals who work more when SSP is available eventually lower their reservation wages,
leading to a persistent effect on employment and IA. In our empirical model we incorporate a post-

17
entitlement treatment effect that, absent any effect of SSP on wage opportunities, we interpret as a habit
persistence effect.
The model also assumes that people either receive welfare or work full time when, in fact, some
people work full time without leaving welfare, and others leave welfare without entering full time work.
In our empirical model, we focus on welfare participation and distinguish between leaving welfare and
becoming SSP-entitled to allow for this. Closely related to this point, the model assumes that individuals
either accept or turndown job offers as they arrive, with no ability to “inventory” an offer until sometime
in the future. This may be particularly important during the initial eligibility period if members of the
program group are able to find a job but delay the start of work until after the close of the waiting period
so as to retain their SSP eligibility. One implication of such behavior is that we might see a “spike” in
flows off welfare and into full time employment immediately after the close of the waiting period. To the
extent that people could actually take a full time job and remain on welfare there would be no spike in the
flow into full time employment, but there would still be a relatively rapid drop off in welfare
participation. We investigate this in more detail in our empirical model, below.
Finally, the model predictions are not invariant to the welfare policy changes that occurred in
British Columbia over the period. Most importantly, the 6 month disqualification period for job quitters
to receive IA, introduced in 1996, would affect the prediction that some members of the program group
would quit a job and return to IA immediately after establishing SSP entitlement, and/or at the end of
their SSP entitlement period.

III. An Econometric Framework for Estimating the Impacts of SSP on Welfare
We now turn to the specification of an econometric model for estimating the impacts of SSP on
welfare participation. Our model starts with a logistic probability model for monthly welfare
participation in the absence of SSP, with second order state dependence and a relatively simple

18
specification of unobserved heterogeneity. Although other approaches are feasible (such as a two-state
hazard model framework), the data from the SSP experiment are recorded on a monthly basis, so a
discrete panel data approach is not particularly restrictive.15 Moreover, as we show in the next section,
this class of models provides a relatively accurate description of the observed behavior of the
experimental groups.
Building on the insights developed in the previous section, we extend this model to the program
group by incorporating three sequential incentives: an incentive to remain on IA in the qualification
period; an incentive to find a job and leave IA in the immediate post-eligibility period (for those who
satisfied the waiting period requirement); and an incentive to stay off welfare during the three year period
of SSP entitlement (for those who satisfied the waiting period and found a full time job within the next
year). In recognition of the pattern of experimental impacts observed in Figure 1, we also estimate
models that include a post-entitlement effect for those who received SSP payments.
To simplify the associated empirical model, we do not explicitly model welfare participation in
the first 12 months after initial entry into the IA system.16 Instead, we summarize this period according
to whether or not the individual satisfied the waiting period to be potentially eligible for SSP. We
combine this with a model of IA participation in months 13-84 and a model for the process of initiating
SSP payments among members of the eligible program group. Also, as discussed in the previous section,
one possible reaction to the offer of SSP eligibility is to accumulate an inventory of deferred job offers
during the waiting period and then take the best one that is still available immediately after achieving
eligibility. We incorporate this possibility by assuming that the program group members who delayed
their exit from welfare to achieve SSP eligibility had an inventoried job offer and began receiving

15

Efron (1988) shows that in a conventional hazard model setting in which the data are recorded in discrete time, a
simple logistic model for the failure event has many attractive features. We are unaware of a similar analysis for the
“two state” case.

16

Card and Robins (2005) present a series of models examining the behavior of the program and control groups of
the Applicant experiment in the first year after random assignment.

19
supplement payments very soon after the end of the waiting period.

a. SSP Eligibility, SSP Entitlement, and Welfare Dynamics
Formally, we summarize the welfare outcomes and SSP status of the program and control groups
with three sets of variables: a dummy variable Si indicating whether individual i was potentially eligible
for SSP at the end of the 12 month waiting period; a sequence of dummy variables (Ei13, Ei14, …,EiT’)
indicating whether or not the individual was entitled to SSP payments as of the start of month t (with T’
denoting the last month of potential entitlement); and a sequence of dummy variables (yi13, yi14, … yi84)
indicating IA participation in each month from 13 to 84 months after initial entry into IA. Building on the
model developed in Card and Hyslop (2005), we assume that differences across the experimental
population are summarized by a (possibly multi-dimensional) random effect αi.17 We exploit the
randomly assigned treatment status and assume that the distribution of random effects is the same for the
program group (indicated by Pi=1) and the control group (indicated by Pi=0).
For a given value of the random effect, we assume that eligibility status is determined
independently of subsequent SSP receipt or IA participation, that entitlement status of the eligible
program group is determined independently of current and lagged IA participation; and that IA
participation depends on lagged participation and current and lagged entitlement status. Specifically, we
assume that the joint probability of eligibility status, entitlement, and IA participation, conditional on
program group status, is given by a model of the form:
P(Si ; Ei13, Ei14, … EiT’; yi13, yi14, … yi84 | Pi)



∫  P( S

=

i

t

α

=



∫  P( S
α

17

i




| Pi ,α i ).∏ P ( yit , Eit |yit −1 ,..., Eit −1 ,..., Si , Pi ,α i )  f (α i )dα i




| Pi ,α i ).∏ P ( Eit |Eit −1 ,..., Si ,α i ).P ( yit | yit −1 , yit − 2 , Eit ,..., Si , Pi ,α i )  f (α i )dα i
t

Thus, we ignore any observable components of heterogeneity, such as age, gender, or education.

20
where f(αi) represents the probability distribution of the random effect. We adopt the convention that a
higher value of αi is associated with a higher probability of IA participation. In particular, we assume that
αi represents a person-specific intercept in the model for P(yit | yit-1, yit-2, Eit, Eit-1,…, Pi, αi). We consider
two alternative specifications for the random effects: first, we assume that f(αi) is a normal density, with
mean 0 and standard deviation σ; and second, that f(αi) is a discrete distribution with a relatively small
number of points of support (Laird, 1978; Lindsay, 1983a, 1983b; Card and Sullivan, 1988).

b. Modeling SSP Eligibility
For an individual to be potentially eligible for SSP, the rules required that they receive IA for at
least 12 of the 13 months from the start of their reference spell. Thus, we expect eligibility status to be
correlated with the intercept in the welfare participation model. In our normal heterogeneity models we
assume that the probability of eligibility is given by:
(1a)

P(Si=1| Pi, αi ) = logit [ δ0 + δ1 αi + δ2Pi + δ3 Pi αi ],

where logit[x]=exp[x]/(1+exp[x]) represents the logistic distribution function. For members of the
control group this probability depends on the index δ0 + δ1 αi. We expect δ1>0, reflecting the correlation
of eligibility status with the latent propensity to remain on IA. The index for the program group includes
an intercept shift δ2 and an interaction δ3 αi. Since members of the program group had an incentive to
delay their exit from IA, we expect δ2>0. The sign of δ3 depends on whether high or low propensity
welfare users respond more or less to the SSP delayed-exit incentive. In our discrete heterogeneity
models, we consider a generalization of (1a) that allows different probabilities of eligibility in the
treatment and control groups for each value of the random effect:
(1b)

P(Si=1| Pi, αi ) = logit [ δ1(αi) + δ2(αi)Pi ],

where δ1(αi) and δ2(αi) take on separate values for each value of αi.18

18

Note that this is equivalent to assuming that heterogeneity is summarized by a three dimensional vector with
discrete points of support.

21

c. Modeling SSP Entitlement
For members of the program group who attained SSP eligibility, the second part of our model
describes the sequence of dummy variables indicating when (and if) they successfully initiated SSP
payments. Conceptually, the eligible program group can be divided into two subgroups: those who would
have been eligible even if they were assigned to the control group (which we refer to as the “windfalleligible” subgroup); and those who delayed their IA exit behavior in order to gain SSP eligibility (the
“delayed exiters”).19 Although we cannot identify which subgroup a given individual belongs to, we posit
separate behavior for each subgroup, and assume that the observed behavior of the eligible program group
represents an (appropriately weighted) average of the two subgroups.
For the windfall-eligible subgroup we assume that the sequence of establishment dummies
follows a simple hazard process:
Φ[ dE0 + dE1(t-13) – k αi ] ,
(2a) ht(αi) = P(Eit=1 | Eit-1, Eit-2, …; αi) = 1,
0,

if Eit-1=0 and 13≤t≤T’

if Eit-1=1
if Eit-1=0 and t>T’,

where Φ is the standard normal distribution function. This model implies that the hazard of initiating SSP
payments depends on a linear trend and on the heterogeneity component αi through the factor loading k.
In our models with discrete heterogeneity we also consider a generalization of equation (2a) that includes
a separate intercept for each value of the random effect. The SSP rules stated that after achieving
eligibility people in the program group had one year to find a fulltime job and initiate supplement
payments, implying that T’=24. In the available data files, however, we only know the date of each
person’s first SSP check. We assume that the date of the first check is two months after the date of actual
entitlement. Even under this assumption, there are many people with late entitlement dates. To allow for

19

The eligibility rates of the control and program groups are 54.1% and 57.0%, respectively. Hence the delayers
represent about 5.1% (= 100*(57.0-54.1)/57.0) of the eligible subgroup.

22
administrative delays and other sources of slippage we set T’=26, implying a 14 month entitlement
window (see the Data Appendix for further discussion). We censor the establishment date at month 26
for all cases where it seems to have occurred later.
With respect to the delayed exiters, we assume that this group obtained job offers during the
waiting period that they were able to delay starting until (soon) after becoming eligible for the SSP
offer.20 An examination of the distribution of entitlement dates shows only a small fraction of people
became entitled at month 13 (3.6% of those who ever became entitled), but reveals a sharp “spike” in
entitlements at month 14 (11.6% of those who ever became entitled). Since there was no such spike in
the entitlement distribution in the SSP Recipient experiment, we believe this is plausibly attributable to
the delayed exiters. Based on this, we assume that none of the delayed exiters became entitled at month
13, a fraction λ14 became entitled at month 14 and the remaining (1-λ14) became entitled at month 15.21
The observed entitlement hazard of the eligible program group in month t depends on the fraction
of delayed exiters in the population at risk to initiate SSP. For a given value of the random effect, the
fraction of the eligible program group who are delayed exiters at the beginning of month 13 is
(2b)

π13(αi) = [ P(Si=1| Pi=1, αi ) - P(Si=1| Pi=0, αi )] / P(Si=1| Pi=1, αi ) .

Given our assumption that none of the delayed exiters establish entitlement in the first possible month, the
overall hazard of entitlement in month 13 (conditional on αi) is therefore
(2c)

(1- π13(αi)) × h13 (αi) .

At the beginning of month 14, the fraction of delayed exiters among those who have not yet established
SSP entitlement is
(2d)

π14 (αi) = π13(αi) / [ (1-π13(αi)) (1-h13(αi)) + π13(αi) ] ,

20

We have also considered a more general model in which only a fraction θ “inventoried” job offers until soon after
satisfying the waiting period requirement, while the remaining fraction (1-θ) either turned down job offers that they
would otherwise have accepted or searched less intensively in order to satisfy the eligibility criteria. Assuming that
the behavior of the latter group is the same as the windfall group, we estimate θ to be very close to 1 but imprecise.
21

We also experimented with some models that allowed the delayed exiters to establish eligibility in months 13, 14,
or 15. Our results are robust to this variation.

23
reflecting the attrition of the windfall-eligible subgroup. The overall hazard of entitlement in month 14 is
therefore
(2e)

(1-π14( αi)) × h14(αi) + π14 (αi) × λ14 .

Similarly, the fraction of delayed exiters among those still at risk to become entitled in month 15 is
(2f)

π15 (αi) = π14(αi) ( 1-λ14 ) / [ (1-π14(αi)) (1-h14(αi)) + π14(αi)(1-λ14) ] ,

and the overall hazard of entitlement in month 15 is
(2g)

(1- π15 ( αi)) × h15(αi) + π15 (αi) .

Finally, under the assumption that all of the delayed exiters become entitled in either month 14 or month
15, the overall hazard of entitlement in months 16 and later is just the hazard for the windfall-eligible
group, ht(αi). The combination of equations (2a)-(2g) provides a complete probability statement for
P(Ei13, Eit14, … Ei26 | Pi , Si, αi).
d. Modeling IA Participation Dynamics
The final component of our model is a specification for IA participation behavior over the period
beginning in month 13. We consider models of the form:
(3)

P(yit-1 | yit-1, yit-1, …, Eit, Eit-1, …, Si, Pi, αi)
= logit {αi + dy(t) + γ1 yit-1 + γ2 yit-2 + γ3 yit-1yit-2 + Pi τ(t,Si,Eit,tei,yit-1,αi)}, t=13, …, T=84,

where dy(t) = dy0 + dy1(t-12) + dy2(t-12)2 + dy3(t-12)3 is a cubic trend in the number of months since the
close of the eligibility window, τ(t,Si,Eit,tei,yit-1,αi) represents the treatment effect of SSP on applicants’ IA
participation in month t, and tei = min t {Eit=1} represents the month in which individual i established SSP
entitlement. Note that for the control group model (3) is just a logistic model with second-order state
dependence and a random effect. For the program group, we allow for three distinct treatment effects
SSP. The first, which we call the “establishment effect”, reflects the requirement that people had to find a
full time job and leave IA in order to become entitled to subsidy payments. Thus, we expect to observe a
large negative impact on IA participation in the period immediately surrounding tei (the first month of

24
entitlement). The second effect, which we call the “entitlement effect”, reflects the fact that people who
were entitled to the SSP subsidy had a stronger incentive to remain off welfare than similar members of
the control group. This incentive remained in effect for 3 years from when entitlement was established –
i.e. until (tei+35). The third effect, which we call the “post-entitlement effect”, reflects any long term
impact beyond the expiry of the subsidy, and affects behavior after month (tei+36).
Specifically, we assume that the treatment effects of SSP on the program group are given by:
(4)

τ(t,Si,Eit,tei,yit-1,αi) = Si × Eit × { 1(tei ≤ t ≤ tei+2) [τ01(αi)yit-1 + τ00(αi)(1-yit-1)]
+ 1(tei+3 ≤ t ≤ tei+35) [τ11(αi)yit-1 + τ10(αi)(1-yit-1)]
+ 1(tei+36 ≤ t) [τ21(αi)yit-1 + τ20(αi)(1-yit-1)] },

where τ01(αi) and τ00(αi) represent the establishment effects of SSP entitlement for people who were on or
off IA in the preceding month, respectively; similarly, τ11(αi) and τ10(αi) represent the entitlement effects,
and τ21(αi) and τ20(αi) represent the post-entitlement effects. Note that the treatment effects only affect
members of the program group who are entitled to SSP as of month t, and the establishment effects occur
in a narrow 3-month window from tei to (tei+2). In addition, we adopt a simple “one-factor” model for the
variation in treatment effects with the value of the random effect:
τuv(αi) = ωuv + ηuv.αi

for u=0,1,2 and v=0,1.

To allow for the possibility that the post-eligibility effects fade over time (as Figure 1a suggests), we also
consider a specification in which these effects decay exponentially after entitlement ends.
A final issue in modeling IA dynamics from month 13 onward is the specification of the initial
conditions (yi11,yi12) for this process. To deal with this issue we use the empirical distribution of (yi11,yi12)
conditional on Si from the combined SSP-A sample. This is an over-simplification because it ignores any
variation in the likelihood of a specific initial condition with respect to the value of the random effect.
Nevertheless, we believe it provides a reasonable approximation to the process generating the initial
conditions. In particular, 95% of the SSP-eligible subset have the initial condition (yi11,yi12) = (1,1), and
75% of the SSP-ineligible subgroup have (yi11,yi12) = (0,0), so the potential for variability with the

25
unobserved heterogeneity component is limited.

IV. Estimation Results
a. Models for the Control Group Only
The first three columns of Table 3 report parameter estimates for three alternative specifications
of the model, restricted to the control group only. Column 1 reports a specification with normally
distributed heterogeneity, column 2 reports a model with discrete heterogeneity (assuming four mass
points), and column 3 presents a model with discrete heterogeneity and a generalized model of selection
into eligibility. For the normal heterogeneity model we report the estimated standard deviation of the
random effect in the 4th row of the table. For the models with discrete heterogeneity, we report the
locations of the mass points and their probabilities at the bottom of the table. Note that all models also
include a cubic time trend.
The estimated state dependence parameters from all three specifications are very similar, with
large positive coefficients for the first and second lags of IA participation and a negative interaction
effect. The parameters of the eligibility model in columns 1 and 2 are also very similar, and show a high
correlation between the random effect and the probability of eligibility. This makes sense, given that
eligibility status is roughly the same as not having left welfare by month 12. The specification in column
3 replaces the “one factor” assumption of the baseline eligibility model (equation 1a) with a set of masspoint-specific constants. This addition improves the likelihood significantly, but has little impact on the
state dependence parameters. Although not reported in the table, the estimated constants are very highly
correlated with the mass points in the IA participation model (correlation = 0.9 across 4 mass points)
suggesting that a “1-factor” model like (1a) is reasonable.
In order to evaluate the predictive power of the alternative models, we simulated each model
(using 40 draws on the random effect for each observation) and derived the predicted fractions of the
control group in 20 mutually exclusive “cells” defined by the total number of months on IA during

26
months 13-84, and the number of transitions between IA states.22 We then construct an informal
summary statistic based on the sum of the squared differences between the actual and predicted
frequencies in each cell.23 Based on this measure, the mass point models provide a slightly better fit than
the normal heterogeneity model, and the model with generalized selection provides the best fit
(GOF=137.8). The qualitative and quantitative differences between the models are small, however. We
also fit a model with 5 mass points. This model has only a slightly higher likelihood than the model in
column 3, and yields very similar predictions for the IA histories of the control group.

b. Models for the Program and Control Groups
Columns 3-6 of Table 3 present a set of increasingly complex specifications for the joint behavior
of the control and program groups in the SSP Applicant experiment. The model in column 4 extends the
simple normal heterogeneity model of column 1 to include the SSP-entitlement process and treatment
effects for the program group. The model in column 5 similarly extends the mass point model in column
2. In both cases we assume that the post-entitlement effects of the SSP program are proportional to the
effects during the entitlement period, with separate proportionality factors for the effects on IA entry and
exit. As discussed above, we also assume that all of the “delayed exiters” in the eligible program group
become entitled in months 14 or 15.
The estimates for the shared parameters in the pooled and controls-only models are very similar,
providing some support for the underlying assumptions of our modeling framework. In particular, the
22

Overall there are 272 possible welfare histories over the interval from month 13 to 84. In order to ensure
reasonable cell sizes, we classify the number of months on IA into 8 intervals (0, 1-6, 12-23, 13-24, 25-36, 37-54,
55-71, and 72), and classify the numbers of transitions into 4 categories: 0 (implying either always on or always off
IA), 1 (i.e. a single transition over the period), “2+ even” (implying an individual’s final, month-84, state is the same
as their initial, month-13, state), and “3+ odd” (implying their final state differs from their initial state). Table 4
shows the actual distribution of the control and program groups across these cells, and the predictions from the
model in column (6) of Table 3.
23
The idea of comparing the actual and predicted frequencies from multinomial models is formalized in Moore
(1977) and has been used by Card and Sullivan (1988), Chay and Hyslop (2001), and Card and Hyslop (2005). We
construct the standard Pearson statistic, Σj (Oj – Ej)2/Ej, where Oj and Ej are the observed and predicted frequencies

27
state dependence parameters are nearly identical, as are the estimates of the standard deviation of the
random effect (for the normal heterogeneity models 1 and 5), and the locations and probabilities of the
mass points (for the discrete heterogeneity models 2 and 6). The goodness-of-fit statistics for the control
group are also quite similar for the pooled and controls-only models and, although not reported in the
table, the estimates of the cubic trend parameters are also very similar across these models.
The model in column 6 of Table 3 generalizes the specification in column 5 in three ways. First,
it includes a generalized eligibility model, like the specification in column 3, with unrestricted parameters
for the eligibility rate at each mass point for either the program or control groups. Second, it includes a
generalized specification for the hazard of establishing SSP, with separate intercepts for each mass point.
Third, it includes an extra parameter measuring the potential decay of the post-entitlement treatment
effects. In particular, the treatment effects s months after the end of SSP entitlement are:
τ21(s; αi) = ρ1 exp[-Rs] τ11(αi), and
τ20(s; αi) = ρ0 exp[-Rs] τ10(αi)
where τ11(αi) and τ10(αi) are the entitlement period treatment effects, ρ1 and ρ0 represent the fractions of
these treatment effects that persist immediately after the end of entitlement, and R is a parameter
representing the decay rate of the post-eligibility effects.
The generalized model has a significantly higher likelihood than the more restrictive mass point
model in column 5, and also leads to a slightly better goodness of fit statistic for the control group
(though not the program group). The estimated treatment effects from this specification are similar to the
estimates from either of the simpler models, and show a strong negative impact of the entitlement process
on IA participation, a somewhat smaller negative impact on participation rates during the entitlement
period, and a sizeable degree of post-entitlement persistence. The two models with no decay in the postentitlement effects suggest that about 50% of the effect on IA exits and 70% of the effect on IA entry
persisted after the end of SSP payments. The more general model in column 6 suggests that a larger
in cell j.

28
fraction of the entitlement effects persisted initially, and these effects decayed relatively rapidly, at a rate
of 2.9 percent per month (or about 30 percent per year).
The estimated establishment and entitlement period treatment effects for the models in Table 3
are similar to estimates we obtained for a similar specification of welfare participation behavior in the
SSP Recipient Study (Card and Hyslop, 2005, Table 6). In both experiments we find that the
establishment treatment effects are larger (more negative) for people with higher values of the random
effect. An explanation for this pattern is that because everyone who started receiving SSP payments had
to leave welfare, those with a higher underlying probability of welfare participation experienced a bigger
proportional treatment effect. However, an important difference between the experiments is the degree of
persistence of the treatment effects in the post-eligibility period. While we find evidence of a lasting
impact in the Applicant experiment here, we found a model with no persistence in the treatment effects
provides a remarkably good description of the experimental impacts in the Recipient experiment.
We have fit a number of additional models to probe the robustness of the results from our main
specifications. In one case we extended the model in column 6 to include 5 mass points. As for the
control group, the addition of an extra mass point leads to only a marginal improvement in the likelihood
of the model, and little change in the predicted behavior of either the program or control group. Another
model extended the specification in column 4 by including a free parameter for θ, the fraction of delayed
exiters who inventoried job offers. In this specification the estimate of θ is 0.96, and the likelihood is
essentially the same as for the restricted model. We also experimented with an alternative
parameterization for f(αi), in which we assumed a mixture of normal heterogeneity and a mass of “pure
leavers” – individuals who leave welfare too soon to establish eligibility and never return. This model
does not fit as well as the general discrete distribution model (column 6), but leads to similar estimates for
the treatment effects, and roughly similar predictions for the IA histories of the program groups.

29
c. Assessing Goodness of Fit
To provide more insight into the ability of the models in Table 3 to explain the behavior of the
program and control groups, Table 4 shows the predicted and actual distributions of the control and
program groups across the 20 cells used in our summary goodness of fit statistics, using the predictions
from the model in column 6. Inspection of the table shows that one place where the model does a
relatively poor job is in predicting the fraction of the sample that is off IA in every month. For example,
in the control group this cell has 396 observations (24% of the control population) but the predicted
number is only 328 (20% of the control population). Likewise in the program group this cell has 360
observations (22% of the program group) but the model only predicts 318 people in the cell (19% of the
sample). However, since the goodness of fit statistic sums the squared deviation between the predicted
and actual counts, divided by the predicted count, these prediction errors only contribute modestly to the
overall goodness of fit statistics. The biggest contributors are the two cells with 1 transition and 25-36 or
37-54 months on IA. In the control group, the model predicts a total of 55 people in these cells (3.3%)
versus an actual count of 110 (6.7%), and these two cells contribute 42% of the total value of the fit
statistic. Similarly, in the program group, the model only predicts 35 people in these cells (2.1% of the
sample) relative to an actual count of 89 (5.4%), and these two cells contribute 58% of the total value of
the fit statistic for the program group. Given the sensitivity of the fit statistics to small cells, we conclude
that the model in column 6 of Table 3 provides reasonable predictions for the IA histories of the two
groups, albeit not accurate enough to pass conventional chi-squared tests.
Another way to assess the predictive power of the model is to compare the predicted and actual
time profiles of welfare participation. Figure 4 shows the predicted and actual IA profiles for the
treatment and control groups. Predictions for the control group are quite accurate, with a root mean
squared prediction error of 0.004. Predictions for the program group are less so (root mean squared
prediction error=0.009) though the correlation between the predicted and actual fraction on IA is over
0.998. Close inspection of the figure suggests that the model over-predicts the welfare participation rate

30
of the program group in months 24-32, and under-predicts the rate in later months of the sample period.
Further insights are provided in Figures 6a, 6b, and 6c, which compare the actual and predicted
IA participation rates for various subgroups of the control and program groups. Figure 5a compares the
model’s fits to the actual IA profiles of the eligible and ineligible subsets of the control group.
Considering the simplicity of the model, it does remarkably well in predicting the divergent paths of the
two groups. Similarly, Figure 5b compares the actual and predicted participation patterns for the eligible
and ineligible program subgroups. The model does quite well for the eligible subgroup, but has some
difficulty predicting the IA profile of the ineligible subgroup. In particular, the model over-predicts IA
participation of the ineligible programs in months 18-34 and under-predicts their IA participation in
months 54 onward. According to the model, the time profile of IA participation for the ineligible
program group should roughly parallel the profile of the ineligible controls, since they only differ in terms
of the relative distribution of random effects. In fact, however, as we discuss further below, there is a
distinct difference in the time profiles of IA participation for the two groups which is not explained by our
model.
Figure 5c compares the actual and predicted profiles for subsets of the eligible program group
who did or did not manage to establish SSP entitlement. The predictions for the two groups are unbiased
on average, but there are clearly intervals where the model over-predicts the IA participation of one group
and over-predicts the rate for the other, and vice versa. A notable difficulty for the model is in predicting
the “dip” in IA participation in months 24-36 for the group who received SSP. In our analysis of the
Recipient experiment we encountered a similar problem, perhaps due to the imprecision in our measure of
the timing of the transition period during which eligible program group members first became entitled to
SSP.
Another way to evaluate the model is to compare the predicted and actual gaps in IA participation
between the treatment and control groups. This exercise is presented in Figure 6a. Consistent with the
patterns in Figure 5c, the model under-predicts the SSP impacts on IA participation in months 18-36. It

31
also systematically over-predicts the magnitude of the gap between the program and control groups after
month 36. At first glance this may seem to be evidence that the model is over-estimating the postentitlement effects of SSP. Further investigation, however, suggests that the problem is related to the
difficulty of under-predicting the IA participation of the ineligible programs, noted in Figure 5b. One
piece of evidence in favor of this interpretation is Figure 6b, which shows the predicted and actual gaps in
IA participation between the eligible program group and the subset of the control group who satisfied the
eligibility criterion.24 The model does a relatively good job of explaining the gaps in IA participation
between the eligible program group and the eligible control group, especially after month 36. The “flip
side” of this comparison is presented in Figure 6c, where we present the predicted and actual gaps in IA
participation between the ineligible program group and the ineligible control group. The profile of actual
differences displays an unusual pattern, falling to about -3% by about month 24, then rising to 2% by
month 36, and then fluctuating around this level for the remainder of the period. In contrast, the predicted
difference is quite stable and very close to 0. Since the ineligible groups comprise about one-half of the
experimental population, the 2 percentage point prediction error for the gap between the ineligible
program and control groups can account for the roughly 1-percentage point prediction error for the
overall gap between the treatment and control groups in the later months of the sample.
As a further check on this interpretation, we re-estimated the model in column 6 of Table 3,
imposing the assumption that all the behavioral effects of SSP ended when subsidy payments ended. The
resulting model has a significantly lower likelihood (chi-square statistic = 24.0 with 3 degrees of
freedom) and does a much worse job of tracking the differences between the program and control group,
and between the eligible subsets of the two program groups. Based on these findings, and the results in
Figures 7b and 7c, we conclude that the systematic pattern of prediction errors for the overall treatment

24

An issue with this comparison is that the eligible program group is bigger, since it includes the delayed
exiters. These are only about 5 percent of the total eligible programs, however, so their influence is small
on either the actual or predicted outcomes.

32
effect of SSP is driven by the relatively flatter trend in IA participation for the ineligible program group
than the ineligible control group – a divergence that is not explainable by our simple model of eligibility
determination, and may in fact be due to random chance.
The other models presented in Table 3 lead to broadly similar predictions as those shown in
Figures 5, 6a-6c, and 7a-7c, although the model in column 6 has the best forecasting performance (in
terms of root mean squared prediction errors). In particular, comparisons between the specifications in
columns 4 and 5 suggest there is not much difference in the predictive performance of models that use a
discrete distribution of random effects or a normal distribution. The superior performance of the model in
column 6 seems to be attributable to the generalized selection and establishment models, and to the
introduction of the decay parameter for the post-entitlement effects.

d. Understanding SSP’s Effects
By simulating the models in Table 3 under various counterfactual assumptions it is possible to
gain some additional insights into the behavioral responses of the program group to the incentives created
in the Applicant experiment. This exercise is particularly useful for illustrating the separate impacts of
the establishment effect and the entitlement effect of the SSP, and showing the effect of the delayed
exiters on the profile of SSP impacts.
Figure 7 conducts this exercise using the model in column 6 of Table 3. We first simulate the IA
participation rates of the control group. Then we simulate the rates for the program group, beginning by
assuming that the only treatment effects are the establishment effects (associated with the requirement
that people leave IA to establish an entitlement to SSP payments). The resulting profile of treatment
effects peaks at about -5 percentage points in month 26, then dissipates relatively quickly. Next, we
simulate the rates for the program group, including both the establishment effects and the entitlement
period effects. The predicted treatment effects under this scenario peak at about -8.5 percentage points in
month 26, remain relatively large until about month 54 (when people began to exhaust their three year

33
entitlements to subsidy payments), then fade relatively quickly. The third simulation adds the posteligibility treatment effects, and generates the profile that was shown in Figure 6a. A comparison of these
three profiles shows how the pattern of observed impacts in the SSP Applicant experiment can be
explained by a combination of the establishment effects, the entitlement period effects, and the postentitlement effects, which seem to have persisted for at least two years after people were no longer
receiving SSP payments.
The final simulation in Figure 7 is designed to show the impact of the delayed exiters in the
program group. We conduct this simulation by “switching off” the eligibility of people in the program
group who would not have been eligible if they were in the control group. The presence of this group,
which (in the simulation) represents about 2 percent of the overall program group, explains the positive
impact of SSP on IA participation in month 12. In the counterfactual simulation with no delayed exit
response, virtually all of these people are off IA in month 12, and the implied experimental impact is 0.
Our model assumes all of the delayed exiters took up the subsidy, so in later months their presence adds
to the net impact of the program. On average, however, we estimate that the program impact would only
have been about 0.20 percentage points smaller in months 18-54 in the absence of this group. This is
largely because the majority of delayed exiters would have been off IA in the absence of SSP, so the
scope for this group to be affected by the subsidy during the entitlement period and beyond is limited.
That is, the main effect of the delayed exiters is to increase the fraction of the sample who become SSP
eligible and then establish entitlement, thus raising the cost of the subsidy program.

V. Conclusions
In this paper we develop and estimate an econometric model of the behavioral effects of the SSP
Applicant Experiment. We use a simple search-theoretic model to show that Applicant experiment
created three incentives: (1) an eligibility incentive for new welfare entrants to remain on welfare for a
year to become eligible for the subsidy; (2) an establishment incentive to find a job and leave welfare

34
within the next 12 months for people who became eligible for the subsidy; and (3) an entitlement
incentive to work full time and remain off welfare over the 36 months that subsidy payments were
available for those who established SSP eligibility. Experimental comparisons between the treatment and
control groups cannot separately distinguish these effects. Thus, we extend the econometric model
developed in Card and Hyslop (2005) for analyzing the SSP Recipient experiment to incorporate the
waiting period requirement in the Applicant study.
Our empirical results show that the time profile of the experimental impacts in the SSP Applicant
study can be explained by a combination of an eligibility incentive (which increased welfare participation
during the waiting period), an establishment incentive (which led to a rapid rate of welfare-leaving among
members of the program group who satisfied the waiting period requirement), and longer-term
entitlement incentives of the program. In particular, most of the impact of SSP soon after the waiting
period was due to the “establishment” incentive, with about two-thirds of the peak impact attributable to
this incentive. Our results help reconcile the relatively large peak impact observed in the SSP Applicant
experiment compared to other welfare reform programs with universal eligibility, and offer a simple
interpretation for the decline from the 11 percentage point peak effect 27 months after initial entry into IA
to about 6 percent by months 40-48. We also find evidence that the impact of the subsidy persisted after
SSP payments ended. Our results suggest that 60-90 percent of the entitlement incentive effects persisted
immediately post-entitlement, but faded relatively quickly, at a decay rate of about 3 percent per month.
Finally, we conclude that nearly all of the people in the treatment group who delayed their initial
exit from IA in response to the incentives of the program left IA within 2-3 months of the end of the
waiting period, and became entitled for the SSP subsidy. Although these delayed exiters were apparently
responding to the incentives created by the SSP time limits, leading to an increase in the costs of the
program, simulations from our models suggest that the presence of the delayed exiters has a very small
effect on the magnitude of the SSP impacts in later months.

35
References
Ashenfelter, Orley, "Determining Participation in Income-Tested Social Programs," Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 78, September 1983, pp. 517-525.
Card, David and Dean R. Hyslop. “Estimating the Effects of a Time Limited Earnings Subsidy for
Welfare Leavers.” Econometrica 73 (November 2005): 1723-1770.
Card, David and Philip K. Robins. “How Important Are “Entry Effects” in Financial Incentive Programs
for Welfare Recipients? Experimental Evidence from the Self-Sufficiency Project.” Journal of
Econometrics 125 (March-April 2005): 113-139.
Card, David and Daniel G. Sullivan. “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training Programs on
Movements In and Out of Employment.” Econometrica 56 (May 1988): 497-530.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Dean R. Hyslop. “Identification and Estimation of Dynamic Binary Response
Panel Data Models: Empirical Evidence Using Alternative Approaches.” UC Berkeley Department of
Economics Unpublished Manuscript, April 2001.
Efron, Bradley. “Logistic Regression, Survival Analysis, and the Kaplan-Meier Curve.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 83 (1988): 414-425.
Ford, Reuben, David Gyarmati, Kelly Foley, and Doug Tattrie. Can Work Incentives Pay for
Themselves? Final Report on the Self Sufficiency Project for Welfare Applicants. Ottawa: SRDC,
October 2003.
Ham, John and Robert J. LaLonde. “The Effect of Sample Selection and Initial Conditions in Duration
Models: Evidence from Experimental Data on Training”. Econometrica 64 (1996): 175-206.
Human Resources Development Canada (HRDC). Inventory of Income Security Programs in Canada.
Ottawa: HRCD, 1993.
Laid, Nan. “Nonparametric Maximum Likelihood Estimation of a Mixing Distribution.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 73 (1978): 805-811.
Lin, Winston, Philip K. Robins, David Card, Kristen Harknett, and Susanna Lui-Gurr. When Financial
Incentives Encourage Work: Complete 18 Month Findings from the Self Sufficiency Project. Ottawa:
Social Research and Demonstration Corporation, 1998.
Lindsay, B. G. “The Geometry of Mixture Likelihoods: A General Theory.” Annals of Statistics 11
(1983a): 86-94.
Lindsay, B. G. “The Geometry of Mixture Likelihoods II: The Exponential Family.” Annals of Statistics
11 (1983b): 783-792.
Michalopoulos, Charles, David Card, Lisa A. Gennetian, Kristen Harknett and Philip K. Robins. “The
Self Sufficiency Project at 36 Months: Effects of a Financial Work Incentive on Employment and
Income.” Ottawa: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation, June 2000.

36
Michalopoulos, Charles, Doug Tattrie, Cynthia Miller, Philip K. Robins, Pamela Morris, David Gyarmati,
Cindy Redcross, Kelly Foley, and Reuben Ford. Making Work Pay: Final Report of the Self Sufficiency
Project for Long Term Welfare Recipients. Ottawa: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation,
July 2002.
Moffitt, Robert A., "The Effect of Employment and Training Programs on Entry and Exit from the
Welfare Caseload," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 15 (January 1996): pp. 32-50.
Moore, D. S. “Generalized Inverses, Wald’s Method, and the Construction of Chi-Squared Tests of Fit.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 72 (1977): 131-137.
Mortensen, Dale T. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Decisions.” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 30 (July 1977): 505-517.
Mortensen, Dale T. “Job Search and Labor Market Analysis.” In Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard,
editors, Handbook of Labor Economics (Volume II). New York: North Holland, 1986.

Data Appendix
This appendix explains various aspects of the data used in this study concerning timing
conventions, and variables used and created.
a. Timing conventions
Unless otherwise explicitly stated, all dates in the analysis are relative to the start month of the IA
reference spell. As shown in table 2, these start months range from 3 months prior to the month of
random assignment until the month of random assignment.
b. Determining Eligibility-status and date Eligibility was Achieved
We have used the binary variable “Eligible” in the original SSP-Applicants data extract as the
indicator of eligibility status. We edited one observation in the program group with Eligible=0, but with a
specified eligibility date (“Eligdate”) and received SSP payments, to be Eligible=1. Although a date of
eligibility (“Eligdate”) is provided for observations with Eligible=1, preliminary analysis suggested that
simply assuming eligibility occurs 12 months after the first month of the reference spell, as in the program
rules, appears to be more internally consistent with the data. For this reason, we have adopted this
assumption to date the eligibility for those individuals who achieve eligibility status.
c. SSP Entitlement-status, the month Entitlement was Established, and the Transition Period
The entitlement status for the program group individuals who have Eligible=1 is determined by
whether or not they ever received supplementary payments. The original dataset contains a variable
“tkupdate” that specifies the start of the entitlement period. However, from preliminary analysis of the
patterns of supplementary payment receipt around this variable date, we prefer instead to estimate the
establishment month directly from the patterns of supplementary payments. In particular, we took the first
month supplementary payments were received less 2 months (to reflect processing lags and delays
between first working fulltime, filing pay stubs and receiving the supplement payments) as our initial
estimated establishment month. This resulted in a range for the estimated establishment months of 12-28
(months relative to the start of the reference spell). We then allowed a 14 month establishment window
rather than 12 as specified in the SSP rules for processing delays and/or administrative flexibility in the
application of the rules, and censored this date at month 25 (this affects 12 out of 387 entitled individuals:
10 with month=26, and 1 each with month=27 and 28). Recognizing a delay occurs between establishing
entitlement and leaving IA, we add 1 month to these dates for our analysis of welfare dynamics, giving the
range of establishment months from 13 to 26. Finally, as in Card and Hyslop (2005), we assume a 3
month transition period beginning in the month entitlement is established, during which an entitled
individual is obliged to leave IA.

Table 1: Key Features of the SSP Applicants Demonstration
A. Program Eligibility
⋅ Eligibility limited to single parents, aged 19 and over, who are new applicants for Income
Assistance (IA) – not on IA in 6 months prior to current application.
⋅ Sample members drawn from IA registers in British Columbia, with random assignment between
February 1994 and March 1995.
⋅ 1,667 single parents assigned to the program group; 1,648 assigned to the control group.

B. Program Features
⋅ Eligibility for subsidy payments required program group members to remain on IA for 1 year (12
out of 13 months following start of IA reference spell).
⋅ Of those who become eligible, payments are only available to members who successfully initiate
their first supplement payment within one year of becoming eligible (13-24 months after start of
IA reference spell). Subsidy payments are available for 36 months from time of first payment.
⋅ Subsidy payments available to program group members who work at least 30 hours per week
(over a four-week or monthly accounting period), and earn at least the minimum wage.
⋅ Once established, program group members can return to IA at any time. Subsidy is reestablished when an eligible person begins working full time again. Recipients are ineligible for
IA while receiving subsidy payments.
⋅ Subsidy equals one-half of the difference between actual earnings and an earnings benchmark,
set at $3,083 per month in British Columbia in 1993, and adjusted for inflation in subsequent
years.
⋅ Subsidy payments are unaffected by unearned income or the earnings of a spouse / partner, and
are treated as regular income for income tax purposes.
⋅ Employers are not informed of SSP status. Program group members apply for subsidy payments
by mailing copies of payroll forms.

Table 2: Characteristics of SSP Applicants Experimental Samples
1996 Census
Vancouver
Lone Parents

Control
Group

Program
Group

Control Group, by
Eligibility Status
Ineligible Eligible

Program Group, by SSP:
Eligibility Status
Establishment
Ineligible Eligible
No take-up Take-up

Fraction Female
0.850
0.915
Average Age
39.5
32.4
Fraction Under 25
0.052
0.146
Fraction Never Married
0.219
0.245
Average No. Children < 6
0.430
0.61
Average No. Children 6-15
1.24(a)
0.81
Average No. Children 16-18
--0.13
Fraction Foreign Born
0.358
0.309
Fraction Grew Up with 2 Parents
--0.647
Fraction High School Graduate
0.629
0.622
Fraction College Graduate
0.245
0.130
Start of IA reference-spell relative to Random assignment:
3 months prior
--0.026
2 months prior
--0.213
1 month prior
--0.692
month of RA
--0.069

0.896
32.7
0.157
0.227
0.62
0.77
0.13
0.299
0.655
0.630
0.138

0.897
33.1
0.115
0.222
0.56
0.80
0.15
0.235
0.661
0.677
0.157

0.931
31.8
0.172
0.264
0.65
0.82
0.12
0.372
0.636
0.575
0.106

0.879
33.3
0.138
0.217
0.53
0.76
0.15
0.246
0.680
0.666
0.162

0.910
32.2
0.172
0.234
0.68
0.78
0.11
0.339
0.636
0.603
0.119

0.910
32.4
0.182
0.230
0.71
0.76
0.11
0.369
0.626
0.543
0.109

0.910
32.0
0.158
0.240
0.64
0.81
0.12
0.295
0.650
0.683
0.134

0.022
0.187
0.721
0.070

0.033
0.202
0.701
0.065

0.020
0.222
0.685
0.073

0.023
0.170
0.742
0.066

0.022
0.200
0.706
0.073

0.026
0.206
0.700
0.068

0.016
0.191
0.713
0.080

No. Months on IA Prior 3 Years
--Fraction Working at Baseline
0.612(b)
Average Years Work Experience
---

3.5
0.253
9.6

3.8
0.257
10.0

3.7
0.372
10.9

3.4
0.152
8.5

3.9
0.348
11.2

3.8
0.188
9.1

3.7
0.140
8.5

3.8
0.256
9.8

Fraction SSP Eligible
Fraction Take-up SSP

-----

0.541
---

0.570
0.237

0
---

1
---

0
0

1
0.416

1
0

1
1

1,543

1,651

1,632

758

893

701

931

544

387

Number of Observations

Note: 1996 Census sample includes all lone parents aged 19-55 living in Vancouver. SSP samples exclude observations who were not on IA in the 6 months
before or after random assignment, and whose IA reference spell started either 4 months before, or 1 month after, random assignment.
(a)
Average number of children aged 6+.
(b)
Working at Census date.

Table 3: Parameter Estimates for Models of IA Participation, SSP Eligibility, and SSP Entitlement
Models for the Control Group Only:
(1)
(2)
(3)

Models for the Control and Program Groups:
(4)
(5)
(6)

IA Participation Model:
Coefficient of y(t-1)

5.44 (0.07)

5.43 (0.07)

5.46

(0.07)

5.46

(0.05)

5.47

(0.05)

5.46

(0.05)

Coefficient of y(t-2)

2.16 (0.06)

2.17 (0.06)

2.19

(0.07)

2.17

(0.04)

2.19

(0.04)

2.15

(0.04)

Coefficient of y(t-1)×y(t-2)

-1.76 (0.09)

-1.75 (0.09)

-1.80

(0.09)

-1.70

(0.06)

-1.73

(0.06)

-1.70

(0.06)

Std. dev. of random effect

1.42 (0.04)

1.37

(0.03)

Eligibility Model:
Constant

0.24 (0.07)

0.08 (0.11)

0.28

(0.05)

-0.02

(0.10)

Coefficient of random effect

0.93 (0.07)

0.90 (0.07)

--

0.95

(0.06)

0.95

(0.05)

--

mass points

mass points

mass-pt specific

mass points

mass points

mass-pt specific

Program group dummy

--

--

--

0.08

(0.03)

0.09

(0.03)

--

Program group×random effect

--

--

--

-0.04

(0.04)

0.00

--

--

--

--

--

0.73

(0.15)

0.77

(0.14)

0.78

(0.11)

Constant

--

--

--

-1.97

(0.06)

-1.97

(0.06)

-1.96

(0.09)

Trend

--

--

--

0.23

(0.07)

0.23

(0.07)

0.26

(0.07)

Coefficient on random effect

--

--

--

0.02

(0.03)

0.01

(0.03)

Establishment Model:
Parameter for Delayed Exiters:
Hazard in month 14
Parameters for Windfall Eligibles:

Note: table continues. See notes at end of table.

mass-pt specific

Table 3: Parameter Estimates for Models of IA Participation, SSP Eligibility, and SSP Entitlement, Continued
Models for the Control Group Only:
(1)
(2)
(3)

Models for the Control and Program Groups:
(4)
(5)
(6)

Treatment Effects of IA:
Establishment Period:
Exit

--

--

--

-2.50

(0.17)

-2.35

(0.22)

-2.22

(0.21)

Exit × random effect

--

--

--

-0.82

(0.14)

-0.77

(0.15)

-0.82

(0.15)

Entry

--

--

--

-1.62

(0.41)

-1.75

(0.49)

-1.65

(0.44)

Entry × random effect

--

--

--

-0.28

(0.28)

-0.41

(0.28)

-0.21

(0.28)

Exit

--

--

--

-0.91

(0.17)

-0.84

(0.21)

-0.75

(0.18)

Exit × random effect

--

--

--

-0.42

(0.10)

-0.41

(0.10)

-0.42

(0.10)

Entry

--

--

--

-1.06

(0.15)

-1.13

(0.16)

-0.95

(0.18)

Entry × random effect

--

--

--

0.00

(0.10)

-0.03

(0.09)

-0.03

(0.12)

Exit

--

--

--

0.52

(0.07)

0.53

(0.06)

0.61

(0.13)

Entry

--

--

--

0.73

(0.10)

0.73

(0.09)

0.93

(0.21)

--

--

--

--

2.88

(1.50)

Entitlement Period:

Post-Entitlement Effects:

Decay rate (% per month)

Note: table continues. See notes at end of table.

--

Table 3: Parameter Estimates for Models of IA Participation, SSP Eligibility, and SSP Entitlement, Continued
Models for the Control Group Only:
(1)
(2)
(3)

Models for the Control and Program Groups:
(4)
(5)
(6)

Mass Point Locations:

Point 1

--

0.00 --

0.00 --

--

0.00 --

0.00 --

Point 2

--

-1.66 (0.13)

-1.55 (0.14)

--

-1.58

(0.12)

-1.59

(0.12)

Point 3

--

1.20 (0.08)

1.20 (0.08)

--

1.22

(0.07)

1.27

(0.06)

Point 4

--

2.84 (0.16)

2.90 (0.16)

--

2.77

(0.12)

2.84

(0.12)

Point 1

--

0.35

0.35

--

0.34

0.36

Point 2

--

0.27

0.27

--

0.24

0.24

Point 3

--

0.28

0.28

--

0.31

0.30

Point 4

--

0.10

0.10

--

0.11

0.10

10

15

17

26

30

38

-34510.7

-36389.1

-36383.5

-35696.4

-35698.0

-35685.1

154.1

142.1

137.5

152.7

140.0

131.3

177.3

175.2

183.2

Mass Point Probabilities

Number of Parameters
Log-likelihood
Goodness of Fit:

Control group
Program group

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses to right of coefficient estimates. See text for description of models.

Table 4: Summary of IA Participation Patterns of Control and Program Groups – Actual and Predicted

Months on
IA in 13-84

0

Summary of Actual Patterns:
Number of Transitions
1
2+ Even
3+ Odd

Total

0

Summary of Predicted Patterns:
Number of Transitions
1
2+ Even
3+ Odd

Total

Control Group
0
1-6
7-12
13-24
25-36
37-54
55-71
72

396
0
0
0
0
0
0
78

0
104
69
84
58
52
33
0

0
90
31
47
30
44
106
0

0
28
43
127
91
96
44
0

396
222
143
258
179
192
183
78

328
0
0
0
0
0
0
61

0
116
58
64
30
25
23
0

0
125
48
57
43
66
124
0

0
35
62
126
96
115
52
0

318
275
168
247
168
206
198
61

Total

474

400

348

429

1651

389

315

462

485

1651

Program Group
0
1-6
7-12
13-24
25-36
37-54
55-71
72

360
0
0
0
0
0
0
57

0
175
105
85
34
53
23
0

0
86
48
49
41
42
92
0

0
31
58
111
87
67
28
0

360
292
211
245
162
162
143
57

318
0
0
0
0
0
0
45

0
167
86
56
20
15
16
0

0
123
49
60
42
62
100
0

0
48
84
138
82
83
38
0

318
338
220
254
144
160
154
45

Total

417

475

358

382

1632

363

360

436

473

1632

Note: The predicted summaries of IA Participation patterns are based on 40 simulations using the model for both the Control and Program presented in column 6
of Table 3.

Figure 1a: Income Assistance Participation Rates – Control and Program Groups

1
SSPEstablishment
window

Controls
Programs
Difference

End SSP
Entitlement

0.8

Fraction on IA

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
Eligibility
period
-0.2
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

Month Relative to Start of IA-Reference Spell

60

66

72

78

84

Figure 1b: Smoothed Exit Rates from Income Assistance – Control and Program Groups

0.1
Controls
Programs
Difference
0.08

IA Exit Rates

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
SSPEstablishment
window

Eligibility
period

End SSP
Entitlement

-0.02
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

Month Relative to Start of IA-Reference Spell

60

66

72

78

84

Figure 1c: Smoothed Entry Rates to Income Assistance – Control and Program Groups

0.1
SSPEstablishment
window

Controls
Programs
Difference

End SSP
Entitlement

0.08

IA Entry Rates

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
Eligibility
period
-0.02
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

Month Relative to Start of IA-Reference Spell

60

66

72

78

84

Figure 2a: Outcomes around Start of SSP Receipt

1

Fraction on SSP, IA, or Employed

0.8

0.6
On IA
Receiving SSP
Employed Full-time
0.4

0.2

0
-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Month Since First SSP Check

4

6

8

10

12

Figure 2b: Outcomes around Expiry of SSP Entitlement

0.8

0.04
On IA (Left Scale)
Receiving SSP (Left Scale)
Employed Full-time (Left Scale)

0.03

0.4

0.02

0.2

0.01

0

0
24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

Month Since First SSP Check

40

42

44

46

48

IA Entry Rate

Fraction on SSP, IA, or Employed

IA Entry Rate (Right Scale)
0.6

Figure 3a: Reservation Wage of Ineligible Program Group Member
Reservation
Wage

Pre-Eligibility
Period

Post-SSP
Period

b+c

Start of
Welfare spell

12
Months Since Start of Welfare Reference Spell

Figure 3b: Reservation Wage of Eligible but Not-Entitled Program Group Member
Reservation
Wage

Establishment
Period

Pre-Eligibility
Period

Post-SSP
Period

b+c

Start of
Welfare spell

12

24
Months Since Start of Welfare Reference Spell

Figure 3c: Reservation Wage of Eligible and Entitled Program Group Member
Reservation
Wage

Pre-Eligibility
Period

Establishment
Period

Entitlement
Period

Post-SSP
Period

b+c
b+c-s

Start of
Welfare spell

12

te
Months Since Start of Welfare Reference Spell

te+36

Figure 4: Actual and Predicted IA Participation Rates of Control and Program Groups
1.0

0.8
Controls -Actual

Fraction on IA

Controls Predicted
0.6

Programs-Actual
Programs Predicted

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

6

12

18

24
30
36
42
48
54
60
Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

Figure 5a: Actual and Predicted IA Rates for Eligible and Ineligible Control Subgroups
1.0

0.8
Eligible Controls-Actual

Fraction on IA

Eligible Controls-Predicted
Ineligible Controls-Actual

0.6

Ineligible Controls-Predicted

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

Figure 5b: Actual and Predicted IA Rates for Eligible and Ineligible Program Subgroups
1.0

0.8
Ineligible Programs-Actual

Fraction on IA

Ineligible Programs-Predicted
Eligible Programs-Actual

0.6

Eligible Programs-Predicted

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

Figure 5c: Actual and Predicted IA Rates for Eligible Program Subgroups
1.0
No SSP-Actual
No SSP-Predicted

0.8

SSP Takeup-Actual

Fraction on IA

SSP Takeup-Predicted

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

Figure 6a: Actual and Predicted Treatment Effects on IA Participation
0.050
0.025

Actual Treatment Effect

Difference in Fraction on IA

Predicted Treatment Effect

0.000
-0.025
-0.050
-0.075
-0.100
-0.125
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

Figure 6b: Differences in IA Participation, Eligible Treatments Versus Eligible Controls
0.025
0.000

Difference in Fraction on IA

-0.025
Actual Difference

-0.050

Predicted Difference

-0.075
-0.100
-0.125
-0.150
-0.175
-0.200
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

Figure 6c: Differences in IA Participation, Ineligible Treatments Versus Ineligible Controls
0.040

Difference in Fraction on IA

0.030
0.020
0.010
0.000
-0.010
Actual Difference

-0.020

Predicted Difference

-0.030
-0.040
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

Figure 7: Decomposition of Predicted Treatment Effects on IA Participation
0.050
Establishment Effect Only
Establishment and Entitlement Effects
Total Treatment Effect
Assuming No Delayed Exits

Difference in Fraction on IA

0.025

0.000

-0.025

-0.050

-0.075

-0.100
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

42

48

54

60

Month Relative to Start of IA Reference Period

66

72

78

84

