                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           STATE-DEPENDENT INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS POLICY

                                          Daron Acemoglu
                                           Ufuk Akcigit

                                        Working Paper 12775
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12775


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




We thank conference and seminar participants at the Canadian Institute of Advanced Research, European
Science Days, MIT, National Bureau of Economic Research, Toulouse Information Technology Network,
and Philippe Aghion and particularly Suzanne Scotchmer for useful comments. Financial support
from the Toulouse Information Technology Network is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2006 by Daron Acemoglu and Ufuk Akcigit. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
State-Dependent Intellectual Property Rights Policy
Daron Acemoglu and Ufuk Akcigit
NBER Working Paper No. 12775
December 2006
JEL No. L16,O31,O34,O41

                                               ABSTRACT

What form of intellectual property rights (IPR) policy contributes to economic growth? Should technological
followers be able to license the products of technological leaders? Should a company with a large
technological lead receive the same IPR protection as a company with a more limited lead? We develop
a general equilibrium framework to investigate these questions. The economy consists of many industries
and firms engaged in cumulative (step-by-step) innovation. IPR policy regulates whether followers
in an industry can copy the technology of the leader and also how much they have to pay to license
past innovations. With full patent protection, followers can catch up to the leader in their industry
either by making the same innovation(s) themselves or by making some pre-specified payments to
the technological leaders. We prove the existence of a steady-state equilibrium and characterize some
of its properties. We then quantitatively investigate the implications of different types of IPR policy
on the equilibrium growth rate. The two major results of this exercise are as follows. First, the growth
rate in the standard models used in the (growth) literature can be improved significantly by introducing
a simple form of licensing. Second, we show that full patent protection is not optimal from the viewpoint
of maximizing the growth rate of the economy and that the growth-maximizing policy involves state-dependent
IPR protection, providing greater protection to technological leaders that are further ahead than those
that are close to their followers. This form of the growth-maximizing policy is a result of the "trickle-down"
effect, which implies that providing greater protection to firms that are further ahead of their followers
than a certain threshold increases the R&D incentives also for all technological leaders that are less
advanced than this threshold.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu

Ufuk Akcigit
MIT
uakcigit@MIT.EDU
1        Introduction

How should the intellectual property rights of a company be protected? Should a firm with
a large technological lead receive the same intellectual property rights (IPR) protection as a
company with a more limited technological lead? These questions are central to many discus-
sions of patent policy. A recent ruling of the European Commission, for example, has required
Microsoft to share secret information about its products with other software companies (New
York Times, December 22, 2004). There is a similar debate about whether Apple should make
iPod’s code available to competitors that are producing complementary products. Central to
the debate about Microsoft and iPod is the fact that they have a substantial technological
lead over their rivals. This implies that the analysis of many of the relevant policy and acad-
emic questions requires a framework for the analysis of state-dependent patent/IPR protection
policy. By state-dependent IPR policy, we mean a policy that makes the extent of patent
or intellectual property rights protection conditional on the technology gap between diﬀerent
firms in the industry. Existing work has investigated the optimal length and breadth of patents
assuming an IPR policy that does not allow for licensing and is uniform. In this paper, we make
a first attempt to develop a framework that incorporates both licensing of existing patents and
state-dependent IPR policies.
        Our basic framework builds on and extends the step-by-step innovation models of Aghion,
Harris and Vickers (1997) and Aghion, Harris, Howitt and Vickers (2001), where a number of
(typically two) firms engage in price competition within an industry and undertake R&D in
order to improve the quality of their product. The technology gap between the firms determines
the extent of the monopoly power of the leader, and hence the price markups and profits.
The purpose of R&D by the follower is to catch up and surpass the leader (as in standard
Schumpeterian models of innovation, e.g., Reinganum, 1981, 1985, Aghion and Howitt, 1992,
Grossman and Helpman, 1991), while the purpose of R&D by the leader is to escape the
competition of the follower and increase its markup and profits. As in racing-type models in
general (e.g., Harris and Vickers, 1985, 1987, Budd, Harris and Vickers, 1993), a large gap
between the leader and the follower discourages R&D by both. Consequently, overall R&D
and technological progress are greater when the technology gap between the leader and the
follower is relatively small.1 One may expect that full patent protection may be suboptimal in
a world of step-by-step competition; by stochastically or deterministically allowing the follower
    1
    Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Griﬃth and Howitt (2005) provide empirical evidence that there is greater R&D
in British industries where there is a smaller technological gap between firms. See O’Donoghue, Scotchmer and
Thisse (1998) for a discussion of how patent life may come to an end because of related innovations.


                                                     1
to use the innovations of the technological leader, the likelihood of relatively small gap between
leaders and followers, and thus the amount of R&D may be raised.2 Based on this intuition, one
may further conjecture that state-dependent IPR policy may also be useful and should provide
less protection to firms that are technologically more advanced relative to their competitors.
       There are two problems with this intuition. First, existing growth models (including those
mentioned above) do not allow licensing of the leading-edge technology and the presence of
licensing changes the trade-oﬀs underlying the above intuition.3 Second, the above intuition is
derived from models with uniform IPR policy, without a systematic study of the implications
of state-dependent IPR policy on R&D incentives.
       To investigate these issues systematically, we construct a general equilibrium model with
step-by-step innovation, potential licensing of patents and state-dependent IPR policy. In our
model economy, each firm can climb the technology ladder via three diﬀerent methods: (i)
by “catch-up R&D,” that is, R&D investments applied to a variant of the technology of the
leader; (ii) by “frontier R&D,” that is, building on the patented innovations of the technological
leader for a pre-specified license fee; and (iii) as a result of the expiration of the patent of the
technological leader. The second feature is not present in any growth model that we are aware
of, but is essential for understanding how IPR policy works in practice.
       The combination of these policies allows a variety of diﬀerent policy regimes. The first is full
patent protection with no licensing, which corresponds to the environment assumed in existing
growth models (e.g., Aghion, Harris, Howitt and Vickers, 2001) and provides full (indefinite)
patent protection to technological leaders, but does not allow any licensing agreements (it sets
the license fees to infinity). The second is full patent protection with licensing, which allows
technological followers to build on the leading-edge technology in return for a license fee. We
refer to this regime as “full patent protection” because patents never expire and followers have
to pay a patent fee equal to the gain in net present value resulting from the use of the leading-
edge technology.4 The third regime is uniform imperfect patent protection, which deviates
from the previous two benchmarks by allowing either expiration of patents and/or license
fees that are less than the full benefit to the follower. The adjective uniform indicates that
   2
      This is conjectured, for example, in Aghion, Harris, Howitt and Vickers (2001).
   3
      See Scotchmer (2005) for the importance of incorporating these types of licensing agreements into models
of innovation.
    4
      The alternative would be for the followers to pay a fee equal to the damage to the technological leader,
resulting from the loss of the leader’s monopoly power after their licensing and further innovation. In practice,
licensing fees or patent infringement fees reflect both the benefits to the firm using the knowledge and the
damage to the original inventor (see, e.g., Scotchmer, 2005). In our analysis, we allow the license fees to be set
at any level, thus incorporating both possibilities.



                                                        2
in this policy environment all industries are treated identically irrespective of the technology
gap between the leader and the follower. The final and most interesting policy regime is
state-dependent imperfect patent protection, which deviates from full patent protection as a
function of the technology gap between the leader and the follower in the industry (i.e., it
allows technologically more advanced firms to receive more or less protection). Each of these
policy regimes captures a diﬀerent conceptualization of IPR policy and is interesting in its own
right. Note however that the last regime is general enough to nest the other three.
       We first prove the existence of a stationary (steady-state) equilibrium under any of these
policy regimes and characterize a number of features of the equilibrium analytically. For
example, we prove that with uniform IPR policy, R&D investments decline when the gap
between the leader and the follower increases.
       We then turn to a quantitative investigation of growth-maximizing (“optimal”) IPR policy,
by providing a number of simulations of the equilibrium for plausible parameter values and for
diﬀerent forms of IPR policies.5 Our quantitative investigation leads to two major results:

   1. Allowing for licensing of patents increases the equilibrium growth rate of the economy
         significantly. Intuitively, without such licensing, a large part of the R&D eﬀort goes to
         duplication, and followers’ R&D does not contribute to the growth rate of the economy.
         Licensing implies that R&D by all firms–not just the leaders–contributes to growth
         and also increases the R&D incentives of followers. In our benchmark parameterization,
         allowing for licensing increases the steady-state equilibrium growth rate of the economy
         from 1.86% to 2.58% per annum.

   2. Growth-maximizing IPR policy is state dependent. In particular, because of the disin-
         centive eﬀect of relaxing IPR protection on R&D, uniform IPR policy (either by ma-
         nipulating license fees or the duration of patents) has minimal eﬀect on the equilibrium
         growth rate. In contrast, state-dependent IPR policy can significantly increase innova-
         tion and growth in the economy. For example, in our baseline parameterization, optimal
         state-dependent IPR policy increases the growth rate to 2.96% relative to the growth
         rate of 2.63% under uniform IPR policy. More important than the quantitative eﬀect
         of growth-maximizing state-dependent IPR policy is its form. We find in all cases that
   5
    Throughout, we simplify terminology by using the terms “optimal” and “growth-maximizing” interchange-
ably. It is well known that welfare-maximizing and growth-maximizing policies need not coincide, and in fact,
in models with quality competition, the equilibrium may involve excessive innovation and growth (e.g., Aghion
and Howitt, 1992). Nevertheless, when the discount rate is small, welfare and growth-maximizing policies will
be close, which justifies our use of the term “optimal” in this context.



                                                     3
        optimal state-dependent IPR policy provides greater protection to technological leaders
        that are further ahead than those that have only a small lead relative to their followers.
        The reason for this result is the trickle-down of R&D incentives. In particular, when a
        particular state for the leader (say being n∗ steps ahead of the follower) is very profitable,
        this increases the incentives to perform R&D not only for leaders that are n∗ − 1 steps
        ahead, but for all leaders with a lead of size n ≤ n∗ − 1. Notably, the trickle-down eﬀect
        can be powerful enough to increase–rather than reduce–the R&D investments by tech-
        nological leaders relative to the benchmark with full patent protection. Thus, reducing
        the IPR protection of leaders that are few steps ahead while oﬀering a high degree of
        protection to firms that are suﬃciently advanced relative to their competitors increases
        R&D incentives. Consequently, in contrast to existing models, imperfect state-dependent
        IPR can increase R&D investments relative to full protection. Moreover, contrary to the
        conjecture above, the trickle-down eﬀect implies that the optimal state-dependent IPR
        policy should provide greater protection to firms that have a larger technological lead.

      Overall, our analysis illustrates the diﬀerent eﬀects of IPR policy on the equilibrium growth
rate of an economy. It shows that allowing for licensing can increase growth significantly and
that optimal state-dependent IPR policy can also increase the growth rate of an economy
relative to uniform IPR policy. Consequently, the benefits of considering a rich set of IPR
policies could be substantial in practice. Our analysis also suggests that the structure of optimal
IPR may depend on the equilibrium industry structure (which determines the technology gap
between leaders and followers as a function of the underlying technology of the industry). A
more detailed analysis of the relationship between industry structure and the optimal form of
IPR policy is an area for future research.
      Our paper is a contribution both to the IPR protection and the endogenous growth liter-
atures. The industrial organization and growth literatures emphasize that ex-post monopoly
rents and thus patents are central to generate the ex-ante investments in R&D and technological
progress, even though monopoly power also creates distortions (e.g., Arrow, 1962, Reinganum,
1981, Tirole, 1988, Romer, 1990, Grossman and Helpman, 1991, Aghion and Howitt, 1992,
Green and Scotchmer, 1995, Scotchmer, 1999, Gallini and Scotchmer, 2002, O’Donoghue and
Zweimuller, 2004).6
      Much of the literature discusses the trade-oﬀ between these two forces to determine the
optimal length and breadth of patents. For example, Klemperer (1990) and Gilbert and Shapiro
  6
      Boldrin and Levine (2001, 2004) or Quah (2003) argue that patent systems are not necessary for innovation.


                                                        4
(1990) show that optimal patents should have a long duration in order to provide inducement to
R&D, but a narrow breadth so as to limit monopoly distortions. A number of other papers, for
example, Gallini (1992) and Gallini and Scotchmer (2002), reach opposite conclusions. Another
branch of the literature, including the seminal paper by Scotchmer (1999) and the recent
interesting papers by Llobet, Hopenhayn and Mitchell (2001) and Hopenhayn and Mitchell
(2001), adopts a mechanism design approach to the determination of the optimal patent and
intellectual property rights protection system. For example, Scotchmer (1999) derives the
patent renewal system as an optimal mechanism in an environment where the cost and value
of diﬀerent projects are unobserved and the main problem is to decide which projects should
go ahead. To the best of our knowledge, no other paper in the literature has considered state-
dependent patent or IPR policy, which is the focus of the current paper. As a first attempt, we
only look at state-dependent patent length and license fees (though similar ideas can be applied
to an investigation of the gains from making the breadth of patent awards state-dependent).
       Our paper is most closely related to and extends the results of Aghion, Harris and Vickers
(1997) and Aghion, Harris, Howitt and Vickers (2001) on endogenous growth with step-by step
innovation.7 Although our model builds on these papers, it also diﬀers from them in a number
of significant ways. First, we allow licensing agreements whereby followers can pay a pre-
specified license fee for building on the leading-edge technology developed by other firms. We
show that such licensing has significant eﬀects on the equilibrium growth rate of the economy.
Second, our economy incorporates a general IPR policy that can be state dependent. Third,
in our economy there is a general equilibrium interaction between production and R&D, since
they both compete for scarce labor.8 Finally, we provide a number of analytical results for the
general model (with or without IPR policy), while Aghion, Harris, Howitt and Vickers (2001)
focus on the case where innovations are either “drastic” (so that the leader never undertakes
R&D) or very small. They also do not prove the existence of a steady state or characterize the
properties of the equilibrium in this class of economies.
       Finally, our results are also related to the literature on tournaments and races, for example,
Fudenberg, Gilbert, Stiglitz and Tirole (1983), Harris and Vickers (1985, 1987), Choi (1991),
Budd, Harris and Vickers (1993), Taylor (1995), Fullerton and McAfee (1999), Baye and Hoppe
   7
      Segal and Whinston (2005) analyze the impact of anti-trust policy on economic growth in a related model
of step-by-step innovation.
    8
      This general equilibrium aspect is introduced to be able to close the model economy without unrealistic
assumptions and makes our economy more comparable to other growth models (Aghion, Harris, Howit and
Vickers, 2001, assume a perfectly elastic supply of labor). We show that the presence of general equilibrium
interactions does not significantly complicate the analysis and it is still possible to characterize the steady-state
equilibrium.


                                                         5
(2003), and Moscarini and Squintani (2004). This literature considers the impact of endogenous
or exogenous prizes on eﬀort in tournaments, races or R&D contests. In terms of this literature,
state-dependent IPR policy can be thought of as state-dependent handicapping of diﬀerent
players (where the state variable is the gap between the two players in a dynamic tournament).
To the best of our knowledge, these types of schemes have not been considered in this literature.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the basic environment.
Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium under uniform IPR policy. Section 4 extends these
results to the case in which IPR policy is state dependent. Section 5 quantitatively evaluates
the implications of various diﬀerent types of IPR policy regimes on economic growth and
characterizes the growth-maximizing state-dependent IPR policies. Section 6 concludes, while
the Appendix contains the proofs of all the results stated in the text.


2     Model

We now describe the basic environment. The characterization of the equilibrium under the
diﬀerent policy regimes is presented in the next section.

2.1   Preferences and Technology

Consider the following continuous time economy with a unique final good. The economy is
populated by a continuum of 1 individuals, each with 1 unit of labor endowment, which they
supply inelastically. Preferences at time t are given by
                                  Z ∞
                               Et      exp (−ρ (s − t)) log C (s) ds,                        (1)
                                     t

where Et denotes expectations at time t, ρ > 0 is the discount rate and C (t) is consumption
at date t. The logarithmic preferences in (1) facilitate the analysis, since they imply a simple
relationship between the interest rate, growth rate and the discount rate (see (2) below).
    Let Y (t) be the total production of the final good at time t. We assume that the economy
is closed and the final good is used only for consumption (i.e., there is no investment), so that
C (t) = Y (t). The standard Euler equation from (1) then implies that

                                            Ċ (t)   Ẏ (t)
                                  g (t) ≡          =        = r (t) − ρ,                     (2)
                                            C (t)    Y (t)
where this equation defines g (t) as the growth rate of consumption and thus output, and r (t)
is the interest rate at date t.



                                                     6
       The final good Y is produced using a continuum 1 of intermediate goods according to the
Cobb-Douglas production function
                                                      Z     1
                                       ln Y (t) =               ln y (j, t) dj,                          (3)
                                                        0

where y (j, t) is the output of jth intermediate at time t. Throughout, we take the price of the
final good as the numeraire and denote the price of intermediate j at time t by p (j, t). We
also assume that there is free entry into the final good production sector. These assumptions,
together with the Cobb-Douglas production function (3), imply that each final good producer
will have the following demand for intermediates
                                                   Y (t)
                                     y (j, t) =            ,       ∀j ∈ [0, 1] .                         (4)
                                                  p (j, t)
       Each intermediate j ∈ [0, 1] comes in two diﬀerent varieties, each produced by one of two
infinitely-lived firms. We assume that these two varieties are perfect substitutes and these
firms compete a la Bertrand.9 Firm i = 1 or 2 in industry j has the following technology

                                         y (j, t) = qi (j, t) li (j, t)                                  (5)

where li (j, t) is the employment level of the firm and qi (j, t) is its level of technology at
time t. The only diﬀerence between two firms is their technology, which will be determined
endogenously.
       Each consumer in the economy holds a balanced portfolio of the shares of all firms. Con-
sequently, the objective function of each firm is to maximize expected profits.
       The production function for intermediate goods, (5), implies that the marginal cost of
producing intermediate j for firm i and industry j at time t is
                                                                   w (t)
                                          M Ci (j, t) =                                                  (6)
                                                                  qi (j, t)
where w (t) is the wage rate in the economy at time t.
       When this causes no confusion, we denote the technological leader in each industry by i
and the follower by −i, so that we have:

                                           qi (j, t) ≥ q−i (j, t) .
   9
    Alternatively, we can assume that these two varieties are imperfect substitutes, for example, so that the
output of intermediate j is given by
                                         k          σ−1
                                                                             l σ
                                                                          σ−1 σ−1
                               y (j, t) = ϕy1 (j, t) σ + (1 − ϕ) y2 (j, t) σ      ,

with σ > 1. This generalization has no eﬀect on any of our qualitative results, but increases notation. We
therefore prefer to focus on the case where the two varieties are perfect substitutes.


                                                          7
Bertrand competition between the two firms implies that all intermediates will be supplied by
the leader at the “limit” price:10
                                                             w (t)
                                              pi (j, t) =              .                                         (7)
                                                            q−i (j, t)
Equation (4) then implies the following demand for intermediates:

                                                        q−i (j, t)
                                           y (j, t) =              Y (t) .                                       (8)
                                                         w (t)

2.2      Technology, R&D and IPR Policy

R&D by the leader or the follower stochastically leads to innovation. We assume that when
the leader innovates, its technology improves by a factor λ > 1.
       The follower, on the other hand, can undertake R&D to catch up with the frontier tech-
nology or to improve over the frontier technology.11 The first possibility, catch-up R&D, can
be thought of as discovering an alternative way of performing the same task as the current
leading-edge technology (applied to the follower’s variant of the product). We assume that
because this innovation is for the follower’s variant of the product and results from its own
R&D eﬀorts, it does not constitute infringement of the patent of the leader, and the follower
does not have to make any payments to the technological leader in the industry. Therefore, if
the follower chooses the first possibility, it will have to retrace the steps of the technological
leader (as applied to its own variant of the product), but in return, it will not have to pay a
patent fee. For follower firm −i in industry j at time t, we denote this type of R&D by

                                                  a−i (j, t) = 0.

       The alternative, frontier R&D, involves followers building on and improving the current
leading-edge technology. If this type of R&D succeeds, the follower will have improved the
leading-edge technology using the patented knowledge of the technological leader, and thus
will have to pay a pre-specified patent fee to the leader.12 We specify the patent fees below.
  10
      If the leader were to charge a higher price, then the market would be captured by the follower earning
positive profits. A lower price can always be increased while making sure that all final good producers still
prefer the intermediate supplied by the leader i rather than that by the follower −i even if the latter were
supplied at marginal cost. Since the monopoly price with the unit elastic demand curve is infinite, the leader
always gains by increasing its price, making the price given in (7) the unique equilibrium price.
   11
      A third possibility is for the follower to climb the technology ladder step-by-step, meaning that, for example,
when the current leader is at some technology rung nij (t) and the follower itself is at n−ij (t) < nij (t) − 1,
it must first discover technology n−ij (t) + 1, et cetera. We have investigated this type of environment with
“slow catch-up” in a previous version of the paper. Since the general results are similar, we do not discuss this
variation to save space.
   12
      Clearly, the follower will never license the technology of the leader for production purposes, since this would
lead to Bertrand competition and zero ex post profits for both parties.


                                                          8
This strategy is denoted by
                                           a−i (j, t) = 1.

Throughout, we allow a−i (j, t) ∈ [0, 1] for mathematical convenience, thus a should be inter-
preted as the probability of frontier R&D by the follower.
   R&D by the leader, catch-up R&D by the follower, and frontier R&D by the follower
may have diﬀerent costs and success probabilities. Nevertheless, we simplify the analysis by
assuming that all three types of R&D have the same costs and the same probability of success.
In particular, in all cases, we assume that innovations follow a controlled Poisson process, with
the arrival rate determined by R&D investments. Each firm (in every industry) has access to
the following R&D technology:
                                      xi (j, t) = F (hi (j, t)) ,                               (9)

where xi (j, t) is the flow rate of innovation at time t and hi (j, t) is the number of workers
hired by firm i in industry j to work in the R&D process at t. This specification implies that
within a time interval of ∆t, the probability of innovation for this firm is xi (j, t) ∆t + o (∆t).
   We assume that F is twice continuously diﬀerentiable and satisfies F 0 (·) > 0, F 00 (·) < 0,
F 0 (0) < ∞ and that there exists h̄ ∈ (0, ∞) such that F 0 (h) = 0 for all h ≥ h̄. The
assumption that F 0 (0) < ∞ implies that there is no Inada condition when hi (j, t) = 0. The
last assumption, on the other hand, ensures that there is an upper bound on the flow rate of
innovation (which is not essential but simplifies the proofs). Recalling that the wage rate for
labor is w (t), the cost for R&D is therefore w (t) G (xi (j, t)) where

                                  G (xi (j, t)) ≡ F −1 (xi (j, t)) ,                           (10)

and the assumptions on F immediately imply that G is twice continuously diﬀerentiable and
satisfies G0 (·) > 0, G00 (·) > 0, G0 (0) > 0 and limx→x̄ G0 (x) = ∞, where
                                                   ¡ ¢
                                             x̄ ≡ F h̄                                         (11)

is the maximal flow rate of innovation (with h̄ defined above).
   We next describe the evolution of technologies within each industry. Suppose that leader i
in industry j at time t has a technology level of

                                         qi (j, t) = λnij (t) ,                                (12)

and that the follower −i’s technology at time t is

                                       q−i (j, t) = λn−ij (t) ,                                (13)

                                                   9
where nij (t) ≥ n−ij (t) and nij (t), n−ij (t) ∈ Z+ denote the technology rungs of the leader and
the follower in industry j. We refer to nj (t) ≡ nij (t)−n−ij (t) as the technology gap in industry
j. If the leader undertakes an innovation within a time interval of ∆t, then its technology
increases to qi (j, t + ∆t) = λnijt +1 and technology gap rises to nj (t + ∆t) = nj (t) + 1 (the
probability of two or more innovations within the interval ∆t will be o (∆t), where o (∆t)
represents terms that satisfy lim∆t→0 o (∆t) /∆t).
       When the follower is successful in catch-up R&D (i.e., a−i (j, t) = 0) within the interval
∆t, then it catches up with the leader and its technology improves to

                                         q−i (j, t + ∆t) = λnijt ,

and the technology gap variable becomes njt+∆t = 0. In contrast, if the follower is successful
in frontier R&D and pays the license fee (i.e., a−i (j, t) = 1), then it surpasses the leading-edge
technology, so we have
                                        q−i (j, t + ∆t) = λnijt +1

and the technology gap variable becomes njt+∆t = 1 (and from this point onwards, the labels
i and −i are swapped, since the previous follower now becomes the leader).
       In addition to catching up with or surpassing the technology frontier with their own
R&D, followers can also copy the technology frontier because IPR policy is such that some
patents expire. In particular, we assume that patents expire at some policy-determined Poisson
rate η, and after expiration followers can costlessly copy the frontier technology, jumping to
q−i (j, t + ∆t) = λnijt .13
       This description makes it clear that there are two aspects to IPR policy: (i) the length of
the patent; (ii) license fees. In our most general policy regime, we allow both of these to be
state dependent, so they are represented by the following two functions:

                                              η : N → R+

and for all t ≥ 0,
                                       ζ (t) : N → R+ ∪ {+∞} .

Here η (n) ≡ η n < ∞ is the flow rate at which the patent protection is removed from a
technological leader that is n steps ahead of the follower. When η n = 0, this implies that there
is full protection at technology gap n, in the sense that patent protection will never be removed.
  13
    Alternative modeling assumptions on IPR policy, such as a fixed patent length of T > 0 from the time of
innovation, are not tractable, since they introduce a form of delayed-diﬀerential equations.


                                                    10
In contrast, η n → ∞ implies that patent protection is removed immediately once technology
gap n is reached. Similarly, ζ (n, t) ≡ ζ n (t) denotes the patent fee that a follower has to pay in
order to build upon the innovation of the technological leader, when the technology gap in the
industry is n steps.14 Our formulation imposes that η ≡ {η 1 , η 2 , ...} is time-invariant, while
ζ (t) ≡ {ζ 1 (t) , ζ 2 (t) , ...} is a function of time. This is natural, since in a growing economy,
license fees should not remain constant. Below, we will require that ζ grows at the same rate
as aggregate output in the economy.
       When ζ n (t) = 0, there is no protection because followers can license the leading-edge
technology at zero cost.15 In contrast, when ζ n (t) = ∞, licensing the leading-edge technology
is prohibitively costly. Note however that ζ n < ∞ does not necessarily imply that patent
protection is imperfect. In particular, in what follows we will interpret a situation in which
the license fee is equal to the net extra gain from surpassing the leader rather than being neck-
and-neck (i.e., being at a technology gap of 0) as “full protection”.16 We also refer to a policy
regime as uniform IPR protection if both η and ζ (t) are constant functions, meaning that
intellectual property law treats all firms and industries identically irrespective of the technology
gap between the leader and the follower (i.e., η uni ≡ {η, η, ...} and ζ uni (t) ≡ {ζ (t) , ζ (t) , ...}).
We also assume that there exists some n̄ < ∞ such that ηn = η n̄ and ζ n (t) = ζ n̄ (t) for all
n ≥ n̄.
       Given this specification, we can now write the law of motion of the technology gap in
  14
      Throughout, we assume that ζ is a policy choice and firms cannot contract around it. An alternative
approach would be to allow firms to bargain over the level of license fees. In this case, it is plausible to presume
that the legally-specified infringement penalties or license fees will aﬀect the equilibrium in the bargaining game,
so the eﬀect of policies we investigate would still be present. We do not allow bargaining between firms over
the license fees in order to simplify the analysis.
   15
      Throughout, we interpret ζ n (t) = 0 as ζ n (t) = ε with ε ↓ 0, so that followers continue not to license the
new technology without innovation (recall the comment in footnote 12).
   16
      In other words, we interpret “full protection” to correspond to a situation in which ζ n (t) = V1 (t) − V0 (t),
where V1 refers to the net present value of a firm that is one step ahead of its rival and V0 is the value of a firm
that is neck-and-neck with its rival (naturally, ζ n (t) > V1 (t) − V0 (t) would also correspond to full protection,
since in this case no follower would choose to license). Alternatively, full protection could be interpreted as
corresponding to the case in which the follower pays a license fee equal to the loss of profits that it causes for
the technology leader (see Scotchmer, 2005). In our model, this would correspond to ζ n (t) = V0 (t) − V−1 (t),
where V−1 is the net present value of a firm that is one step behind the technology leader. This expression
applies, since without licensing the follower would have made its own innovation, in which case the leader would
have fallen to the state of a neck-and-neck firm rather than being surpassed by one step. In all equilibria we
compute below, we find that the second amount is significantly less than the first, thus our interpretation of full
protection licensing fee is large enough to cover both possibilities. In any case, what value of ζ is designated
as “full protection” does not have any bearing on our formal analysis, since we characterize the equilibrium for
any ζ and then find the growth-maximizing policy sequence.




                                                         11
industry j as follows:
              ⎧
              ⎪
              ⎪                                     xi (j, t) ∆t + a−i (j, t) x−i (j, t) ∆t + o (∆t)
              ⎪
              ⎪   nj (t) + 1 with probability
              ⎪
              ⎪                                     ³                                     ´
              ⎨
nj (t + ∆t) =          0     with probability        (1 − a−i (j, t)) x−i (j, t) + ηnj (t) ∆t + o (∆t) .
              ⎪
              ⎪
              ⎪
              ⎪                                        ³                                 ´
              ⎪
              ⎪
              ⎩ nj (t)       with probability       1 − xi (j, t) + x−i (j, t) + η nj (t) ∆t − o (∆t))
                                                                                                   (14)
Here o (∆t) again represents second-order terms, in particular, the probabilities of more than
one innovations within an interval of length ∆t. The terms xi (j, t) and x−i (j, t) are the flow
rates of innovation by the leader and the follower; a−i (j, t) ∈ [0, 1] denotes whether the follower
is trying to catch up with a leader or surpass it; and ηnj (t) is the flow rate at which the follower
is allowed to copy the technology of a leader that is nj (t) steps ahead. Intuitively, when
a−i (j, t) = 1, the technology gap in industry j increases from nj (t) to nj (t) + 1 if either the
leader is successful (flow rate xi (j, t)) or if the follower is successful (flow rate x−i (j, t)).

2.3    Profits

We next write the instantaneous “operating” profits for the leader (i.e., the profits exclusive
of R&D expenditures and license fees). Profits of leader i in industry j at time t are

                            Πi (j, t) = [pi (j, t) − M Ci (j, t)] yi (j, t)
                                        µ                       ¶
                                             w (t)      w (t)        Y (t)
                                      =              −
                                          q−i (j, t) qi (j, t) pi (j, t)
                                        ³             ´
                                      = 1 − λ−nj (t) Y (t)                                             (15)

where nj (t) ≡ nij (t)−n−ij (t) is the technology gap in industry j at time t. The first line simply
uses the definition of operating profits as price minus marginal cost times quantity sold. The
second line uses the fact that the equilibrium limit price of firm i is pi (j, t) = w (t) /q−i (j, t)
as given by (7), and the final equality uses the definitions of qi (j, t) and q−i (j, t) from (12)
and (13). The expression in (15) also implies that there will be zero profits in an industry that
is neck-and-neck, i.e., in industries with nj (t) = 0. Also clearly, followers always make zero
profits, since they have no sales.
   The Cobb-Douglas aggregate production function in (3) is responsible for the form of the
profits (15), since it implies that profits only depend on the technology gap of the industry
and aggregate output. This will simplify the analysis below by making the technology gap in
each industry the only industry-specific payoﬀ-relevant state variable.


                                                  12
       The objective function of each firm is to maximize the net present discounted value of net
profits (operating profits minus R&D expenditures and plus or minus patent fees). In doing
this, each firm will take the sequence of interest rates, [r (t)]t≥0 , the sequence of aggregate
output levels, [Y (t)]t≥0 , the sequence of wages, [w (t)]t≥0 , the R&D decisions of all other firms
and policies as given.

2.4      Equilibrium

Let µ (t) ≡ {µn (t)}∞
                    n=0 denote the distribution of industries over diﬀerent technology gaps, with
P∞
  n=0 µn (t) = 1. For example, µ0 (t) denotes the fraction of industries in which the firms are
neck-and-neck at time t. Throughout, we focus on Markov Perfect Equilibria (MPE), where
strategies are only functions of the payoﬀ-relevant state variables.17 This allows us to drop
the dependence on industry j, thus we refer to R&D decisions by xn for the technological
leader that is n steps ahead and by a−n and x−n for a follower that is n steps behind. Let
us denote the list of decisions by the leader and follower with technology gap n at time t
by ξ n (t) ≡ hxn (t) , pi (j, t) , yi (j, t)i and ξ −n (t) ≡ ha−n (t) , x−n (t)i.18 Throughout, ξ will
indicate the whole sequence of decisions at every state, ξ (t) ≡ {ξ n (t)}∞
                                                                          n=−∞ . We define an
allocation as follows:
                                          D             E
Definition 1 (Allocation) Let              η, [ζ (t)]t≥0 be the IPR policy sequences. Then an allo-
cation is a sequence of decisions for a leader that is n = 0, 1, ..., ∞ step ahead, [ξ n (t)]t≥0 ,
                                                                                £        ¤
a sequence of R&D decisions for a follower that is n = 1, ..., ∞ step behind, ξ −n (t) t≥0 , a
sequence of wage rates [w (t)]t≥0 , and a sequence of industry distributions over technology gaps
[µ (t)]t≥0 .

       For given IPR sequences η and [ζ (t)]t≥0 , MPE strategies, which are only a function of the
payoﬀ-relevant state variables, can be represented as follows

                                        x : Z × R2+ → R+ ,
                                        a : Z− \ {0} × R2+ → [0, 1] .
  17
      MPE is a natural equilibrium concept in this context, since it does not allow for implicit collusive agreements
between the follower and the leader. While such collusive agreements may be likely when there are only two
firms in the industry, in most industries there are many more firms and also many potential entrants, making
collusion more diﬃcult. Throughout, we assume that there are only two firms to keep the model tractable.
   18
      The price and output decisions, pi (j, t) and yi (j, t), depend not only on the technology gap, aggregate
output and the wage rate, but also on the exact technology rung of the leader, nij (t). With a slight abuse of
notation, throughout we suppress this dependence, since their product pi (j, t) yi (j, t) and the resulting profits
for the firm, (15), are independent of nij (t), and only the technology gap, nj (t), matters for profits, R&D,
aggregate output and economic growth.


                                                         13
The first function represents the R&D decision of a firm (both when it is a follower and when
it is a leader in an industry) with an n step technology gap (n ∈ Z), and the aggregate level of
output and the wage ((Y, w) ∈ R2+ ). The second function represents the decision of a follower
(as a function of the level of output and the wage in the economy) of whether to direct its
R&D to reaching or surpassing the leading-edge technology (or more precisely, it represents
the probability with which the follower will choose to undertake R&D to surpass the leading
edge technology). Consequently, we have the following definition of equilibrium (below we will
define a steady-state equilibrium in terms of a solution to maximization problems):
                                                               D            E
Definition 2 (Equilibrium) Given an IPR policy sequence η, [ζ (t)]t≥0 , a Markov Per-
fect Equilibrium is given by a sequence [ξ∗ (t) , w∗ (t) , Y ∗ (t)]t≥0 such that (i) [p∗i (j, t)]t≥0
and [yi∗ (j, t)]t≥0 implied by [ξ∗ (t)]t≥0 satisfy (7) and (8); (ii) R&D policies [a∗ (t) , x∗ (t)]t≥0
are best responses to themselves, i.e., [a∗ (t) , x∗ (t)]t≥0 maximizes the expected profits of firms
                                                                               D              E
taking aggregate output [Y ∗ (t)]t≥0 , wages [w∗ (t)]t≥0 , government policy η, [ζ (t)]t≥0 and
the R&D policies of other firms [a∗ (t) , x∗ (t)]t≥0 as given; (iii) aggregate output [Y ∗ (t)]t≥0 is
given by (3); and (iv) the labor market clears at all times given the wage sequence [w∗ (t)]t≥0 .

2.5   The Labor Market

Since only the technological leader produces, labor demand in industry j with technology gap
nj (t) = n can be expressed as
                                               λ−n Y (t)
                                    ln (t) =             for n ∈ Z+ .                            (16)
                                                w (t)
In addition, there is demand for labor coming for R&D from both followers and leaders in all
industries. Using (9) and the definition of the G function, we can express industry demands
for R&D labor as                    ⎧
                                    ⎨ G (xn (t)) + G (x−n (t)) if n ∈ N
                         hn (t) =                                            ,                   (17)
                                    ⎩
                                        2G (x0 (t))               if n = 0
where n < 0 refers to the demand of a follower in an industry with a technology gap of n.
Note that in this expression, x−n (t) refers to the R&D eﬀort of a follower that is n steps
behind (conditional on its optimal choice of a−n (t) ∈ [0, 1]). Moreover, this expression takes
into account that in an industry with neck-and-neck competition, i.e., with n = 0, there will
be twice the demand for R&D coming from the two firms.
   The labor market clearing condition can then be expressed as:
                        X∞         ∙                                    ¸
                                        1
                   1≥       µn (t)            + G (xn (t)) + G (x−n (t)) ,                       (18)
                                     ω (t) λn
                           n=0


                                                      14
and ω (t) ≥ 0, with complementary slackness, where
                                                                  w (t)
                                                   ω (t) ≡                                                       (19)
                                                                  Y (t)
is the labor share at time t. The labor market clearing condition, (18), uses the fact that total
supply is equal to 1, and the demand cannot exceed this amount. If demand falls short of 1,
then the wage rate, w (t), and thus the labor share, ω (t), have to be equal to zero (though
this will never be the case in equilibrium). The right-hand side of (18) consists of the demand
for production (the terms with ω in the denominator), the demand for R&D workers from the
neck-and-neck industries (2G (x0 (t)) when n = 0) and the demand for R&D workers coming
from leaders and followers in other industries (G (xn (t)) + G (x−n (t)) when n > 0).
       Defining the index of aggregate quality in this economy by the aggregate of the qualities
in the diﬀerent industries, i.e.,
                                                        Z     1
                                           ln Q (t) ≡             ln q (j, t) dj,                                (20)
                                                          0
the equilibrium wage can be written as:19
                                                                   S∞
                                          w (t) = Q (t) λ−           n=0   nµn (t)
                                                                                     .                           (21)

2.6       Steady State and the Value Functions

Let us now focus on steady-state (Markov Perfect) equilibria, where the distribution of in-
dustries µ (t) ≡ {µn (t)}∞
                         n=0 is stationary, ω (t) defined in (19) and g, the growth rate of the
economy, are constant over time. We will establish the existence of such an equilibrium and
characterize a number of its properties. If the economy is in steady state at time t = 0, then
                                            ∗t                             ∗
by definition, we have Y (t) = Y0 eg             and w (t) = w0 eg t , where g ∗ is the steady-state growth
rate. The two equations also imply that ω (t) = ω∗ for all t ≥ 0. Throughout, we assume that
the parameters are such that the steady-state growth rate g ∗ is positive but not large enough
to violate the transversality conditions. This implies that net present values of each firm at all
point in time will be finite and enable us to write the maximization problem of a leader that
is n > 0 steps ahead recursively.
       First note that given an optimal policy x̂ for a firm, the net present discounted value of a
leader that is n steps ahead at time t can be written as:
                           Z ∞
               Vn (t) = Et     exp (−r (s − t)) [Π (s) + Z (s) − w (s) G (x̂ (s))] ds
                                   t
                              U1                    U1k                            l
  19
       Note that ln Y (t) =ln q (j, t) l (j, t) dj = 0 ln qi (j, t) + ln Yw(t)
                              0
                                                                           (t) −nj
                                                                               λ     dj, where the second equality uses
                               U1
(16). Thus we have ln Y (t) = 0S[ln qi (j, t) + ln Y (t) − ln w (t) − nj ln λ] dj. Rearranging and canceling terms,
               U                    ∞
and writing exp nj ln λdj = λ− n=0 nµn (t) , we obtain (21).


                                                          15
where Π (s) is the operating profit at time s ≥ t, Z (s) is the patent license fees received (or
paid) by a firm which is the leader and w (s) G (x̂ (s)) denotes the R&D expenditure at time
s ≥ t. All variables are stochastic and depend on the evolution of the technology gap within
the industry.
       Next taking the equilibrium R&D policy of other firms, x∗−n (t) and a∗−n (t), and equilibrium
wage rate, w∗ (t), as given, this value can be written as:20

Vn (t) = max {[Πn (t) − w∗ (t) G (xn (t))] ∆t + o (∆t)                                                              (22)
               xn (t)
                                         ⎡                                                              ⎤⎫
                                                            (xn (t) ∆t + o (∆t)) Vn+1 (t + ∆t)           ⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                      ⎢                                                                 ⎥⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                      ⎢          ¡        ¡             ¢                   ¢           ⎥⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                      ⎢       + η n ∆t + 1 − a∗−n (t) x∗−n (t) ∆t + o (∆t) V0 (t + ∆t) ⎥ ⎪
                                      ⎢                                                                 ⎥⎬
               + exp (−r (t + ∆t) ∆t) ⎢
                                      ⎢            ¡                             ¢
                                                                                                        ⎥ .
                                                                                                        ⎥⎪
                                      ⎢           + a∗−n (t) x∗−n (t) ∆t + o (∆t) (V−1 (t + ∆t) + ζ n ) ⎥⎪
                                      ⎢                                                                 ⎥⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                      ⎣                                                                 ⎦⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                                                                                         ⎪
                                               ¡                                             ¢           ⎪
                                                                                                         ⎭
                                                                            ∗
                                             + 1 − xn (t) ∆t − η n ∆t − x−n (t) ∆t − o (∆t) Vn (t + ∆t)

The first part of this expression is the flow profits minus R&D expenditures during a time
interval of length ∆t. The second part is the continuation value after this interval has elapsed.
Vn+1 (t) and V0 (t) are defined as net present discounted values for a leader that is n + 1 steps
ahead and a firm in an industry that is neck-and-neck (i.e., n = 0). The second part of the
expression uses the fact that in a short time interval ∆t, the probability of innovation by the
leader is xn (t) ∆t + o (∆t), where o (∆t) again denotes second-order terms. This explains the
first line of the continuation value. For the remainder of the continuation value, note that the
                                                               ¡           ¢
probability that the follower will catch up with the leader is 1 − a∗−n (t) x∗−n (t) ∆t + o (∆t);
in particular, if a∗−n (t) = 1, this eventually will never happen, since the follower would be
undertaking R&D not to catch up but to surpass the leader. This explains the third line,
which applies when a∗−n (t) = 1. There are two diﬀerences between the second and third lines;
(i) in the third line, conditional on success by the follower, a leader moves to the position
of a follower rather than a neck-and-neck firm (V−1 instead of V0 ); (ii) it receives the state-
dependent patent fee ζ n . Finally, the last line applies when no R&D eﬀort is successful and
patents continue to be enforced, so that the technology gap remains at n steps.
       Next, subtract Vn (t) from both sides, divide everything by ∆t, and take the limit as ∆t → 0.
  20
     Clearly, this value function could be written for any arbitrary sequence of R&D policies of other firms. We
set the R&D policies of other firms to their equilibrium values, x∗−n (t) and a∗−n (t), to reduce notation in the
main body of the paper.




                                                       16
This yields:

      r (t) Vn (t) − V̇n (t) = max{[Πn (t) − w∗ (t) G (xn (t))] + xn (t) [Vn+1 (t) − Vn (t)]   (23)
                               xn (t)
                                  ¡¡           ¢               ¢
                               + 1 − a∗−n (t) x∗−n (t) + η n [V0 (t) − Vn (t)]
                                  ¡                     ¢
                               + a∗−n (t) x∗−n (t) + η n [ζ n + V0 (t) − V−1 (t)]},

where V̇n (t) denotes the derivative of Vn (t) with respect to time. In steady state, the net
present value of a firm that is n steps ahead, Vn (t), will also grow at a constant rate g ∗ for all
n ∈ Z+ . Let us then define the normalized values as

                                                        Vn (t)
                                          vn (t) ≡                                             (24)
                                                        Y (t)
for all n ∈ Z, which will be independent of time in steady state, i.e., vn (t) = vn . Similarly, in
what follows we assume that license fees are also scaled up by GDP, so that

                                                   ζ n (t)
                                            ζn =           ,
                                                   Y (t)
which will ensure the existence of a (stationary) steady-state equilibrium (the use of ζ n (t) for
the original patent fees and ζ n for the scaled-up fees should not cause any confusion).
   Using (24) and the fact that from (2), r (t) = g (t)+ρ, the recursive form of the steady-state
value function (23) can be written as:
                  ¡      ¢
       ρvn = max{ 1 − λ−n − ω∗ G (xn ) + xn [vn+1 − vn ] ,                                     (25)
              xn
               £¡      ¢          ¤
             + 1 − a∗−n x∗−n + η n [v0 − vn ] + a∗−n x∗−n [v−1 − vn + ζ n ]} for n ∈ N,

where x∗−n is the equilibrium value of R&D by a follower that is n steps behind, and ω ∗ is the
steady-state labor share (while xn is now explicitly chosen to maximize vn ).
   Similarly the value for neck-and-neck firms is

                     ρv0 = max {−ω ∗ G (x0 ) + x0 [v1 − v0 ] + x∗0 [v−1 − v0 ]} ,              (26)
                             x0

while the values for followers are given by

               ρv−n =      max {−ω ∗ G (x−n ) + [(1 − a−n ) x−n + η n ] [v0 − v−n ]            (27)
                         x−n ,a−n
                         +a−n x−n [v1 − v−n − ζ n ] + x∗n [v−n−1 − v−n ]} for n ∈ N,

which takes into account that if the follower decides to build upon the leading-edge technology
it will become the new leader, but will have to pay the patent fee ζ n .

                                                   17
    For neck-and-neck firms and followers, there are no instantaneous profits, which is reflected
in (26) and (27). In the former case this is because neck-and-neck firms sell at marginal cost,
and in the latter case, because followers have no sales. These normalized value functions
emphasize that, because of growth, the eﬀective discount rate is r (t) − g (t) = ρ rather than
r (t).
    The maximization problems in (25)-(26) immediately imply that any steady-state equilib-
rium R&D policies, ha∗ , x∗ i, must satisfy:
                                     ⎧
                                     ⎨ =1        if v1 − ζ n > v0
                                a∗−n    ∈ [0, 1] if v1 − ζ n = v0                              (28)
                                     ⎩
                                          =0     if v1 − ζ n < v0

and
                        ½      µ            ¶ ¾
                          0−1 [vn+1 − vn ]
            x∗n    = max G                   ,0                                                (29)
                                    ω∗
                        (      Ã¡        ¢                                     ! )
                                 1 − a∗−n [v0 − v−n ] + a∗−n [v1 − v−n − ζ n ]
           x∗−n    = max G 0−1
                                                                                ,0             (30)
                                                     ω∗
                        ½      µ         ¶ ¾
                          0−1 [v1 − v0 ]
             x∗0   = max G                 ,0 ,                                                (31)
                                   ω∗

where G0−1 (·) is the inverse of the derivative of the G function, and since G is twice continuously
diﬀerentiable and strictly concave, G0−1 is continuously diﬀerentiable and strictly increasing.
These equations therefore imply that innovation rates, the x∗n ’s, will increase whenever the
incremental value of moving to the next step is greater and when the cost of R&D, as measured
by the normalized wage rate, ω∗ , is less. Note also that since G0 (0) > 0, these R&D levels can
be equal to zero, which is taken care of by the max operator.
    The response of innovation rates, x∗n , to the increments in values, vn+1 − vn , is the key
economic force in this model. For example, a policy that reduces the patent protection of
leaders that are n + 1 steps ahead (by increasing η n+1 or reducing ζ n+1 ) will make being
n + 1 steps ahead less profitable, thus reduce vn+1 − vn and x∗n . This corresponds to the
standard disincentive eﬀect of relaxing IPR policy. In contrast to existing models, however,
here relaxing IPR policy can also create a positive incentive eﬀect. This positive incentive
eﬀect has two components. First, as equation (30) shows, weaker patent protection in the
form of lower license fees (lower ζ) may encourage further frontier R&D by the followers,
directly contributing to aggregate growth. Second and perhaps somewhat more paradoxically,
lower protection for technological leaders that are n + 1 steps ahead will tend to reduce vn+1 ,
thus increasing vn+2 − vn+1 and x∗n+1 . We will see that this latter eﬀect plays an important

                                                18
role in the form of optimal state-dependent IPR policy. Finally, relaxing IPR protection
may also create a beneficial composition eﬀect; this is because, typically, {vn+1 − vn }∞
                                                                                        n=0 is a
decreasing sequence, which implies that x∗n−1 is higher than x∗n for n ≥ 1 (see Propositions
4 and 5 below). Weaker patent protection (in the form of shorter patent lengths) will shift
more industries into the neck-and-neck state and potentially increase the equilibrium level of
R&D in the economy.21 The optimal level and structure of IPR policy in this economy will be
determined by the interplay of these three forces.
    Given the equilibrium R&D decisions ha∗ , x∗ i, the steady-state distribution of industries
across states µ∗ has to satisfy the following accounting identities:
                           ¡ ∗                   ¢
                            xn+1 + x∗−n−1 + η n+1 µ∗n+1 = x∗n µ∗n for n ∈ N,                                (32)
                                                                   ∞
                                                                   X
                             ¡                   ¢
                                 x∗1 + x∗−1 + η 1 µ∗1 = 2x∗0 µ∗0 +   a∗−n x∗−n µ∗n ,                        (33)
                                                                   n=1
                                                 ∞
                                                 X ¡¡        ¢          ¢
                                    2x∗0 µ∗0 =       1 − a∗−n x∗−n + η n µ∗n .                              (34)
                                                 n=1
The first expression equates exit from state n + 1 (which takes the form of the leader going one
more step ahead or the follower catching up for surpassing the leader) to entry into the state
(which takes the form of a leader from the state n making one more innovation). The second
equation, (33), performs the same accounting for state 1, taking into account that entry into
this state comes from innovation by either of the two firms that are competing neck-and-neck.
Finally, equation (34) equates exit from state 0 with entry into this state, which comes from
innovation by a follower in any industry with n ≥ 1.
    The labor market clearing condition in steady state can then be written as
                        X∞      ∙                         ¸
                              ∗     1         ∗
                                                    ¡ ∗ ¢
                    1≥      µn ∗ n + G (xn ) + G x−n         and ω ∗ ≥ 0,                                   (35)
                        n=0
                                  ω λ

with complementary slackness.
    The next proposition characterizes the steady-state growth rate. As with all the other
results in the paper, the proof of this proposition is provided in the Appendix.

Proposition 1 Let the steady-state distribution of industries and R&D decisions be given by
hµ∗ , a∗ , x∗ i, then the steady-state growth rate is
                                      "           ∞
                                                                        #
                                                  X    ¡               ¢
                            g ∗ = ln λ 2µ∗0 x∗0 +   µ∗n x∗n + a∗−n x∗−n .                                   (36)
                                                        n=1
  21
     Weaker patent protection also creates a beneficial “level eﬀect” by aﬀecting equilibrium prices (as shown in
equation (7) above) and by reallocating some of the workers engaged in “duplicative” R&D to production.


                                                         19
     This proposition clarifies that the steady-state growth rate of the economy is determined
by three factors:

    1. R&D decisions of industries at diﬀerent levels of technology gap, x∗ ≡ {x∗n }∞
                                                                                    n=−∞ .

    2. The distribution of industries across diﬀerent technology gaps, µ∗ ≡ {µ∗n }∞
                                                                                  n=0 .

    3. Whether followers are undertaking R&D to catch up with the frontier or to surpass the
       frontier, a∗ ≡ {a∗n }−1
                            n=−∞ .

     IPR policy aﬀects these three margins in diﬀerent directions as illustrated by the discussion
above.
     We now define a steady-state equilibrium in a more convenient form, which will be used to
establish existence and derive some of the properties of the equilibrium.

Definition 3 (Steady-State Equilibrium) Given an IPR policy hη, ζi, a steady-state equi-
librium is a tuple hµ∗ , v, a∗ , x∗ , ω∗ , g ∗ i such that the distribution of industries µ∗ satisfy
(32), (33) and (34), the values v ≡ {vn }∞
                                         n=−∞ satisfy (25), (26) and (27), the R&D decisions
a∗ and x∗ are given by (28), (29), (30) and (31), the steady-state labor share ω ∗ satisfies (35)
and the steady-state growth rate g ∗ is given by (36).

     We next provide a characterization of the steady-state equilibrium, starting first with the
case in which there is uniform IPR policy.


3      Uniform IPR Policy

Let us first assume that the only available policy option is uniform IPR policy, whereby η n =
η < ∞ and ζ n = ζ < ∞ for all n ∈ N, which we denote by η uni and ζ uni . In this case,
(27) implies that the problem is identical for all followers, so that v−n = v−1 for n ∈ N.
Consequently, (27) can be replaced with the following simpler equation:

    ρv−1 = max {−ω∗ G (x−1 ) + [(1 − a−1 ) x−1 + η] [v0 − v−1 ] + a−1 x−1 [v1 − v−1 − ζ]} , (37)
           x−1 ,a−1

implying optimal R&D decisions for all followers of the form
                           ½      µ                                  ¶ ¾
                  ∗           0−1 max h[v0 − v−1 ] , [v1 − v−1 − ζ]i
                 x−1 = max G                                          ,0 .                     (38)
                                                    ω∗
     Let us denote the sequence of value functions under uniform IPR as {vn }∞
                                                                             n=−1 . We start
with a number of results that characterize the form of a steady-state equilibrium in this econ-
omy.

                                                20
                                                      ­         ®
Proposition 2 Consider a uniform IPR policy η uni , ζ uni and suppose that
­ ∗                          ®
 µ , v, a∗−1 , x∗ , ω ∗ , g ∗ is a steady-state equilibrium. Then, v−1 ≤ v0 and {vn }∞
                                                                                     n=0 forms a
bounded and strictly increasing sequence converging to some positive value v∞ .

   The next result shows that we can restrict attention to a finite sequence of values:
                                                   ­           ®
Proposition 3 Consider a uniform IPR policy ηuni , ζ uni and a corresponding steady-state
           ­                             ®
equilibrium µ∗ , v, a∗−1 , x∗ , ω ∗ , g ∗ . Then, there exists n∗ ∈ N such that x∗n = 0 for all
n ≥ n∗ .

   The next proposition shows that x∗ ≡ {x∗n }∞
                                              n=1 is a decreasing sequence, which implies that
technological leaders that are further ahead undertake less R&D. Intuitively, the benefits of
further R&D are decreasing in the technology gap, since greater values of the technology gap
translate into smaller increases in the equilibrium markup (recall (15)).

Proposition 4 Consider a uniform IPR policy ηuni and ζ uni . Then in any steady-state equi-
librium with uniform IPR, x∗n+1 ≤ x∗n for all n ∈ N and moreover, x∗n+1 < x∗n if x∗n > 0.

   A final comparison is between the R&D levels of neck and-and-neck firms, x∗0 , and the
R&D investments of followers and leaders in industries with a technology gap of n = 1, x∗−1
and x∗1 . The next proposition shows that x∗0 > x∗1 and x∗0 ≥ x∗1 , so that without licensing,
neck-and-neck industries are “most R&D intensive”.

Proposition 5 Consider a uniform IPR policy η uni and ζ uni . Then x∗0 > x∗1 and x∗0 ≥ x∗−1 .
                 ¡¡      ¢         ¢
Moreover, if G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0 and ζ > 0, then x∗0 > x∗−1 .
                        ¡¡          ¢         ¢
   The condition G0−1        1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0 here ensures that there will be positive R&D
in the steady-state equilibrium (see Remark 1 below and Lemma 1 in the Appendix).
                                                              ­                             ®
    Next, we prove the existence of a steady-state equilibrium µ∗ , v, a∗−1 , x∗ , ω ∗ , g ∗ with
ω ∗ < 1. A steady state with with ω∗ < 1 is economically more interesting, since when ω∗ = 1,
there are no profits, thus it must be the case that µ∗0 = 1 (so that all firms are neck-and-neck
and there are no markups). Equation (36) together with µ∗0 = 1 and x∗n = 0 for all n ∈ Z+
would then imply that there is no economic growth, i.e., g ∗ = 0.
   Establishing the existence of a steady-state equilibrium in this economy is made compli-
cated by the fact that the equilibrium allocation cannot be represented as a solution to a
maximization problem. Instead, as emphasized by Definition 3, each firm maximizes its value
taking the R&D decisions of other firms as given; thus an equilibrium corresponds to a set of

                                                21
R&D decisions that are best responses to themselves and a labor share (wage rate) ω ∗ that
clears the labor market. We establish the existence of a steady-state equilibrium in a number
of steps.
     First, note that each xn belongs to a compact interval [0, x̄], where x̄ is the maximal flow rate
of innovation defined in (11) above. Now fix a labor share ω̃ ∈ [0, 1] and a sequence hã−1 , x̃i of
(Markovian) steady-state strategies for all other firms in the economy, and consider the dynamic
optimization problem of a single firm. Our next result characterizes this problem and shows
that given some z ≡ hω̃, ã−1 , x̃i, the value function of an individual firm is uniquely determined,
while its optimal R&D choices are given by a convex-valued correspondence. In what follows,
we denote sets and correspondences by uppercase letters and refer to their elements by lowercase
letters, e.g., a−1 (z) ∈ A−1 [z], xn (z) ∈ Xn [z].
                                           ­             ®
Proposition 6 Consider a uniform IPR policy η uni , ζ uni , and suppose that the labor share
and the R&D policies of all other firms are given by z = hω̃, ã−1 , x̃i. Then the dynamic opti-
mization problem of an individual firm leads to a unique value function v [z] : {−1} ∪Z+ → R+
and optimal R&D policies A−1 [z] ⊂ [0, 1] and X [z] : {−1} ∪ Z+ ⇒ [0, x̄] are compact and
convex-valued for each z ∈ Z and upper hemi-continuous in z (where v [z] ≡ {vn [z]}∞
                                                                                   n=−1 and
X [z] ≡ {Xn [z]}∞
                n=−1 ).


     Now let us start with an arbitrary z ≡ hω̃, ã−1 , x̃i ∈ Z ≡ [0, 1]2 × [0, x̄]∞ . From Proposition
6, this z is mapped into optimal R&D decision sets A−1 [z] and X [z], where a−1 ∈ A−1 [z] and
xn [z] ∈ Xn [z]. From R&D policies hã−1 , x̃i, we calculate µ [ã−1 , x̃] ≡ {µn [ã−1 , x̃]}∞
                                                                                             n=0 using
equations (32), (33) and (34). Then we can rewrite the labor market clearing condition (35)
as
                                   (   ∞        ∙                               ¸     )
                                       X             1
                      ω = min              µn          + G (x̃n ) ω̃ + G (x̃−n ) ω̃; 1 ,
                                     n=0
                                                    λn
                          ≡ ϕ (ω̃, ã−1 , x̃)                                                     (39)

where due to uniform IPR, x∗−n = x∗−1 for all n > 0. Next, define the mapping (correspondence)
Φ [z] ≡ (ϕ (z) , A−1 [z] , X [z]), which maps Z into itself, that is,

                                                    Φ: Z ⇒ Z.                                     (40)

That Φ maps Z into itself follows since z ∈ Z consists of ã−1 ∈ [0, 1], x̃ ∈ [0, x̄]∞ and ω̃ ∈ [0, 1],
and the image of z under Φ consists of a−1 ∈ [0, 1] and x ∈ [0, x̄]∞ , and moreover, (39) is
clearly in [0, 1] (since the right-hand side is nonnegative and bounded above by 1). Finally,

                                                         22
from Proposition 6, A−1 [z] and Xn [z] are compact and convex-valued for each z ∈ Z, and also
upper hemi-continuous in z, and ϕ is continuous. Using this construction, we can establish:
                                                   ­ uni uni ®
Proposition 7 Consider a uniform IPR policy         η , ζ        and suppose that
    ¡¡      ¢         ¢                                     ­                            ®
G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0. Then a steady-state equilibrium µ∗ , v, a∗−1 , x∗ , ω∗ , g ∗
exists. Moreover, in any steady-state equilibrium ω ∗ < 1. In addition, if either η > 0 or
x∗−1 > 0, then g ∗ > 0.
                                                ¡¡          ¢         ¢
Remark 1 If the assumption that G0−1                 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0 is relaxed, then there exists
a trivial equilibrium in which x∗n = 0 for all n ∈ Z+ , i.e., an equilibrium in which there is no
innovation and thus no growth (this follows from Lemma 1 and from Propositions 4 and 5,
which imply that x∗0 ≥ x∗n for all n 6= 0). Moreover, if η > 0, then this equilibrium would also
involve µ∗0 = 1, so that in every industry two firms with equal costs compete a la Bertrand
and charge price equal to marginal cost, leading to zero aggregate profits and a labor share
                                                ¡¡       ¢         ¢
of output equal to 1. The assumption that G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0, on the other hand,
is suﬃcient to rule out µ∗0 = 1 and thus ω ∗ = 1. If in addition the steady-state equilibrium
involves some probability of catch-up or innovation by the followers, i.e., either η > 0 or
x∗−1 > 0, then the growth rate is also strictly positive. A suﬃcient condition to ensure that
                                 ¡¡         ¢      ¢
x∗−1 > 0 when η = 0 is that G0−1 1 − λ−1 /ρ − ζ > 0.22

       An immediate consequence of Proposition 3, combined with (32) is that µn = 0 for all
n ≥ n∗ (since there is no innovation in industries with technology gap greater than n∗ ). Thus
the law of motion of an industry can be represented by a finite Markov chain. Moreover,
because after an innovation by a follower, all industries jump to the neck-and-neck state (when
a∗−1 = 0) or to the technology gap of one (when a∗−1 = 1), this Markov chain is irreducible (and
aperiodic), thus converges to a unique steady-state distribution of industries. This is stated
and proved in the next proposition.
                                                ­           ®
Proposition 8 Consider a uniform IPR policy η uni , ζ uni and a steady-state equilibrium
                         ­         ®
sequence of R&D decisions a∗−1 , x∗ . Then, there exists a unique steady-state distribution of
industries µ∗ .
  22                                                                           ∗
     To see why this condition is suﬃcient
                                          suppose  that η = 0 and also that x−1 = 0. Then (37)    immediately
                                                −1                                               ∗
implies v−1 = 0 and (25) implies v 1 ≥ 1−  λ     /ρ. Moreover, from (38)
                                                                           and the
                                                                                    fact that
                                                                                              ω   ≤ 1, we have
x∗−1 ≥ G0−1 (v1 − v−1 − ζ) ≥ G0−1 1 − λ−1 /ρ − ζ . Therefore, G0−1 1 − λ−1 /ρ − ζ > 0 contradicts the
hypothesis that x∗−1 = 0, and implies x∗−1 > 0. The reason why η > 0 can, under some circumstances, contribute
to positive growth is related to the composition eﬀect discussed above.




                                                       23
4         State-Dependent IPR Policy

We now extend the results from the previous section to the environment with state-dependent
IPR policy. The main results from the previous section generalize, but the argument is slightly
modified.
         It is no longer necessarily the case that the sequence of values {vn }∞
                                                                               n=−∞ is increasing, since
IPR policies could be very sharply increasing, making a particular state very unattractive for
the leader.23 For this reason, we do not have the equivalent of Proposition 2. Nevertheless, it
can be established that only a finite number of states will have positive weight in the steady-
state distribution:

Proposition 9 Consider the state-dependent IPR policy hη, ζi, and suppose that
­ ∗                          ®
 µ , v, a∗−1 , x∗ , ω ∗ , g ∗ is a steady-state equilibrium. Then there exists a state n∗ ∈ N
such that µ∗n = 0 for all n ≥ n∗ .

         Because of the reasons highlighted in footnote 23, Proposition 4 may not necessarily hold
with state-dependent IPR. Nevertheless, the proofs of these propositions make it clear that
as long as hη, ζi is not too far from uniform IPR, the conclusions in these propositions will
continue to hold. In fact, our numerical results with optimal state-dependent IPR always verify
the conclusions of Proposition 4 (but interestingly not those of Proposition 5; see Figure 5 in
Section 5).
         Our next result is a generalization of Proposition 6, which shows that each individual firm’s
maximization problem is well-behaved with state-dependent IPR.

Proposition 10 Consider the state-dependent IPR policy hη, ζi and suppose that the labor
share and the R&D policies of all other firms are given by z = hω̃, ã, x̃i. Then the dynamic
optimization problem of an individual firm leads to a unique value function v [z] : Z → R+
and optimal R&D policies A [z] : Z− \ {0} ⇒ [0, 1] and X [z] : Z ⇒ [0, x̄] are compact and
convex-valued for each z ∈ Z and upper hemi-continuous in z (where v [z] ≡ {vn [z]}∞
                                                                                   n=−1 ,
A [z] ≡ {An [z]}−1                       ∞
                n=−∞ and X [z] ≡ {Xn [z]}n=−1 ).


         Finally, the next result generalizes Proposition 7 and establishes the existence of a steady-
state equilibrium with positive growth.

    23
         For example, we could have η n = 0 and η n+1 → ∞, which would imply that vn+1 − vn is negative.




                                                         24
Proposition 11 Consider the state-dependent IPR policy hη, ζi and suppose that
    ¡¡      ¢            ¢                                     ­                            ®
G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η 1 ) > 0. Then a steady-state equilibrium µ∗ , v, a∗−1 , x∗ , ω∗ , g ∗
exists. Moreover, in any steady-state equilibrium ω ∗ < 1. In addition, if either η 1 > 0 or
x∗−1 > 0, then g ∗ > 0.

    Although the analysis so far has established the existence of a steady-state equilibrium
and characterized some of its properties, it is not possible to determine the optimal state-
dependent IPR policy analytically. For this reason, in Section 5, we undertake a quantitative
investigation of the form and structure of optimal state-dependent IPR policy using plausible
parameter values.


5     Optimal IPR Policy: A Quantitative Investigation

In this section, we investigate the implications of various diﬀerent types of IPR policies on
the equilibrium growth and R&D rates using numerical computations of the steady-state equi-
librium. Our purpose is not to provide a detailed calibration of the model economy, but to
highlight the broad quantitative characteristics of the model and its implications for optimal
IPR policy under plausible parameter values. As we will see, the structure of optimal IPR pol-
icy and the innovation gains from such policy are relatively invariant to the range of parameter
values we consider.

5.1   Methodology

We take the annual discount rate as 5%, i.e., ρyear = 0.05 and without loss of generality, we
normalize labor supply to 1. The theoretical analysis considered a general production function
for R&D given by (9). The empirical literature typically assumes a Cobb-Douglas production
function. For example, Kortum (1993) considers a function of the form

                          Innovation (t) = B0 exp (κt) (R&D inputs)γ ,                      (41)

where B0 is a constant and exp (κt) is a trend term, which may depend on general technological
trends, a drift in technological opportunities, or changes in general equilibrium prices (such as
wages of researchers etc.). The advantage of this form is not only its simplicity, but also the
fact that most empirical work estimates a single elasticity for the response of innovation rates
to R&D inputs. Consequently, they essentially only give information about the parameter γ
in terms of equation (41). A low value of γ implies that the R&D production function is more
concave. For example, Kortum (1993) reports that estimates of γ vary between 0.1 and 0.6

                                               25
(see also Pakes and Griliches, 1980, or Hall, Hausman and Griliches, 1988). For these reasons,
throughout, we adopt a R&D production function similar to (41):

                                                       x = Bhγ                                                    (42)
                                                                                                                   1
where B, γ > 0. In terms of our previous notation, equation (42) implies that G (x) = [x/B] γ w,
where w is the wage rate in the economy (thus in terms of the above function, it is captured by
the exp (κt) term).24 Equation (42) does not satisfy the boundary conditions we imposed so far
and can be easily modified to do so without aﬀecting any of the results, since in all numerical
exercises only a finite number of states are reached.25 Following the estimates reported in
Kortum (1993), we start with a benchmark value of γ = 0.35, and then report sensitivity
checks for γ = 0.1 and γ = 0.6. The other parameter in (42), B, is chosen so as to ensure
an annual growth rate of approximately 1.9%, i.e., g ∗ ' 0.019, in the benchmark economy
which features indefinitely-enforced patents and no licensing. This growth rate together with
ρyear = 0.05 also pins down the annual interest rate as ryear = 0.069 from equation (2).
       We choose the value of λ using a reasoning similar to Stokey (1995). Equation (36) implies
that if the expected duration of time between any two consecutive innovations is about 3 years
in an industry, then a growth rate of about 1.9% would require λ = 1.05.26 We take λ = 1.05
as the benchmark value, and check the robustness of the results to λ = 1.01 and λ = 1.2
(expected duration of 1 year and 12 years, respectively). This completes all of the parameters
of the model except the IPR policy.
       As noted above, we begin with the full patent protection regime without licensing, i.e.,
hη = {0, 0, ...} , ζ = {∞, ∞, ...}i. We then compare this to an economy with full patent pro-
                               ­                  ©           ª®
tection and licensing, i.e., η = {0, 0, ...} , ζ = ζ̄, ζ̄, ... , where ζ̄ = v1 − v0 .27 After this,
  24
       More specifically, (42) can be alternatively written as

                                   Innovation (t) = Bw (t)−γ (R&D expenditure)γ ,

thus would be equivalent to (41) as long as the growth of w (t) can be approximated by constant rate.
   25
      For example, we could add a small linear term to the production function for R&D, (42), and also make it
flat after some level h̄. For example, the following generalization of (42),

                                           x = min Bhγ + εh; B h̄γ + εh̄

for ε small and h̄ large, makes no diﬀerence to our simulation results.
   26
      In particular, in our benchmark parameterization with full protection without licensing, 24% of industries
are in the neck-and-neck state. This implies that improvements in the technological capability of the economy
is driven by the R&D eﬀorts of the leaders in 76% of the industries and the R&D eﬀorts of both the leaders and
the followers in 24% of the industries. Therefore, the growth equation implies that we have g ' ln λ × 1.24 × x,
where x denotes the average frequency of innovation in a given industry. A major innovation on average every
three years implies a value of λ ' 1.05.
   27
      For the interpretation of full patent protection as ζ̄ = v1 − v0 , recall the discussion in footnote 16. Note also


                                                          26
we move to a comparison of the optimal (growth-maximizing) uniform IPR policy η uni , ζ uni
to the optimal state-dependent IPR policy. Since it is computationally impossible to calcu-
late the optimal value of each η n and ζ n , we limit our investigation to a particular form of
state-dependent IPR policy, whereby the same η and ζ applies to all industries that have a
technology gap of n = 5 or more. In other words, the IPR policy matrix takes the form:
                                             (η 1 , ζ 1 ) (η 2 , ζ 2 ) (η3 , ζ 3 ) (η 4 , ζ 4 )   (η5 , ζ 5 )
             IPR policy →             none    z}|{         z}|{         z}|{         z}|{ z       }|          {
                                        −      −            −            −            − − − − − − − − − −−
        Technology gap: n →             0        1            2            3           4  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 . . ∞.


We checked and verified that allowing for further flexibility (e.g., allowing η 5 and η 6 or ζ 5 and
ζ 6 to diﬀer) has little eﬀect on our results.
    The numerical methodology we pursue relies on uniformization and value function iteration.
The details of the uniformization technique are described in the proof of Proposition 6. On
value function iteration, see Judd (1999). In particular, we first take the IPR policies η and ζ
as given and make an initial guess for the equilibrium labor share ω ∗ . Then conditional on ω ∗ ,
we generate a sequence of values {vn }∞             ∞
                                      n=−∞ (or {vn }n=−1 depending on whether there is state-
dependent IPR policy or not), and we derive the optimal R&D policies, {x∗n }∞        ∗ −1
                                                                            n=−∞ , {an }n=−∞
and the steady-state distribution of industries, {µ∗n }∞
                                                       n=0 . After convergence, we compute the
growth rate g ∗ , and then check for market clearing in the labor market from equation (18).
Depending on whether there is excess demand or supply of labor, ω ∗ is varied and the whole
process is repeated until the entire steady-state equilibrium for a given IPR policy is computed.
The process is then repeated for diﬀerent IPR policies.
    In the state-dependent IPR case, the optimal (growth-maximizing) IPR policy sequences,
η and ζ, are computed one element at a time, until we find the growth-maximizing value for
that component, for example, η 1 . We then move the next component, for example, η 2 . Once
the growth-maximizing value of η 2 is determined, we go back to optimize over η 1 again, and
this procedure is repeated recursively until convergence.
    We now present our simulation results. We start with the parameter values λ = 1.05 and
γ = 0.35, and then show how the results change when we vary these parameters.

5.2    Full IPR Protection Without Licensing

We start with the benchmark with full protection and no licensing, which is the case that the
existing literature has considered so far (e.g., Aghion, Harris, Howitt and Vickers, 2001). In
that at a license fee of ζ̄, followers are indiﬀerent between a = 0 and a = 1, and in computing the equilibrium
in this case we always suppose that they choose a = 1. Thus alternatively one might wish to think that
ζ̄ = v1 − v0 − ε for ε ↓ 0.


                                                            27
terms of our model, this corresponds to η n = 0 for all n and ζ n = ∞ for all n. Equation
(28) implies that a∗−n = 0 for all n. We choose the parameter B in terms of (42), so that the
benchmark has an annual growth rate of 1.86%.
       The value function for this benchmark case is shown in Figure 1 (with the solid line). The
value function has decreasing diﬀerences for n ≥ 0, which is consistent with Proposition 4,
and features a constant level for all followers (since there is no state dependence in the IPR
policy). Figure 2 shows the level of R&D eﬀorts for leaders and followers in this benchmark
(again with the solid lines). This figure shows that the R&D level of a leader declines as the
technology gap increases. Moreover, consistent with Propositions 4 and 5, the highest level of
R&D is for firms that are neck-and-neck (i.e., at the technology gap of n = 0). Since there is
no state-dependent IPR policy, all followers undertake the same level of R&D eﬀort, which is
also shown in the figure.
       Figure 3 shows the distribution of industries according to technology gaps (again the solid
line refers to the benchmark case). The mode of the distribution is at the technology gap of
n = 1, but there is also a concentration of industries at technology gap n = 0, because a∗−n = 0
implies that innovations by the followers take them to the “neck-and-neck” state.
       The first column of Table 1 also reports the results for this benchmark simulation. As noted
above, B is chosen such that the annual growth rate is equal to 0.0186, which is recorded at
the bottom row. The table also shows the gap between x∗0 and x∗−1 (0.029 versus 0.018), the
frequencies of industries with technology gaps of 0, 1 and 2. The steady-state value of ω is
0.952. Since labor is the only factor of production in the economy, ω∗ should not be thought
of as the labor share in GDP. Instead, 1 − ω ∗ measures the share of pure monopoly profits in
value added. In the benchmark parameterization, this corresponds to 5% of GDP, which is
reasonable.28 Finally, the table also shows that in this benchmark parameterization 3.2% of
the workforce is working as researchers, which is also consistent with US data.29

5.3      Full IPR Protection With Licensing

We next turn to full IPR protection with licensing. As specified above, we think of full IPR
protection with licensing as corresponding to η n = 0 for all n (so that patents never expire)
and ζ n = ζ̄ ≡ v1 − v0 for all n (so that the license fee for making use of a leading-edge
technology is equal to the net present discounted value gap between being a one step ahead
  28
     Bureau of Economic Analysis (2004) reports that the ratio of before-tax profits to GDP in the US economy
in 2001 was 7% and the after-tax ratio was 5%.
  29
     According to National Science Foundation (2006), the ratio of scientists and engineers in the US workforce
in 2001 is about 4%.


                                                      28
leader and a neck-and-neck firm). Figures 1-3 show the corresponding value functions, R&D
eﬀort levels and distribution of industries for this case (with the dashed lines). Since there is no
state-dependent policy the general pattern is similar to that in the economy without licensing.
There is no longer a spike in R&D eﬀort at n = 0, however, since now firms always prefer to
pay the license and jump ahead of the leading-edge technology. This makes the neck-and-neck
state no longer special (in fact, as column 2 of Table 1 shows in equilibrium there will be no
industries in the neck-and-neck state). More importantly, the level of R&D by followers is
considerably higher than in the benchmark case. In particular, x∗−1 is now 0.021 rather than
0.018. The resulting growth rate is 2.58% instead of 1.86% in the benchmark. The boost to
growth comes not from the increase in the R&D eﬀort overall, but from the fact that the R&D
of the followers now also advances the technological frontier of the economy since they can
license and build on the leading-edge technology (recall equation (36)). In fact, column 2 of
Table 1 shows that this considerably higher growth rate is achieved with a lower fraction of
the workforce, only 2.6%, working in the research sector.
   This result, which is robust across diﬀerent parameterizations of the model, is the first
important implication of our analysis. Relative to existing models of step-by-step innovation,
such as Aghion, Harris, Howitt and Vickers (2001), which do not allow for the possibility of
licensing, here the R&D eﬀort by followers can directly contribute to economic growth and this
increases the equilibrium growth rate of the economy.

5.4   Optimal Uniform IPR Protection

We next turn to optimal (growth-maximizing) IPR policy with licensing. That is, we impose
that η n = η and ζ n = ζ for all n, and look for values of η and ζ that maximize the growth
rate. Column 3 of Table 1 shows that the growth-maximizing values of η and ζ are both equal
to 0 in the benchmark parameterization. This corresponds to zero license fees and indefinite
life of patents, so that followers can never copy the leading-edge technology without R&D, but
they can always advance one step ahead of the leader when they are successful in their R&D
eﬀorts (without paying any license fees).
   The resulting value function, R&D eﬀort levels and industry distributions according to
technology gaps are shown in Figures 4-6 (with the solid lines).
   The figures and column 3 of Table 1 show that the growth-maximizing IPR policy discour-
ages leaders (which can be seen from the fact that v1 −v0 declines significantly), but encourages
R&D eﬀort by the followers, since when successful they do not have to pay the license fee. The
optimal uniform IPR increases the growth rate by only a little, however. While the growth

                                                29
rate of the economy with full IPR protection with licensing was 2.58%, it is now 2.63%. This
increase is associated with a very modest rise in the share of the labor force working in research
(from 2.6% to 2.7%).

5.5   Optimal State-Dependent IPR Without Licensing

We next turn to our second major question; whether state-dependent IPR makes a significant
diﬀerence relative the uniform IPR. We first investigate this question without licensing (so that
the comparison is to the benchmark case in column 1). In particular, we set ζ n = ∞ for all n
and look for the combination of {η 1 , ..., η 5 } that maximizes the growth rate. The results are
shown in column 4 of Table 1.
   Two features are worth noting. First, the growth rate increases noticeably relative to
column 1; it is now 2.03% instead of 1.86%. Nevertheless, this increase is quite small relative
to the benefits of licensing. Therefore, state-dependent IPR policy with no licensing is not a
substitute for licensing.
   Second, we see an interesting pattern (which is in fact quite general in all of our quantitative
investigations). The optimal state-dependent policy {η1 , ..., η 5 } provides greater protection to
technological leaders that are further ahead. In particular, we find that the optimal policy
involves η 1 = 0.054, η 2 = 0.005, and η3 = η 4 = η 5 = 0. This corresponds to very little patent
protection for firms that are one step ahead of the followers, which can be seen by comparing
η 1 = 0.054 to x∗−1 = 0.010. This comparison implies that firms that are one step behind
followers are more than five times as likely to catch up with the technological leader because
of the expiration of the patent of the leader as they are likely to catch up because of their own
successful R&D. Then, there is a steep increase in the protection provided to technological
leaders that are two steps ahead, and η2 is 1/10th of η 1 . Perhaps even more remarkably, after
a technology gap of three or more steps, there is full protection and patents never expire.
   This pattern of greater protection for technological leaders that are further ahead may
go against a naïve intuition that state-dependent IPR policy should try to boost the growth
rate of the economy by bringing more industries with large technology gaps (where leaders
engage in little R&D) into neck-and-neck competition. This composition eﬀect is present, but
it is dominated by another, more powerful force, the trickle-down eﬀect. The intuition for the
trickle-down eﬀect is as follows: by providing secure patent protection to firms that are three
or more steps ahead of their rivals, optimal state-dependent IPR increases the R&D eﬀort of
leaders that are one and two steps ahead as well–despite the fact that these firms now face
less secure protection of their own intellectual property. In fact, this is precisely because of

                                                30
low protection for technological leaders that are one or two steps ahead combined with the
promise of much greater protection once they reach a technology gap of three steps or more.
Mechanically, high levels of η1 and η 2 reduce v1 and v2 , while high IPR protection for more
advanced firms increases vn for n ≥ 3. Consequently, it becomes more beneficial for leaders
that are one or two steps ahead to undertake R&D to reach the higher level of IPR protection.
This pattern of increased R&D for leaders under state-dependent IPR contrasts with uniform
IPR, which always reduces R&D by all technological leaders. The possibility that imperfect
state-dependent IPR protection can increase R&D incentives is a novel feature of our approach,
since previous models have not considered state-dependent IPR policies.

5.6   Optimal State-Dependent IPR With Licensing

Finally, we turn to the most general policy choice within the context of our approach and
investigate which combinations of {η1 , ..., η 5 } and {ζ 1 , ..., ζ 5 } maximize the growth rate and
the contribution of the optimal state-dependent IPR policies to economic growth. The results
of this exercise are shown in column 5 of Table 1. Now the comparison should be to the optimal
uniform IPR policy with licensing in column 3, where uniform IPR policies η and ζ were chosen
to maximize the aggregate growth rate. The value functions, R&D eﬀorts and the industry
distribution over diﬀerent levels of technology gaps in this economy are shown in Figures 4-6
(with the dashed lines).
   We see in column 5 that growth-maximizing IPR policy involves η n = 0 for all n, so that
patents never expire. Nevertheless, IPR protection for technological leaders is not full. In
particular, the growth-maximizing policy involves ζ 1 = 0, which implies that followers can
build on the leading-edge technology that is one step ahead of their own knowledge without
paying any license fees. From there on, ζ increases to ζ 2 = 0.82, which is still less than full
patent protection. After three or more steps, however, we have ζ 3 = 1.94 and ζ 4 = ζ 5 = 1.95,
which are very close to full patent protection (since v1 − v0 = 1.96). The resulting growth rate
of the economy is 2.96%, which is significantly higher than the growth rate under uniform IPR
policy, 2.63% in column 3. This shows that state-dependent policies can increase the growth
rate of the economy significantly.
   State-dependent policies again achieve this superior growth performance by exploiting the
trickle-down eﬀect, which we already saw in the case without licensing. In particular, ζ n is
an increasing sequence, which implies that technological leaders that are further ahead receive
greater protection. As in the previous subsection, this pattern of IPR is used as a way of
boosting the R&D eﬀort of technological leaders that are one or two steps ahead of their

                                                 31
rivals (see Figure 5). Since these leaders receive little protection and understand that they can
increase both their profits and their IPR protection by undertaking further innovations, they
have relatively strong innovation incentives and undertake high levels of R&D. This increases
the fraction of the labor force working in R&D to 3.9% (which is greater than all the other cases
in Table 1) and again illustrates how imperfect state-dependent IPR protection can increase
R&D incentives relative to full protection.
   The growth rate of the economy also receives a boost from the R&D eﬀort of the follow-
ers that are one step behind the leaders, since, thanks to licensing, followers’ R&D directly
contributes to the advancing the technological frontier of the economy. Figure 5 shows that
followers that are one step behind the frontier now have a higher R&D eﬀort than even in the
case with growth-maximizing uniform IPR (which involved ζ n = 0 for all n). The reason for
this pattern of R&D eﬀorts is that the growth-maximizing IPR policy and the trickle-down
eﬀect have increased the value of being a technological leader. In contrast, the R&D level of
followers that are more than once step behind is lower than in the economy with uniform IPR.
   Overall, the results show that state-dependent IPR policies can increase the equilibrium
growth rate of the economy substantially and that the trickle-down eﬀect is powerful, not only
when we consider the economy without licensing, but also in the presence of licensing.

5.7   Robustness

Tables 2-5 show the robustness of the patterns documented in Figures 1-6 and in Table 1.
In particular, each of these tables changes one of the two parameters λ and γ (increasing or
reducing λ to 1.2 or 1.01, and increasing or reducing γ to 0.6 or 0.1) and show the results
corresponding to each one of the five diﬀerent policy regimes and discussed so far. In each
case, we change the parameter B in equation (42) so that the growth rate of the benchmark
economy with full IPR protection without licensing is the same as in Table 1, 1.86%.
   Notably, the qualitative, and even the quantitative, patterns in Table 1 are relatively robust.
In all cases we see a significant increase in the growth rate when we allow licensing. The
smallest increase is when γ = 0.6, presumably because with limited diminishing returns to
R&D, incentives were already suﬃciently strong without licensing. As a result, in this case,
the growth rate increases only from 1.86% to 1.98%. In all other cases, allowing for licensing
increases the growth rate to above 2.5%, which is a very large increase relative to the baseline
of 1.86%.
   Moreover, in all cases, moving to state-dependent IPR policy increases the growth rate
further, though the extent of the increase varies depending on parameters. The most modest

                                               32
gain comes when γ = 0.1, because in this case the economy with full protection and licensing
already achieves a very high growth rate of 2.78%, and thus there is only little room left for
an increase in growth rate from state-dependent IPR. In all other cases, the increase in the
growth rate is quite substantial.
    Perhaps, more noteworthy is the fact that in all cases, growth-maximizing state-dependent
IPR is shaped by the trickle-down eﬀect. In all of the various parameterizations we have
considered, there is little or no protection provided to technological leaders that are one step
ahead, but IPR protection grows as the technology gap increases. This is the typical pattern
implied by the trickle-down eﬀect.
    We therefore conclude that both the substantial benefits of licensing in models of tech-
nological competition and the benefits of state-dependent policies, mostly coming from the
trickle-down eﬀect, are robust across diﬀerent specifications.


6    Conclusions

In this paper, we developed a general equilibrium framework to investigate the impact of the
extent and form of intellectual property rights (IPR) policy on economic growth. The two
major questions we focused on are whether licensing, which allows followers to build on the
leading-edge technology in return of a license fee, has a major impact on the equilibrium growth
rate and whether the same degree of patent protection should be given to companies that are
further ahead of their competitors as those that are technologically close to their competitors.
    In our model economy, firms engage in cumulative (step-by-step) innovation. Leaders can
innovate in order to widen the technology gap between themselves and the followers, which
enables them to charge higher markups. On the other hand, followers innovate to catch up with
or surpass the technological leaders in their industry. Followers can advance in three diﬀerent
ways. First, the patent of the technological leader may expire, allowing the follower in the
industry to copy the leading-edge technology. Second, each follower can undertake catch-up
R&D to improve its own variant of the product to catch up with the leader. Third, each
follower can undertake frontier R&D, building on and improving the leading-edge technology;
in this case, when successful, it will have to pay a license fee to the technological leader.
    In the model economy, IPR policy regulates whether licensing is possible and how costly
it will be far followers, and also the length of the patents. We characterized the form of the
steady-state equilibrium and proved its existence under general IPR policies. We then used this
framework to investigate the form of “optimal” (growth-maximizing) IPR policy quantitatively.


                                                33
   The major findings of this quantitative exercise are as follows:

  1. A move from an IPR policy without licensing to one that allows for licensing has a signif-
     icant eﬀect on the equilibrium growth rate. For the benchmark parameterization of our
     model, licensing increases the growth rate from 1.86% to 2.58% per annum. This sub-
     stantial increase in growth rate is robust to a large range of variation in the parameters.

  2. State-dependent IPR also leads to a significant improvement in the equilibrium growth
     rate. In our benchmark parameterization, the growth rate of the economy increases from
     2.57% under the growth-maximizing uniform IPR policy to 2.93% under state-dependent
     IPR policy. Perhaps more interesting than this substantial impact on the equilibrium
     growth rate is the form of the optimal state-dependent IPR policy. Contrary to a naïve
     intuition, we find that the growth-maximizing IPR policy provides greater protection to
     firms that are further ahead of their rivals than those that are technologically close to
     their competitors. Underlying this form of the optimal IPR policy is the trickle-down
     eﬀect. The trickle-down eﬀect implies that providing greater protection to suﬃciently
     advanced technological leaders not only increases their R&D eﬀorts, but also raises the
     R&D eﬀorts of all technological leaders that are less advanced than this level, because
     the reward to innovation now includes the greater protection that they will receive once
     they reach this higher level of technology. Our results suggest that the trickle-down eﬀect
     is powerful both with and without licensing, and its form and magnitude are relatively
     insensitive to the exact parameter values used in the quantitative investigation.

   The analysis in this paper suggests that a move to a richer menu of IPR policies, in
particular, a move towards optimal state-dependent policies with licensing may significantly
increase innovation and economic growth. The results also show that the form of optimal
IPR policy may depend on the industry structure (and the technology of catch-up within the
industry). Nevertheless, these conclusions are based on a quantitative evaluation of a rather
simple model. It would be interesting to investigate the robustness of these results to diﬀerent
models of industry dynamics and study whether the relationship between the form of optimal
IPR policy and industry structure suggested by our analysis also applies when variation in
industry structure has other sources (for example, diﬀerences in the extent of fixed costs). The
most important area for future work is a detailed empirical investigation of the form of optimal
IPR policy, using both better estimates of the eﬀects of IPR policy on innovation rates and
also structural models where the eﬀect of diﬀerent policies on equilibrium can be evaluated.


                                              34
Appendix: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Equations (19) and (21) imply
                                                              S∞       ∗
                                           w (t)   Q (t) λ− n=0 nµn (t)
                                   Y (t) =       =                      .
                                           ω (t)           ω (t)
                              ∞
Since ω (t) = ω ∗ and {µ∗n }n=0 are constant in steady state, Y (t) grows at the same rate as Q (t).
Therefore,
                                                ln Q (t + ∆t) − ln Q (t)
                                      g ∗ = lim                           .
                                           ∆t→0             ∆t
Now note the following: during an interval of length ∆t (i) in the fraction µ∗n of the industries with
technology gap n ≥ 1 the leaders innovate at a rate x∗n ∆t + o (∆t); (ii) in the same industries, the
followers innovate at the rate a∗−n x∗−n ∆t+o (∆t); (iii) in the fraction µ∗0 of the industries with technology
gap of n = 0, both firms innovate, so that the total innovation rate is 2x∗0 ∆t + o (∆t)); and (iv) each
innovation increase productivity by a factor λ. Combining these observations, we have
                                       "            ∞                           ∞
                                                                                                        #
                                                   X                           X
                                           ∗ ∗            ∗ ∗                        ∗  ∗
      ln Q (t + ∆t) = ln Q (t) + ln λ 2µ0 x0 ∆t +       µn xn ∆t + o (∆t) +        a−n x−n ∆t + o (∆t) .
                                                   n=1                       n=1

Subtracting ln Q (t), dividing by ∆t and taking the limit ∆t → 0 gives (36).
                                      ­               ®
     Proof of Proposition 2. Let a−1 , {xn }∞    n=−1 be the R&D decisions of the firm and {vn }n=−1
                                                                                                     ∞
                                                                                                 ∗ ∞
be the sequence of values, taking the decisions of other firms and the industry distributions, {xn }n=−1 ,
      ∞
{µ∗n }n=−1 , ω ∗ and g, as given. By choosing xn = 0 for all n ≥ −1, the firm guarantees vn ≥ 0 for all
n ≥ −1. Moreover, since flow profit satisfy π n ≤ 1 for all n ≥ −1, vn ≤ 1/ρ for all n ≥ −1, establishing
that {vn }∞
          n=−1 is a bounded sequence, with vn ∈ [0, 1/ρ] for all n ≥ −1.

    Proof of v1 > v0 : Suppose, first, v1 ≤ v0 , then (31) implies x∗0 = 0, and by the symmetry of the
problem in equilibrium (26) implies v0 = v1 = 0. As a result, from (30) we obtain x∗−1 = 0. Equation
                                     ¡        ¢
(25) implies that when x∗−1 = 0, v1 ≥ 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0, yielding a contradiction and proving that
v1 > v0 .

    Proof of v−1 ≤ v0 : Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that v−1 > v0 .
    If v1 − ζ ≤ v0 , (30) yields x∗−1 = 0. This implies v−1 = ηv0 / (ρ + η), which contradicts v−1 ≥ v0
since η/ (ρ + η) < 1. Thus we must have v1 − ζ > v0 , which implies that a∗−1 = 1. Imposing a∗−1 = 1,
the value function of a neck-and-neck firm can be written as:

                       ρv0    = max {−ω ∗ G (x0 ) + x0 [v1 − v0 ] + x∗0 [v−1 − v0 ]} ,                    (43)
                                   x0
                              ≥ max {−ω ∗ G (x0 ) + x0 [v1 − v0 ]} ,
                                   x0
                              ≥ max {−ω ∗ G (x0 ) + x0 [v1 − v−1 − ζ]} ,
                                 x0
                                       ¡   ¢
                              ≥ −ω ∗ G x∗−1 + x∗−1 [v1 − v−1 − ζ] ,
                                       ¡   ¢
                              ≥ −ω ∗ G x∗−1 + x∗−1 [v1 − v−1 − ζ] + η [v0 − v−1 ] ,
                              = ρv−1 ,

which contradicts the hypothesis that v−1 > v0 and establishes the claim.

   Proof of vn < vn+1 : Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that vn ≥ vn+1 . Now (29) implies x∗n = 0,
and (25) becomes
                    ¡       ¢        £                ¡        ¢        ¤
              ρvn = 1 − λ−n + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 − vn + η [v0 − vn ]               (44)

                                                      35
Also from (25), the value for state n + 1 satisfies
                   ¡           ¢       £            ¡      ¢         ¤
         ρvn+1 ≥ 1 − λ−n−1 + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 − vn+1 + η [v0 − vn+1 ] .             (45)

Combining the two previous expressions, we obtain
                 ¡        ¢       £               ¡        ¢       ¤
                   1 − λ−n + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 − vn + η [v0 − vn ]
                                  £               ¡        ¢         ¤
             ≥ 1 − λ−n−1 + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 − vn+1 + η [v0 − vn+1 ] .

Since λ−n−1 < λ−n , this implies vn < vn+1 , contradicting the hypothesis that vn ≥ vn+1 , and es-
                                                                  ∞                                  ∞
tablishing the desired result, vn < vn+1 . Consequently, {vn }n=−1 is nondecreasing and {vn }n=0 is
                                                                                                 ∞
(strictly) increasing. Since a nondecreasing sequence in a compact set must converge, {vn }n=−1 con-
verges to its limit point, v∞ , which must be strictly positive, since {vn }∞
                                                                            n=0 is strictly increasing and
has a nonnegative initial value. This completes the proof.

    Proof of Proposition 3.        The first-order condition of the maximization of the value function
(25) implies:
                                             vn+1 − vn
                                    G0 (xn ) ≥          and xn ≥ 0,
                                                ω∗
with complementary slackness. G0 (0) is strictly positive by assumption. If (vn+1 − vn ) /ω ∗ < G0 (0),
                                             ∞
then xn = 0. Proposition 2 implies that {vn }n=−1 is a convergent and thus a Cauchy sequence, which
implies that there exists ∃n ∈ N such that vn+1 − vn < ω ∗ G0 (0) for all n ≥ n∗ .
                            ∗


    Proof of Proposition 4. From equation (29),

                                  δ n+1 ≡ vn+1 − vn < vn − vn−1 ≡ δ n                                (46)

is suﬃcient to establish that x∗n+1 ≤ x∗n .
     Let us write:
               ©¡        ¢                                   £                ¡        ¢ ¤      ª
   ρ̄vn = max 1 − λ−n − ω ∗ G (xn ) + x∗n [vn+1 − vn ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 ,
             xn
                                                                                                     (47)
where ρ̄ ≡ ρ + x∗−1 + η. Since x∗n+1 , x∗n and x∗n−1 are maximizers of the value functions vn+1 , vn and
vn−1 , (47) implies:
                              ¡      ¢                            £                 ¡        ¢ ¤
ρ̄vn+1 = 1 − λ−n−1 − ω ∗ G x∗n+1 + x∗n+1 [vn+2 − vn+1 ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 ,
                                                                                                     (48)
                            ¡     ¢                           £                ¡        ¢ ¤
   ρ̄vn ≥ 1 − λ−n − ω ∗ G x∗n+1 + x∗n+1 [vn+1 − vn ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 ,
                            ¡     ¢                           £                ¡        ¢ ¤
   ρ̄vn ≥ 1 − λ−n − ω ∗ G x∗n−1 + x∗n−1 [vn+1 − vn ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 ,
                              ¡      ¢                          £                 ¡       ¢ ¤
ρ̄vn−1 = 1 − λ−n+1 − ω ∗ G x∗n−1 + x∗n−1 [vn − vn−1 ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 .

Now taking diﬀerences with ρ̄vn and using the definitions of δ n ’s, we obtain
                                          ¡        ¢
                         ρ̄δ n+1 ≤ λ−n 1 − λ−1 + x∗n+1 (δ n+2 − δ n+1 )
                                            ¡         ¢
                             ρ̄δ n ≥ λ−n+1 1 − λ−1 + x∗n−1 (δ n+1 − δ n ) .

Therefore,               ¡          ¢
                          ρ̄ + x∗n−1 (δ n+1 − δ n ) ≤ −kn + x∗n+1 (δ n+2 − δ n+1 ) ,                 (49)
where
                                        kn ≡ (λ − 1)2 λ−n−1 > 0.


                                                     36
Now to obtain a contradiction, suppose that δ n+1 − δ n ≥ 0. From (49), this implies δ n+2 − δ n+1 > 0
since kn is strictly positive. Repeating this argument successively, we have that if δ n0 +1 − δ n0 ≥ 0,
                                                                                            ∞
then δ n+1 − δ n > 0 for all n ≥ n0 . However, we know from Proposition 2 that {vn }n=0 is strictly
increasing and converges to a constant v∞ . This implies that δ n ↓ 0, which contradicts the hypothesis
that δ n+1 − δ n ≥ 0 for all n ≥ n0 ≥ 0, and establishes that x∗n+1 ≤ x∗n . To see that the inequality is
strict when x∗n > 0, it suﬃces to note that we have already established (46), i.e., δ n+1 − δ n < 0, thus if
equation (29) has a positive solution, then we necessarily have x∗n+1 < x∗n .

       Proof of Proposition 5. Proof of x∗0 ≥ x∗−1 : Suppose first that ζ > v1 − v0 . Then (28) implies
a∗−1   = 0, and (26) can be written as
                                  ρv0 = −ω ∗ G (x∗0 ) + x∗0 [v−1 + v1 − 2v0 ] .                        (50)
We have v0 ≥ 0 from Proposition 2. Suppose v0 > 0. Then (50) implies x∗0 > 0 and
                                        v−1 + v1 − 2v0       > 0                                       (51)
                                               v1 − v0       > v0 − v−1.
This inequality combined with a∗−1 = 0, (31) and (38) yields x∗0 > x∗−1 . Suppose next that v0 = 0.
Inequality (51) now holds as a weak inequality and implies that x∗0 ≥ x∗−1 . Moreover, since G (·) is
strictly convex and x∗0 is given by (31), (50) then implies x∗0 = 0 and thus x∗−1 = 0.
     We next show that when ζ ≤ v1 − v0 , x∗0 ≥ x∗−1 . In this case, a∗−1 = 1 is an optimal policy, so that
                          ρv0    = −ω ∗ G (x∗0 ) + x∗0 [v1 − v0 ] + x∗0 [v−1 − v0 ]
                         ρv−1    ≥ −ω ∗ G (x∗0 ) + x∗0 [v1 − v−1 − ζ] + η [v0 − v−1 ] .
Subtracting the second expression from the first, we obtain
                           ρ [v0 − v−1 ] ≤ x∗0 [v−1 + ζ − v0 ] + (x∗0 + η) [v−1 − v0 ] ,
and therefore
                                         [v0 − v−1 ] ≤ [v−1 + ζ − v0 ] .
Proposition 2 implies that v−1 ≤ v0 , and therefore v−1 + ζ ≥ v0 . Next observe that with a∗−1 = 1,
(31) and (38) imply that x∗0 ≥ x∗−1 if and only if v1 − v0 ≥ v1 − v−1 − ζ, or equivalently if and only if
v−1 + ζ ≥ v0 . Thus we have established that x∗0 ≥ x∗−1 both when ζ > v1 − v0 and when ζ ≤ v1 − v0 .

   Lemma 1 and proof: We next first prove a lemma, which will be used in the rest of the Appendix.
                          ¡¡         ¢         ¢
Lemma 1 Suppose that G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0, then x∗0 > 0 and v0 > 0.

    Proof of Lemma: Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that x∗0 = 0. The first part of the proof
then implies that x∗−1 = 0. Then (25) implies
                                          ρv1 ≥ 1 − λ + η [v0 − v1 ] .
Equation (26) together with x∗0 = 0 gives v0 = 0, and hence

                                                          1 − λ−1
                                              v1 − v0 ≥           .
                                                           ρ+η
Combined with this inequality, (31) implies
                                             ½     µ             ¶ ¾
                                                      1 − λ−1
                                  x∗0   ≥ max G0−1                 ,0 ,
                                                     ω ∗ (ρ + η)
                                             ½     µ          ¶ ¾
                                                     1 − λ−1
                                        ≥ max G0−1               ,0 ,
                                                      ρ+η

                                                        37
where¡¡ the second
                ¢      inequality
                           ¢      follows from the fact that ω ∗ ≤ 1.              The assumption that
  0−1        −1
G       1−λ       / (ρ + η) > 0 then implies x∗0 > 0, thus leading to a contradiction and establishing
that x∗0 > 0. Strict convexity of G (·) together with x∗0 > 0 then implies v0 > 0.¥
                                          ¡¡        ¢         ¢
    Proof of x∗0 > x∗−1 when G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0 and ζ > 0: Given Lemma 1,
      ¡¡        ¢          ¢
G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0 implies that x∗0 > 0. Then the first part of the proof implies that
when ζ > v1 − v0 , x∗0 > x∗−1 . Next suppose that 0 < ζ < v1 − v0 . Then the same argument as above
implies that x∗0 > x∗−1 if and only if v1 − v0 > v1 − v−1 − ζ, or equivalently if and only if v−1 + ζ > v0 .
Suppose this is not the case. Then from the first part of the proof, we have that x∗0 = x∗−1 = 0, and
thus v−1 = v0 = 0, which implies v−1 + ζ > v0 and thus x∗0 > x∗−1 . This yields a contradiction and
                                                            ¡¡        ¢          ¢
completes the proof that x∗0 > x∗−1 when ζ > 0 and G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0.

    Proof of x∗0 > x∗1 : To prove that x∗0 > x∗1 , let us write the value functions v2 , v1 and v0 as in (48)
in the proof of Proposition 4:
                                                              £                  ¡        ¢ ¤
        ρ̄v2 = 1 − λ−2 − ω ∗ G (x∗2 ) + x∗2 [v3 − v2 ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 ,
                                                              £                  ¡        ¢ ¤
        ρ̄v1 ≥ 1 − λ−1 − ω ∗ G (x∗2 ) + x∗2 [v2 − v1 ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 ,
                                                              £                  ¡        ¢ ¤
        ρ̄v1 ≥ 1 − λ−1 − ω ∗ G (x∗0 ) + x∗0 [v2 − v1 ] + x∗−1 a∗−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a∗−1 v0 + ηv0 ,
        ρ̄v0 = −ω ∗ G (x0 ) + x∗0 [v1 − v0 ] + ηv0 + x∗−1 v0 + x∗0 [v−1 − v0 ] .
Now taking diﬀerences with ρ̄vn and using the definitions of δ n ’s as in (46) in the proof of Proposition
4, we obtain
                 ¡        ¢
     ρ̄δ 2 ≤ λ−1 1 − λ−1 + x∗2 (δ 3 − δ 2 ) ,                                                         (52)
             ¡     −1
                      ¢     ∗                  ∗
                                                  £ ∗                ¡      ∗
                                                                              ¢          ¤ ∗
     ρ̄δ 1 ≥ 1 − λ      + x0 (δ 2 − δ 1 ) + x−1 a−1 (v−1 + ζ) + 1 − a−1 v0 − v0 − x0 [v−1 − v0 ] ,
             ¡     −1
                      ¢                                   ¡               ¢
     ρ̄δ 1 ≥ 1 − λ      + x∗0 (δ 2 − δ 1 ) + x∗−1 a∗−1 ζ + x∗−1 a∗−1 − x∗0 [v−1 − v0 ] ,
             ¡        ¢                      ¡              ¢
     ρ̄δ 1 ≥ 1 − λ−1 + x∗0 (δ 2 − δ 1 ) + x∗−1 a∗−1 − x∗0 [v−1 − v0 ] .
Next note that Proposition 2 implies that v−1 − v0 ≤ 0. Moreover, the first part of the first part
                                      ∗      ∗                           ∗
of
£ ∗the proof
         ¤ has established that x−1 − x0 ≤ 0. Combining this with a−1 ≤ 1 establishes that
 x−1 − x0 [v−1 − v0 ] ≥ 0, and the last inequality then implies
                                           ¡        ¢
                                    ρ̄δ 1 ≥ 1 − λ−1 + x∗0 (δ 2 − δ 1 ) .
Now combining this inequality with the first inequality of (52), we obtain
                                                     ¡       ¢2
                         (ρ̄ + x∗0 ) (δ 2 − δ 1 ) ≤ − 1 − λ−1 + x∗2 (δ 3 − δ 2 ) .                                  (53)
Proposition 2 has established δ 2 > δ 3 , so that the right-hand side is strictly negative, therefore, we
must have δ 2 − δ 1 < 0, which implies that x∗0 > x∗1 and completes the proof.

                                            D                         E
   Proof of Proposition 6.         Fix z = ω̃, {x̃n }∞
                                                     n=−1 , {ãn }−1
                                                                  n=−∞ , and consider the optimization
problem of a representative firm, written recursively as:
                            ¡        ¢
              ρvn = max { 1 − λ−n − ω̃G (xn ) + xn [vn+1 − vn ]
                     xn ∈[0,x̄]

          + x̃−1 (ã−1 [v−1 − vn + ζ] + (1 − ã−1 ) [v0 − vn ]) + η [v0 − vn ]} for n ∈ N

               ρv0 = max {−ω̃G (x0 ) + x0 [v1 − v0 ] + x̃0 [v−1 − v0 ]}
                      x0 ∈[0,x̄]

               ρv−1 =              max            {−ω̃G (x0 ) + x−1 (a−1 [v1 − v−1 − ζ] + (1 − a−1 ) [v0 − v−1 ])
                        x−1 ∈[0,x̄], a−1 ∈[0,1]

               +η [v0 − v−1 ]}.

                                                             38
We now transform this dynamic optimization problem into a form that can be represented as a
contraction mapping
              D       using the method
                                    E of “uniformization”
                                                ³     ´     (see, for example, Ross, 1996, Chapter
                    ∞           −1
5). Let ξ̃ = {x̃n }n=−1 , {ãn }n=−∞ and pn,n0 ξ | ξ̃ be the probability that the next state will
                                                                          D                      E
                                                                                ∞           −1
be n0 starting with state n when the firm in question chooses policies ξ ≡ {xn }n=−1 , {an }n=−∞
and the R&D policy of other firms is given by ξ̃. Using the fact that, because of uniform IPR
policy, hx−n , a−n i = hx−1 , a−1 i for all n ∈ N, these transition probabilities can be written as:
             ³      ´                             ³       ´
       p−1,0 ξ | ξ̃ = (1−ax−1   )x−1 +η
                              −1 +η
                                           p −1,1  ξ | ξ̃   = ax−1 x−1
                                                                −1 +η
             ³      ´                           ³      ´
       p0,−1 ξ | ξ̃ = x0x̃+x̃
                           0
                                           p0,1 ξ | ξ̃ = x0x+x̃ 0
                                                                                                         .
             ³      ´         0
                                                ³      ´          0
                                                                                   ³      ´
                          a−1 x̃−1                           (1−a−1 )x̃−1 +η                     xn
       pn,−1 ξ | ξ̃ = xn +x̃−1 +η          pn,0 ξ | ξ̃ = xn +x̃−1 +η         pn,n+1 ξ | ξ̃ = xn +x̃−1 +η

Uniformization involves adding fictitious transitions from a state into itself, which do not change the
value of the program, but allow us to represent the optimization problem as a contraction. For this
purpose, define the transition rates ψ n as
                                           ⎧
                                 ³      ´ ⎨ xn + x−1 + η for n ∈ {1, 2, ...}
                             ψ n ξ | ξ̃ =     x−1 + η for n = −1                 .
                                           ⎩
                                              2xn for n = 0
                                            ³     ´
These transition rates are finite since ψ n ξ | ξ̃ ≤ ψ ≡ 2x̄ + η < ∞ for all n, where x̄ is the maximal
flow rate of innovation defined in (11) in the text (both x̄ and η are finite by assumption).
    Now following equation (5.8.3) in Ross (1996), we can use these transition rates and define the new
transition probabilities (including the fictitious transitions from a state to itself) as:
                                           ⎧               ³       ´
                                 ³      ´ ⎨ ψn (ξ|ξ̃) pn,n0 ξ | ξ̃    if n 6= n0
                                                 ψ
                           p̃n,n0 ξ | ξ̃ =                                         .
                                           ⎩ 1 − ψn (ξ|ξ̃)            if n = n0
                                                      ψ

This yields equivalent transition probabilities
         ³      ´                        ³      ´                           ³      ´
 p̃−1,−1 ξ | ξ̃ = 1 − x2x̄+η
                           −1 +η
                                  p̃−1,0 ξ | ξ̃ = (1−a−1   )x−1 +η
                                                        2x̄+η        p̃−1,1 ξ | ξ̃ = a2x̄+η
                                                                                       −1 x−1

       ³      ´                        ³      ´                           ³      ´
                   x̃0
 p̃0,−1 ξ | ξ̃ = 2x̄+η            p̃0,0 ξ | ξ̃ = 1 − x2x̄+η
                                                       0 +x̃0                         x0
                                                                     p̃0,1 ξ | ξ̃ = 2x̄+η                                     ,
      ³      ´                          ³     ´                              ³      ´                 ³      ´
 p̃n,0 ξ | ξ̃ = (1−ã−1  )x̃−1 +η
                      2x̄+η       p̃n,n ξ | ξ̃ = 1 − xn +x̃  −1 +η
                                                          2x̄+η
                                                                                         xn
                                                                     p̃n,n+1 ξ | ξ̃ = 2x̄+η     p̃n,−1 ξ | ξ̃ =   ã−1 x̃−1
                                                                                                                    2x̄+η

and also defines an eﬀective discount factor β given by
                                                ψ      2x̄ + η
                                          β≡       =             .
                                               ρ+ψ   ρ + 2x̄ + η
Also let the per period return function (profit net of R&D expenditures) be
                                             (
                                               1−λ−n −ω̃G(xn )
                                                   ρ+2x̄+η     if n ≥ 1
                                 Π̂n (xn ) =     −ω̃G(xn )              .                                (54)
                                                  ρ+2x̄+η otherwise

Using these transformations, the dynamic optimization problem can be written as:
                                 (                                   )
                                             X         ³        ´
                  vn = max Π̂n (xn ) + β         p̃n,n0 ξ n | ξ̃ ṽn0 , for all n ∈ Z,                   (55)
                             xn , an
                                                    n0
                         ≡ T ṽn , for all n ∈ Z.

                                                         39
where v ≡ {vn }∞    n=−1 and the second line defines the operator T , mapping from the space of
functions
    ­       V   ≡  {v : {−1}
                          ® ∪ Z+ → R+ } into itself.        T is clearly a contraction, thus, for given
                     ∞                                                ∞
z = ω̃, ã−1 , {x̃n }n=−1 , possesses a unique fixed point v∗ ≡ {vn∗ }n=−1 (e.g., Stokey, Lucas and Prescott,
1989).
    Moreover, xn ∈ [0, x̄], a−1 ∈ [0, 1], and vn for each n = −1, 0, 1, ... given by the right-hand side of
(55) is continuous in an and xn (an applying only for n = −1), so Berge’s Maximum   ­ Theorem     (Aliprantis
                                                                                                     ®
                                                                                                ∞
and Border, 1999, Theorem 16.31, p. 539) implies that the set of maximizers A∗−1 , {Xn∗ }n=−1 exists,
                                                                                         ­             ∞   ®
is nonempty and compact-valued for each z and is upper hemi-continuous in z = ω̃, ã−1 , {x̃n }n=−1 .
                                                                                    ­                ®
Moreover, concavity of vn in an and xn for each n = −1, 0, 1, ... implies that A∗−1 , {Xn∗ }∞   n=−1 is also
convex-valued for each z, completing the proof.

     Proof of Proposition 7. We first show that         ¡¡ the mapping
                                                                  ¢       Φ:¢ Z ⇒ Z constructed in (40) has a
fixed point, and then establish that when G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0 this fixed point corresponds
to a steady state with ω ∗ < 1.
     First, it has already been established that Φ maps Z into itself. We next show that Z is compact
in the product topology and is a subset of a locally convex Hausdorﬀ space. The first part follows
from
Q∞ the fact that Z can be written as the Cartesian product of compact subsets, Z = [0, 1] × [0, 1] ×
    n=−1 [0, x̄]. Then by Tychonoﬀ’s Theorem (e.g., Aliprantis and Border, 1999, Theorem 2.57, p. 52;
Kelley, 1955, p. 143), Z is compact in the product topology. Moreover, Z is clearly nonempty and also
convex, since for any z, z0 ∈ Z and λ ∈ [0, 1], we have λz+ (1 − λ) z0 ∈ Z. Finally, since Z is a product
of intervals on the real line, it is a subset of a locally convex Hausdorﬀ space (see Aliprantis and Border,
1999, Lemma 5.54, p. 192).
     Next, ϕ is a continuous function from Z into [0, 1] and from Proposition 6, A−1 (z) and Xn (z) for
n ∈ {−1} ∪ Z+ are upper hemi-continuous in z. Consequently, Φ ≡ hϕ [z] , A−1 [z] , X [z]i has closed
graph in z in the product topology. Moreover, each one of ϕ (z), A−1 (z) and Xn (z) for n = −1, 0, ... is
nonempty, compact and convex-valued. Therefore, the image of the mapping Φ is nonempty, compact
and convex-valued for each z ∈ Z. The Kakutani-Fan-Glicksberg Fixed Point Theorem implies that if
the function Φ maps a convex, compact and nonempty subset of a locally convex Hausdorﬀ space into
itself and has closed graph and is nonempty, compact and convex-valued z, then it possesses a fixed
point z∗ ∈ Φ (z∗ ) (see Aliprantis and Border, 1999, Theorem 16.50 and Corollary 16.51, pp. 549-550).
This establishes the existence of a fixed point z∗ of Φ.
                                                                               ∗
     To complete the proof, we    ¡ need   to show that ¢ the ∗fixed point,¡ z∗ , ∗corresponds to
                                                                                                ¢ a steady    state
equilibrium. First, since an ω , a−1 , {xn }n=−1 = a−1 and xn ω , a−1 , {x∗n }∞
                                     ∗ ∗       ∗ ∞
                                                                                                   = x∗n for n ∈
                                                            ­         ∞     ®              n=−1
{−1} ∪ Z+ , we have that given a labor share of ω ∗ , a∗−1 , {x∗n }n=−1 constitutes an R&D policy vector
that is best response to itself, as required by steady-state equilibrium (Definition 3). Next, we need to
prove that the implied labor share ω ∗ leads to labor market clearing. This follows from the fact that the
fixed point involves ω ∗ < 1, since in this case (39) will have an interior solution, ensuring labor market
clearing. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that ω ∗ = 1. Then, as noted in the text, we must have
µ∗0 = 1. From (32), (33) and (34), this   ¡¡ implies
                                                        ∗
                                                     ¢ xn = 0 for
                                                                ¢ n ∈ {−1} ∪ Z+ . However, Lemma 1 implies
                                      0−1         −1
that this is not possible when G            1−λ        / (ρ + η) > 0. Consequently, (39) cannot be satisfied
at ω ∗ = 1, implying that ω ∗ < 1. When ω ∗ < 1, the labor market clearing condition     ¡        (35) is satisfied
                                                                                                             ¢
                                                                ∞                                      ∞
at ω ∗ as an equality, so ω ∗ is an equilibrium given {x∗n }n=−1 , and thus z∗ = ω ∗ , a∗−1 , {x∗n }n=−1 is a
steady-state equilibrium as desired.
     Finally, if η > 0, then (34) implies that µ∗0 > 0. Since x∗0 > 0 from Lemma 1, equation (36) implies
g > 0. Alternatively, if x∗−1 > 0, then g ∗ > 0 follows from (36), completing the proof.
  ∗


     Proof of Proposition 8. We will establish that there exists n∗ such that x∗n∗ = 0 and x∗n > 0 for
all n > n∗ , which will imply that the states n < n∗ are transient and can be ignored, and that {µ∗n }∞  n=0
forms a finite and irreducible Markov chain over the states n = 0, 1, ..., n∗ .
     First, recall that Proposition 2 has established that {vn }n∈Z+ is strictly increasing. Then it follows
from the proof of Proposition 3 that there exists a state n∗∗ ∈ N such that x∗∗         n = 0 for all n ≥



                                                        40
n∗∗ . Now let n∗ = minn∈{0,...,n∗∗ } {n ∈ N:vn+1 − vn ≤ ω ∗ G0 (0)}. Such an n∗ exists, since the set
                                                                                 ¡¡       ¢            ¢
{0, ..., n∗∗ } is finite and nonempty because of the assumption that G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η) > 0.
Then by construction x∗n > 0 for all n < n∗ and x∗n∗ = 0 as desired. Now denoting the probability of
being in state ñ starting in state n after τ periods by P τ (n, ñ), we have that limτ →∞ P τ (n, ñ) = 0 for
all ñ > n∗ and for all n. Thus we can focus on the finite Markov chain over the states n = 0, 1, ..., n∗ ,
            n∗                                                                                           n∗
and {µ∗n }n=0 is the limiting (invariant) distribution of this Markov chain. Given a∗−1 and {x∗n }n=−1 ,
      ∗
{µ∗n }nn=0 is uniquely defined. Moreover, the underlying Markov chain is irreducible (since x∗n > 0 for
n = 0, 1, ..., n∗ − 1, so that all states communicate with n = 0 or n = 1). Therefore, by Theorem 11.2
                                                                                                ∞
in Stokey, Lucas and Prescott (1989, p. 62) there exists a unique stationary distribution {µ∗n }n=0 .

     Proof of Proposition 9.          There are two cases to consider. First, suppose that {vn }n∈Z+ is
strictly increasing. Then it follows from the proof of Proposition 3 that there exists a state n∗ ∈ N
such that x∗n = 0 for all n ≥ n∗ , and as in the proof of Proposition 8, states n ≥ n∗ are transient (i.e.,
limτ →∞ P τ (n, ñ) = 0 for all ñ > n∗ and for all n), so µ∗n = 0 for all n ≥ n∗ .
     Second, in contrast to the first case, suppose that there exists some n∗∗ ∈ Z+ such that vn∗∗ ≥
vn +1 . Then, let n∗ = minn∈{0,...,n∗∗ } {n ∈ N:vn+1 − vn ≤ ω ∗ G0 (0)}, which is again well defined.
   ∗∗

Then, optimal R&D decision (29) immediately implies that x∗n > 0 for all states with n < n∗ , and
since x∗n∗ = 0, all states n > n∗ are transient and limτ →∞ P τ (n, ñ) = 0 for all ñ > n∗ and for all n,
completing the proof.

    Proof of Proposition 10. The proof follows closely that of Proposition 6. In particular, again
using uniformization, the maximization problem of an individual firm can be written as a contraction
                                                                                                ³      ´
mapping similar to (55) there. The finiteness of the transition probabilities follows, since ψ n ξ | ξ̃ ≤
ψ ≡ 2x̄ + maxn {ηn } < ∞ (this is a consequence of the fact that x̄ defined in (11) is finite and
maxn {η n } is finite, since each ηn ∈ R+ and by assumption, there exists n̄ < ∞ such that ηn = ηn̄ ).
This contraction mapping uniquely determines the value function v [z] : Z → R+ .
    Berge’s Maximum Theorem (Aliprantis and Border, 1999, Theorem 16.31, p. 539) again implies
that each of An (z) for n ∈ Z− \ {0} and Xn (z) for n ∈ Z is upper hemi-continuous in z = hω̃, ã, x̃i,
and moreover, since vn for n ∈ Z is concave in an and xn , the maximizers of v [z], A ≡ {A−n }∞  n=1 and
X ≡ {Xn }∞ n=−∞   , are  nonempty, compact and convex-valued.

    Proof
    D         of Proposition E11.           The proof follows that of Proposition 7 closely.         Fix
              −1           ∞                                 Q∞             Q∞
z = ω̃, {ãn }n=−∞ , {x̃n }n=−∞ , and define Z ≡ [0, 1] × n=−1 [0, 1] × n=−∞ [0, x̄]. Again by Ty-
chonoﬀ’s Theorem, Z is compact in the product topology. Then consider the mapping Φ: Z ⇒ Z
constructed as Φ ≡ (ϕ, A, X), where ϕ is given by (39) and A and X are defined in Proposition 10.
Clearly Φ maps Z into itself. Moreover, as in the proof of Proposition 7, Z is nonempty, convex, and
a subset of a locally convex Hausdorﬀ space. The proof of Proposition 10 then implies that Φ has
closed graph in the product topology and is nonempty, compact and convex-valued in z. Consequently,
the Kakutani-Fan-Glicksberg Fixed Point Theorem again applies and implies that Φ has a fixed point
z∗ ∈ Φ (z∗ ). The argument that the fixed point z∗ corresponds to a steady-state equilibrium is identical
to that
     ¡¡ in Proposition
                 ¢      7, and
                            ¢ follows from the fact that within argument identical to that of Lemma 1,
G0−1 1 − λ−1 / (ρ + η1 ) > 0 implies that x∗0 > 0. The result that ω ∗ < 1 then follows immediately.
Finally, as in the proof of Proposition 7, either η 1 > 0 or x∗−1 > 0 is suﬃcient for g ∗ > 0.




                                                     41
References

   Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griﬃth and Peter
Howitt (2005) “Competition and Innovation: an Inverted-U Relationship” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 120, pp. 701-728.
   Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt and John Vickers (2001)
“Competition, Imitation and Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation” Review of Economic Stud-
ies, 68, pp. 467-492 .
   Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris and John Vickers (1997) “Step-by-step
Competition, Innovation and Growth: An Example” European Economic Review, 41, pp. 771-
782.
   Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (1992) “A Model of Growth Through Creative
Destruction” Econometrica, 110, 323-351.
   Aliprantis, Charalambos D. and Kim C. Border (1999) Infinite Dimensional Analy-
sis: Hitchhiker’s Guide, Springer-Verlag, New York.
   Arrow, Kenneth (1962) “ Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for In-
vention” in R.R. Nelson, ed. Universities-National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
Series; The Rate and Direction of Economic Activities: Economic and Social Factors, Prince-
ton University Press, New York.
   Baye, Michael R., and Heidrun C. Hoppe (2003) “The strategic equivalence of rent-
seeking, innovation, and patent-race games,” Games and Economic Behavior, 44, 217-226.
   Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine (2001) “Perfectly Competitive Innovation,”
Univesity of Minnesota and UCLA mimeo.
   Boldrin, Michele and David K. Levine (2004) “Innovation and the Size of the Mar-
ket,” Univesity of Minnesota and UCLA mimeo.
   Budd, Christopher, Christopher Harris and John Vickers (1993) “A Model of the
Evolution of Duopoly: Does the Asymmetry Between Firms Tend to Increase or Decrease?”
Review of Economic Studies, 60, 540-573.
   Bureau of Economic Analysis (2004) “Annual Revision of the National In-
come and Product Accounts” Bureau of Economic Analysis News.                  BEA 04-31.
www.bea.gov/bea/rels.htm
   Choi, Jay P. (1991) “Dynamic R&D Competition under Hazard Rate Uncertainty,”
Rand Journal of Economics, 22, 596-610.
   Fudenberg, Drew, Richard Gilbert, Joseph Stiglitz and Jean Tirole (1983) “Pre-


                                            42
emption, leapfrogging and competition in patent races,” European Economic Review 22, 3-31.
   Fullerton, Robert and Preston McAfee (1999) “Auctioning entry into tournaments,”
Journal of Political Economy, 107, 573-605.
   Gallini, Nancy T. (1992) “Patent Policy and Costly Imitation” RAND Journal of
Economics, 23, 52-63.
   Gallini, Nancy T. and Suzanne Scotchmer (2002) “Intellectual Property; When is
it the Best Incentive Mechanism?” Innovation Policy and the Economy, 2, 51-78.
   Gilbert, Richard. and Carl Shapiro (1990) “Optimal Patent Length and Breadth,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 21(1), 106-112.
   Green, Jerry and Suzanne Scotchmer (1995) “On the Division of Profit in Sequential
Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 26(1), 20-33.
   Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1990) Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
   Hall, Bronwyn H., Jerry Hausman and Zvi Griliches (1988) “Patents and R&D:
Is There a Lag?” International Economic Review, 27, pp. 265-83.
   Harris, Christopher and John Vickers (1985) “Perfect Equilibrium in a Model of
Race” Review of Economic Studies, 52, 193-209.
   Harris, Christopher and John Vickers (1987) “Racing with Uncertainty” Review of
Economic Studies, 54, 1-21.
   Hopenhayn, Hugo and Matthew Mitchell (2001) “Innovation, Variety and Patent
Breadth” RAND Journal of Economics, 32, 152-166.
   Judd, Kenneth (1999) Numerical Methods in Economics, MIT Press, Cambridge.
   Kelley, John L. (1955) General Topology, Springer-Verlag, New York.
   Klemperer, Paul (1990) “How Broad Should the Scope of Patent Protection Be?” Jour-
nal of Industrial Economics, 21, 113-130.
   Kortum, Samuel (1993). “Equilibrium R&D and the Patent-R&D Ratio: US Evidence”
American Economic Review, 83, pp. 450-457.
   Llobet, Gerard, Hugo Hopenhayn and Matthew Mitchell (2001) “Rewarding
Sequential Innovators: Prizes, Patents and Buyouts,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department Staﬀ Report 273, mimeo.
   Moscarini, Giuseppe and Francesco Squintani (2004) “Competitive Experimenta-
tion with Private Information,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper, No. 1489.
   National Science Foundation (2006) “Industrial R&D Employment in the United
States and in U.S. Multinational Corporations” Division of Science Resource Statistics. NSF

                                              43
05-302. Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation. www.bsf.gov/sbe/srs/stats.htm
   O’Donoghue, Ted, Suzanne Scotchmer and Jacques François Thisse (1998)
“Patent Breadth, Patent Life and the Pace of Technological Progress” Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy, 7, 1-32.
   O’Donoghue, Ted and Joseph Zweimuller (2004) “Patents in a Model of Endogenous
Growth” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 81-123.
   Pakes, Ariel and Zvi Griliches (1980) “Patents and R&D at the Firm Level: A First
Look.” Economic Letters, 5, pp. 377-381.
   Quah, Danny (2004) “24/7 Competitive Innovation,” LSE Mimeo.
   Reinganum, Jennifer (1981) “Dynamic Games of Innovation,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 25, 21-24.
   Reinganum, Jennifer (1985) “Innovation and Industry Evolution,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 100, 81-100.
   Romer, Paul M. (1990) “Endogenous Technological Change” Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 98, S71-S102.
   Ross, Sheldon (1996) Stochastic Processes, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
   Scotchmer, Suzanne (1999) “On the Optimality of the Patent System,” The Rand
Journal of Economics, 30, 181-196.
   Scotchmer, Suzanne (2005) Innovations and Incentives, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts.
   Segal, Ilya and Michael Whinston (2005) “Anti-Trust in Innovative Industries,” Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
   Taylor, Curtis (1995) “Digging for golden carrots: an analysis of research tournaments,”
American Economic Review, 85, 872-890.
   Tirole, Jean (1988) The Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
   Stokey, Nancy (1995) “R&D and Economic Growth” Review of Economic Studies, 62,
pp. 469-489.
   Stokey, Nancy and Robert Lucas with E. Prescott (1989) Recursive Methods in
Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press.




                                            44
                                   Table 1. Benchmark Results
                                                          Optimal         Optimal            Optimal
                     Full IPR           Full IPR
                                                          Uniform            State              State
                     Protection         Protection
                                                             IPR          Dependent          Dependent
                      without              with
                                                            with           without              with
                      licensing          licensing
                                                          licensing        licensing          licensing
       λ                  1.05              1.05             1.05             1.05               1.05
       γ                  0.35              0.35             0.35             0.35               0.35
       η1                  0                 0                 0             0.054                0
       η2                  0                 0                 0             0.005                0
       η3                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       η4                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       η5                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       ζ1                  ∞                3.52               0               ∞                  0
       ζ2                  ∞                3.52               0               ∞                 0.82
       ζ3                  ∞                3.52               0               ∞                 1.94
       ζ4                  ∞                3.52               0               ∞                 1.95
       ζ5                  ∞                3.52               0               ∞                 1.95
    v1 − v0               2.70              3.52             1.71             1.59               1.96
      x∗−1               0.018             0.021            0.023            0.010              0.026
       x∗0               0.029             0.033            0.023            0.022              0.024
       µ∗0               0.238               0                 0             0.440                0
       µ∗1               0.326             0.481            0.506            0.195              0.446
       µ∗2               0.189             0.253            0.253            0.135              0.232
       ω∗                0.952             0.931            0.936            0.961              0.937
   Researcher
                         0.032             0.026            0.027            0.028              0.039
     ratio
       g∗               0.0186            0.0258           0.0263            0.0203            0.0296
Note: This table gives the results of the benchmark numerical computations with ρ = 0.05, λ = 1.05,
γ = 0.35 under five diﬀerent IPR policy regimes. It reports the steady-state equilibrium values of
the diﬀerence in the values v1 − v0 ; the R&D rate of a follower that is one step behind, x∗−1 ; the
R&D rate of neck-and-neck competitors, x∗0 ; fraction of industries in neck-and-neck competition, µ∗0 ;
fraction of industries at a technology gap of n = 1; the value of “labor share,” ω ∗ ; the ratio of the labor
force working in research; and the growth rate, g ∗ . It also reports the growth-maximizing uniform and
state-dependent IPR policies with or without licensing. See text for details.




                                                     45
                                           Table 2. λ = 1.01
                                                          Optimal         Optimal            Optimal
                     Full IPR           Full IPR
                                                          Uniform            State              State
                     Protection         Protection
                                                             IPR          Dependent          Dependent
                      without              with
                                                            with           without              with
                      licensing          licensing
                                                          licensing        licensing          licensing
       λ                  1.01              1.01             1.01             1.01               1.01
       γ                  0.35              0.35             0.35             0.35               0.35
       η1                  0                 0                 0             0.272                0
       η2                  0                 0                 0             0.017                0
       η3                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       η4                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       η5                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       ζ1                  ∞                0.19               0               ∞                  0
       ζ2                  ∞                0.19               0               ∞                 0.04
       ζ3                  ∞                0.19               0               ∞                 0.10
       ζ4                  ∞                0.19               0               ∞                 0.10
       ζ5                  ∞                0.19               0               ∞                 0.10
    v1 − v0               0.14              0.19             0.09             0.08               0.10
      x∗−1               0.090             0.106            0.107            0.053              0.126
       x∗0               0.139             0.162            0.107            0.103              0.115
       µ∗0               0.245               0                 0             0.452                0
       µ∗1               0.330             0.496            0.501            0.191              0.455
       µ∗2               0.186             0.251            0.251            0.137              0.232
       ω∗                0.991             0.987            0.987            0.993              0.988
   Researcher
                         0.008             0.007            0.007            0.007              0.010
     ratio
       g∗               0.0186            0.0257           0.0257            0.0203            0.0293
Note: This table gives the results of the benchmark numerical computations with ρ = 0.05, λ = 1.01,
γ = 0.35 under five diﬀerent IPR policy regimes. It reports the steady-state equilibrium values of
the diﬀerence in the values v1 − v0 ; the R&D rate of a follower that is one step behind, x∗−1 ; the
R&D rate of neck-and-neck competitors, x∗0 ; fraction of industries in neck-and-neck competition, µ∗0 ;
fraction of industries at a technology gap of n = 1; the value of “labor share,” ω ∗ ; the ratio of the labor
force working in research; and the growth rate, g ∗ . It also reports the growth-maximizing uniform and
state-dependent IPR policies with or without licensing. See text for details.




                                                     46
                                            Table 3. λ = 1.2
                                                          Optimal         Optimal            Optimal
                     Full IPR           Full IPR
                                                          Uniform            State              State
                     Protection         Protection
                                                             IPR          Dependent          Dependent
                      without              with
                                                            with           without              with
                      licensing          licensing
                                                          licensing        licensing          licensing
       λ                  1.20              1.20             1.20             1.20               1.20
       γ                  0.35              0.35             0.35             0.35               0.35
       η1                  0                 0                 0             0.014                0
       η2                  0                 0                 0             0.002                0
       η3                  0                 0                 0             0.001                0
       η4                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       η5                  0                 0                 0               0                  0
       ζ1                  ∞               24.85               0               ∞                  0
       ζ2                  ∞               24.85               0               ∞                 5.69
       ζ3                  ∞               24.85               0               ∞                12.25
       ζ4                  ∞               24.85               0               ∞                14.75
       ζ5                  ∞               24.85               0               ∞                14.98
    v1 − v0              20.11             24.85            13.69            12.40              14.99
      x∗−1               0.005             0.006            0.007            0.003              0.008
       x∗0               0.008             0.010            0.007            0.006              0.007
       µ∗0               0.221               0                 0             0.418                0
       µ∗1               0.318             0.452            0.523            0.206              0.445
       µ∗2               0.199             0.260            0.261            0.142              0.236
       ω∗                0.806             0.743            0.783            0.847              0.760
   Researcher
                         0.068             0.056            0.070            0.058              0.090
     ratio
       g∗               0.0186            0.0261           0.0284            0.0200            0.0306
Note: This table gives the results of the benchmark numerical computations with ρ = 0.05, λ = 1.2,
γ = 0.35 under five diﬀerent IPR policy regimes. It reports the steady-state equilibrium values of
the diﬀerence in the values v1 − v0 ; the R&D rate of a follower that is one step behind, x∗−1 ; the
R&D rate of neck-and-neck competitors, x∗0 ; fraction of industries in neck-and-neck competition, µ∗0 ;
fraction of industries at a technology gap of n = 1; the value of “labor share,” ω ∗ ; the ratio of the labor
force working in research; and the growth rate, g ∗ . It also reports the growth-maximizing uniform and
state-dependent IPR policies with or without licensing. See text for details.




                                                     47
                                           Table 4. γ = 0.1

                                                         Optimal         Optimal            Optimal
                     Full IPR          Full IPR
                                                         Uniform            State              State
                     Protection        Protection
                                                            IPR          Dependent          Dependent
                      without             with
                                                           with           without              with
                      licensing         licensing
                                                         licensing        licensing          licensing
       λ                 1.05              1.05             1.05             1.05               1.05
       γ                 0.1               0.1               0.1              0.1                0.1
       η1                 0                 0                 0             0.291                 0
       η2                 0                 0                 0                0                  0
       η3                 0                 0                 0                0                  0
       η4                 0                 0                 0                0                  0
       η5                 0                 0                 0                0                  0
       ζ1                 ∞                3.11               0               ∞                   0
       ζ2                 ∞                3.11               0               ∞                 0.77
       ζ3                 ∞                3.11               0               ∞                 1.90
       ζ4                 ∞                3.11               0               ∞                 1.90
       ζ5                 ∞                3.11               0               ∞                 1.90
    v1 − v0              2.20              3.11             1.64             0.48               1.90
      x∗−1              0.022             0.023            0.024            0.016              0.025
       x∗0              0.024             0.026            0.024            0.021              0.024
       µ∗0              0.314               0                 0             0.777                 0
       µ∗1              0.333             0.497            0.501            0.096              0.492
       µ∗2              0.172             0.251            0.251            0.058              0.248
       ω∗               0.944             0.916            0.917            0.981              0.917
   Researcher
                        0.008             0.007            0.008             0.003             0.010
     ratio
       g∗               0.0186            0.0278           0.0280           0.0220            0.0286
Note: This table gives the results of the benchmark numerical computations with ρ = 0.05, λ = 1.05,
γ = 0.1 under five diﬀerent IPR policy regimes. It reports the steady-state equilibrium values of the
diﬀerence in the values v1 − v0 ; the R&D rate of a follower that is one step behind, x∗−1 ; the R&D
rate of neck-and-neck competitors, x∗0 ; fraction of industries in neck-and-neck competition, µ∗0 ; fraction
of industries at a technology gap of n = 1; the value of “labor share,” ω ∗ ; the ratio of the labor
force working in research; and the growth rate, g ∗ . It also reports the growth-maximizing uniform and
state-dependent IPR policies with or without licensing. See text for details..




                                                    48
                                           Table 5. γ = 0.6

                                                         Optimal         Optimal            Optimal
                     Full IPR          Full IPR
                                                         Uniform            State              State
                     Protection        Protection
                                                            IPR          Dependent          Dependent
                      without             with
                                                           with           without               with
                      licensing         licensing
                                                         licensing        licensing          licensing
       λ                 1.05              1.05             1.05             1.05               1.05
       γ                 0.6               0.6               0.6              0.6                0.6
       η1                 0                 0                 0              0.070              0.007
       η2                 0                 0                 0              0.019                0
       η3                 0                 0                 0              0.007                0
       η4                 0                 0                 0              0.003                0
       η5                 0                 0                 0                0                  0
       ζ1                 ∞                5.24             5.24              ∞                   0
       ζ2                 ∞                5.24             5.24              ∞                 0.59
       ζ3                 ∞                5.24             5.24              ∞                 1.69
       ζ4                 ∞                5.24             5.24              ∞                 2.13
       ζ5                 ∞                5.24             5.24              ∞                 2.35
    v1 − v0              4.38              5.24             5.24             2.25               2.35
      x∗−1              0.011             0.015            0.015             0.002              0.027
       x∗0              0.053             0.070            0.070             0.020              0.021
       µ∗0              0.092               0                 0              0.327              0.037
       µ∗1              0.257             0.413            0.413             0.094              0.242
       µ∗2              0.193             0.252            0.252             0.074              0.128
       ω∗               0.942             0.937            0.937            0.9320             0.9307
   Researcher
                        0.073             0.044            0.044             0.087             0.010
     ratio
       g∗               0.0186            0.0198           0.0198           0.0230            0.0303
Note: This table gives the results of the benchmark numerical computations with ρ = 0.05, λ = 1.05,
γ = 0.6 under five diﬀerent IPR policy regimes. It reports the steady-state equilibrium values of the
diﬀerence in the values v1 − v0 ; the R&D rate of a follower that is one step behind, x∗−1 ; the R&D
rate of neck-and-neck competitors, x∗0 ; fraction of industries in neck-and-neck competition, µ∗0 ; fraction
of industries at a technology gap of n = 1; the value of “labor share,” ω ∗ ; the ratio of the labor
force working in research; and the growth rate, g ∗ . It also reports the growth-maximizing uniform and
state-dependent IPR policies with or without licensing. See text for details.




                                                    49
             Values


             40


             30




                                                   Full Protection wêo Licensing
             20


                                                   Full Protection with Licensing
             10


                                                                   Technology Gap
    - 10                 10        20     30       40         50

                          Figure 1. Value Functions.
.


           R&D Efforts


            0.03                                   Full Protection wêo Licensing
                                                   Full Protection with Licensing
           0.025

            0.02

           0.015

            0.01

           0.005

                                                                   Technology Gap
    - 10                 10         20        30        40

                              Figure 2. R&D Efforts.




                                         50
       Industry Shares
          0.5
                                                      Full Protection wêo Licensing
          0.4                                         Full Protection with Licensing


          0.3


          0.2


          0.1


                                                                      Technology Gap
-2                            2        4         6          8

                          Figure 3. Industry Shares.



          Values


          40


          30


          20
                                                      Optimal Uniform IPR
                                                     Optimal State-Dependent IPR
          10


                                                                      Technology Gap
- 10                     10       20        30       40          50

                         Figure 4. Value Functions.




                                           51
        R&D Efforts


         0.03                                        Optimal Uniform IPR
                                                    Optimal State-Dependent IPR
       0.025

         0.02

       0.015

         0.01

       0.005

                                                                 Technology Gap
- 10                     10     20         30         40

                          Figure 5. R&D Efforts.



       Industry Shares
          0.5
                                                     Optimal Uniform IPR
          0.4                                       Optimal State-Dependent IPR


          0.3


          0.2


          0.1


                                                                 Technology Gap
-2                        2       4             6          8

                         Figure 6. Industry Shares.




                                      52
