                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         MONETARY POLICY CHALLENGES IN EMERGING MARKETS:
    SUDDEN STOP, LIABILITY DOLLARIZATION, AND LENDER OF LAST RESORT

                                         Guillermo A. Calvo

                                        Working Paper 12788
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12788


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




I am grateful to Jose De Gregorio, Marcio Garcia, Frederic Mishkin, Ugo Panizza, Andrew Powell,
Ernesto Talvi, John B. Taylor, Rodrigo Valdes, and participants in the Latin American Network of
Central Banks and Finance Ministries at the Inter-American Development Bank, Washington DC,
October 19-20, 2006, for helpful comments; and especially to Gonzalo Llosa for first-rate research
assistance and literature search, and John Smith for expert editing. The usual caveats apply. The views
expressed here do not necessarily represent those of the IDB or the Ntional Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Guillermo A. Calvo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Monetary Policy Challenges in Emerging Markets: Sudden Stop, Liability Dollarization, and
Lender of Last Resort
Guillermo A. Calvo
NBER Working Paper No. 12788
December 2006, Revised January 2007
JEL No. E52,E58,F32

                                             ABSTRACT

The paper argues that Emerging Market economies (EMs) face financial vulnerabilities that weaken
the effectiveness of a domestic Lender of Last Resort (LOLR). As a result, monetary policy is inextricably
linked to the state of the credit market. In particular, the central bank should be ready to operate as
LOLR during Sudden Stop (of capital inflows) by releasing international reserves in an effective manner.
These conditions also impact on optimal monetary policy in normal but high-volatility periods. The
paper further argues that during those periods interest rate rules may engender excessive volatility
of exchange rates and, thus, that it may be advisable to temporarily supplement those rules by foreign
exchange market intervention or outright exchange rate pegging. At a fundamental level, the analysis
suggests that the state-of-the-art literature summarized by Woodford (2003) or even more heterodox
approaches exemplified by Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003) likely fall short of providing a satisfactory
guide for monetary policy in EMs.

Guillermo A. Calvo
Chief Economist
Inter-American Development Bank
1300 New York Ave.
Washington, DC 20005
and NBER
calvo@econ.umd.edu
                                            I. Introduction

         “A nice art collection and quiet surroundings do not a First World central bank

make” should be the motto of every central banker in Emerging Market economies

(EMs). This is especially true during tranquil times in which both the level and volatility

of interest rate spreads are low, and the central bank easily forgets its role as Lender of

Last Resort (LOLR)—thus entirely focusing on its role as guarantor of price stability in a

full-employment setting. Unfortunately, as the high-volatility episode in May/June 2006

reminded us,1 tranquil times may quickly turn into periods in which an EM central banker

looks more like a high-wire performer without a safety net than a sedate analyst whose

primary objective is to find the best specification for a Taylor Rule.

         Fortunately, experienced central bankers are well aware of these facts and have

acted accordingly. Since 1998, for example, Latin America has increased its stock of

international reserves twofold, while Asia (including China) did so by a factor of three.

This followed the Asia 1997 and Russia 1998 crises, which left no doubt that a Sudden

Stop (of capital inflows) and attendant liquidity crunch can hit both saints and sinners.

However, this type of policy reaction is still less than fully incorporated into central

banks’ tool kit—which remains replete with sophisticated analyses on how to implement

Inflation Targeting, for example, with little or no reference to financial imperfections in

EMs.2



1
  The expectation that the Fed would further tighten monetary policy caused a major fall in EM stock
market prices and rise in credit spreads. Interestingly, the episode carried no noticeable cost in terms of
output and employment.
2
  Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2001), and Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2005) are exceptions in which
the incidence of Liability Dollarization and Sudden Stop are explicitly taken into account. The recent book
by Mishkin (2006) offers a balanced and cogent exposition of the central issues that motivate the present
note.


                                                                                                          1
         The objective of this note is to help to redress the balance by bringing to the fore

two distinguishing characteristics of EMs, namely, Sudden Stop and Liability

Dollarization (foreign-exchange denominated debts).3 Special emphasis will be placed

on Domestic Liability Dollarization (DLD), i.e., domestic residents’ dollar debts vis-à-vis

the domestic banking system. These financial features seriously weaken the central

bank’s role as LOLR, but they have been largely ignored in the literature which, true to

form, has focused on issues relevant to mature economies.4

         Section II will start by defining LOLR, arguing that EMs are likely to have a

somewhat ineffective LOLR. The discussion will then turn to the use of international

reserves during Sudden Stop. It will be argued that proper management of Sudden Stop

episodes should be high on the central bank’s agenda, because they may deteriorate long-

term growth prospects, despite the fact that those episodes are not everyday events.

Section III will discuss some aspects of monetary policy under normal conditions, but

under the assumption of a largely ineffective LOLR. Section IV concludes.


                                  II. Lender of Last Resort in EMs

1. Lender of Last Resort (LOLR). A LOLR is an institution that is able to lend at

reasonably low rates of interest to sectors (public or private) that are seriously credit

constrained. Typically, this role is carried out by the central bank (and this will be

assumed in what follows).
3
  In what follows, “dollar” will be identified with “foreign exchange.” In Eichengreen et al. (2005)
Liability Dollarization is instead called Original Sin. The expression “Original Sin” invokes the thought
that EMs may not be able to clean the slate, which is still a highly debated issue. To be fair, Liability
Dollarization is not free from semantic imprecision either (e.g., is the US Liability Dollarized?), but I will
stick with it for the present, albeit with some uneasiness.
4
  For example, the expression Lender of Last Resort does not appear in the Index of Woodford (2003), a
masterful state-of-the-art exposition of monetary theory. Neither is the LOLR or related DLD issue
addressed in Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003), a book that otherwise places great emphasis on domestic
financial imperfections.


                                                                                                                 2
        An effective LOLR either has resources of its own (e.g., international reserves) or

is able to borrow in the open market at reasonable interest rates. The US Fed is an

example of the latter type. Under these circumstances, the LOLR does not interfere with

its role as guarantor of price stability. To a large extent, the two types of activities are

independent of one another. This has not been the case in most EMs.

        Consider, for example, a Sudden Stop episode. The economy as a whole—

including the central bank and the other branches of government—undergoes a sudden,

highly unexpected, curtailment of international credit (see Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejía,

2004, for an empirical definition). Thus, beyond international reserves, central bank

loans have to be financed by seigniorage, i.e., money printing, interfering with the central

bank’s role as guarantor of price stability.

        The LOLR in EMs may also be ineffective in less extreme cases. Suppose, for

example, that there is a run on domestic banks in response to rumors of a financial crisis

(i.e., a potentially self-fulfilling banking crisis). This is an episode akin to the bank run

during the US Great Depression (see Friedman and Schwartz, 1963). An effective LOLR

would quickly gain control of the situation by extending necessary loans to banks in order

for the run not to cause costly withdrawals of credit lines to the private sector. This

operation need not have any impact on prices or the exchange rate because the central

bank would simply be accommodating a higher demand for liquidity.5 The situation

would be different, however, if some of the liquidity held by the private sector consisted

of foreign exchange, for example, a phenomenon called Currency Substitution in the

literature, which is highly prevalent in developing countries (see Calvo and Végh, 1999).

5
  Notice that in this instance the central bank can lend without borrowing because the episode corresponds
to a situation in which there is a sudden higher demand for central bank liquidity. Perhaps a better
characterization of the central bank in this instance would be as Liquidity Provider instead of LOLR.


                                                                                                             3
In that case, increasing domestic liquidity may not be neutral, as in the previous instance.

Unless this operation is swiftly accompanied by foreign exchange intervention, the

increase in domestic liquidity could give rise to a sharp increase in exchange rates and

prices.6

           Let us now consider the situation one period before the LOLR is called into action

and assume that the private sector is fully aware of this. Under an effective LOLR, the

expectation that the LOLR will go into action will come as a relief, since it ensures that a

major financial accident will be avoided. However, if the LOLR is ineffective, the

situation is radically different. The private sector would realize that very soon the

money-printing press will likely go into overdrive, pushing prices and exchange rates

sharply upwards. Moreover, if the situation is triggered by Sudden Stop, or domestic

prices are sticky, the real exchange rate will also increase which, combined with DLD,

compromises the health of the banking system, potentially paralyzing the payments

system. Thus, just a basic understanding of this scenario will drive the private sector to

take precautionary action by means such as withdrawing bank deposits. Most likely, this

will be reflected in higher and more volatile interest-rate spreads, having a negative

impact on the credit market and possibly triggering some early LOLR activity.

2.         Sudden Stop: The role of international reserves. A Sudden Stop is, first and

foremost, a credit event. Typically, the country as a whole finds itself bereft of dollar

credit, and it makes perfect sense that the international reserves of the central bank are

made available to the public. Table 1 shows that this has been the general practice during


6
  To prevent that a change in liquidity composition will bring about a bank run, some central banks have
allowed foreign-exchange deposits. Thus, individuals could change liquidity composition from “peso” to
“dollar” without withdrawing their bank deposits. A major drawback of allowing dollar deposits is that
they may be a major factor behind the creation of DLD.


                                                                                                           4
Sudden Stop episodes since 1980 (see Data Appendix). Central banks lost large

quantities of international reserves, and neither reserve losses nor exchange rate

depreciations are significantly different across exchange rate regimes prevailing prior to

Sudden Stop.7



                                                      Table 1. Media Test

                                                                                 Maximum
                                                 Maximum Loss Maximum Loss of     Nominal
        EXCHANGE RATE                            of Reserves a/ Reserves/GDP b/ Depreciation c/

        FLEXIBLE

        Mean                                                -15.435                      -1.625                    26.435
        Standard Error                                   (3.512)***                  (0.365)***                (7.162)***
        Observations                                             30                          30                        30

        FIXED

        Mean                                                -19.238                      -2.267                     20.495
        Standard Error                                   (2.246)***                  (0.326)***                  (8.795)**
        Observations                                             90                          87                         90

        DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
        FLEXIBLE AND FIXEDd/
        Mean                                                     3.802                       0.643                       5.940
        Standard Error                                         (4.388)                     (0.595)                    (15.816)
        a/
           Percentage difference between the minimum level of international reserves during a Sudden Stop and the pre-crisis
        level.
        b/
             Calculated using one-year lagged GDP.
        c/
             Percentage difference between the maximum exchange rate during a Sudden Stop and its pre-crisis level.
        d/
          Test t of difference in medias.
        Note: The exchange rate regime corresponds to 1-year lagged of Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger’s (2005) three-way
        classification.
        * Significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%




7
    Thus, under Sudden Stop there is no such a thing as “fixers” or “floaters,” they are all “mixers!”


                                                                                                                                 5
        Under normal central bank operations, reserves are made available to the public

through what is usually called Foreign Exchange Intervention, FXI, which in this case

amounts to selling foreign exchange for domestic currency at an exchange rate lower than

the one that would prevail if the central bank did not intervene. Thus, at the margin, FXI

is tantamount to fixing or pegging the exchange rate. Table 1 thus implies that, as a

general rule, during Sudden Stop central banks are likely to switch to some form of fixed

or pegged exchange rate system. Notice that if, contrariwise, the central bank insisted on

letting the exchange rate do all the work, then international reserves would remain in its

vaults, unless, of course, the central bank devises less standard schemes for disposing of

international reserves.

        An interesting example of non-standard ways for disposing of international

reserves is an operation carried out by Brazil in August 2002 (see Financial Times,

2002), when the central bank employed some of its international reserves to make loans

to the export sector through commercial banks. This operation took place during an

incipient Sudden Stop episode triggered by statements from incoming President Lula to

the effect that his government might engage in some kind of public debt repudiation. The

operation appears to have been very successful.8

        Assuming that during Sudden Stop it is optimal for the central bank to make its

reserves available in order to cushion the effects of international credit crunch, what is

better: FXI or directing credit to some critical sectors? FXI has the advantage that the

central bank needs to have only limited information about credit markets. But a major


8
 How common have been these types of directed credit operations in response to incipient Sudden Stop are
unknown to me. It is an interesting research topic. Márcio Garcia, incidentally, suggests (personal
communication) that in the case of Brazil the central bank may have been prompted to provide export credit
because exporters had been forced to surrender to the central bank a large share of export proceeds.


                                                                                                        6
disadvantage is that international reserves may just become Capital Flight, and have no

positive effect on the real economy. This instance cannot be discounted because during

Sudden Stop the private sector operates under “poor visibility”—the Sudden Stop creates

serious information gaps that militate against an efficient allocation of resources. Thus, if

the central bank believes that it can help to coordinate a “good” equilibrium and/or has

better information than the market, limited as it might be, it may be advisable for the

central bank directly to channel international reserves to sectors which, on net, display a

positive marginal social return to the use of international reserves (much like Brazil

attempted to do in 2002, although in each individual case not necessarily involving the

export sector).9 Clearly, for the success of this “surgical” operation, it is necessary for

the central bank to be well on top of developments in domestic credit markets, given that,

in addition, for this operation to be effective time is of the essence. Moreover, every

possible measure should be taken to prevent Moral Hazard. Moral Hazard is a key issue,

since even the expectation that the central bank will provide “cheap” credit during a

Sudden Stop may induce inordinately large risk-taking by the private sector. This is a

well-known phenomenon in the banking sector and stands as an important rationale

behind bank regulation. Thus, if non-bank sectors are routinely bailed out during Sudden

Stop, their debt management procedures should also be subject to government regulation.

In this respect, one possible market-friendly type of arrangement might be to ensure

credit lines during Sudden Stop only to firms that would be ready to abide by central

bank debt management regulations under normal conditions.

           These considerations suggest that, in order to manage monetary policy (including

international reserves) properly, it is important for a central bank to take action on a
9
    This issue will be revisited in Section III.2 below.


                                                                                              7
moment’s notice. Thus, a sort of Sudden Stop Drill (much like Fire Drills) should be

included in central bank activities during normal times. Not being ready for action could

be very costly. According to a recent study by Cerra and Chaman Saxena (2005), deep

financial crises are likely to result in a long-lasting growth decline, which can result in

large welfare losses. These are not “purely cyclical” fluctuations that, as argued by Lucas

(1985), are likely to entail small welfare losses (equivalent to just fractions of 1 percent

of steady-state consumption). Contrariwise, even a small decline in growth potential may

bring about large welfare loss, especially if, realistically, growth and discount rates are

approximately equal. Therefore, proper management of monetary policy during Sudden

Stop may be worth more than long periods of impeccable monetary policy under normal

conditions (where fluctuations are likely to be purely cyclical).


                        III.     Normal Conditions but Imperfect LOLR

        There is a growing consensus in EMs that some form of Inflation Targeting (IT),

implemented by the central bank by means of a reference or policy interest rate (hereafter

Interest Rate Tweaking, or IRT), is a good system for normal and tranquil periods. When

volatility is high, though, typically IRT is replaced by other monetary policy

instruments—FXI being at the top of the list.10 For an illustration of such central bank

sleight of hand one needs to go no further than the recent turmoil episode in May/June of

2006.11 Unfortunately, IRT is generally identified with “floating exchange rates.” Thus,

to the man in the street, pegging the exchange rate during market turbulence may be

tantamount to abandoning floating exchange rates. Since pegged exchange rates have


10
 See BIS (2005) for an interesting collection of central bankers’ views on foreign exchange intervention.
11
 For example, in June 2006 the central bank of Turkey’s net foreign exchange position declined by almost
US$3 billion in a short span of time, even though the IMF program called for floating exchange rates.


                                                                                                       8
been demonized by the Fund as a key factor behind the string of financial crises that

started with Mexico’s “Tequila” crisis in 1994/5, the change of monetary policy

instruments raises suspicions that policymakers may have lost their way, further

contributing to market volatility.

           It seems to me that time is high to clear the air about some concepts that are

poorly defined or just wrong, and to try to provide some rationale for transitory

instrument switching as the economy transitions between tranquil and turbulent periods

in normal times. Hopefully, greater conceptual clarity will help to make transitory

instrument switching in the face of high volatility less traumatic.

           In the first place, IRT is not equivalent to floating exchange rates. The standard

textbook definition of floating exchange rates is a system in which the central bank sets

money supply (e.g., monetary base) and exchange rates are determined by market forces.

In contrast, IRT sets an intertemporal price, i.e., an interest rate, not a monetary

aggregate. It is not hard to show, for example, in standard open-economy models (and

abstracting from uncertainty or assuming complete contingent markets) that one could

tweak the policy interest rate in order to keep the exchange rate or money supply

constant—giving rise to fixed or floating exchange rates as the case may be.12 Thus, as a

first approximation, during tranquil times IRT is a system that encompasses most of the

systems discussed in the literature, going from fixed to floating exchange rates.

Moreover, if IRT is used to implement Inflation Targeting, then the line between the

resulting system and pegged exchange rate becomes really blurry. To illustrate, consider

the polar case in which the basket of goods whose price index is targeted by IT consists

exclusively of foreign exchange (or only pure tradable goods); then IT is equivalent to
12
     Assuming equilibrium uniqueness, an issue that will be discussed below.


                                                                                                9
exchange rate tablitas (i.e., preannounced exchange rates) made famous (or infamous) by

exchange-rate-based stabilization plans in the Southern Cone during the 1970s and 1980s

(see Calvo and Végh, 1999).

        There is, however, a subtle difference between exchange rate pegs and IRT,

namely, the type of bond being employed. In IRT domestic bonds are typically employed,

e.g., central bank debt instruments, denominated in domestic or foreign currency. In

contrast, for exchange rate pegs the central bank buys or sells foreign exchange, i.e., it

employs foreign bonds.13 Both procedures yield identical results if domestic and foreign

bonds are perfect substitutes—but would be different, otherwise. For example, if the

probability of Sudden Stop goes up, interest-rate spreads on domestic bonds may rise

sharply, making IRT significantly more costly than pegging. This is an example in

which, if authorities believe that the market overestimates the probability of Sudden Stop,

it might be optimal to switch from IRT to exchange-rate pegging. If anything, this type

of instrument switching would reinforce the implementability of government’s targets

because it would result in a stronger fiscal stance. In this example the instrument switch

(which need not be permanent) involves no fundamentally different monetary policy

because objectives are unchanged; the switch is only prompted by cost considerations.

This theme, namely, that a transitory switch from IRT to exchange-rate pegging could

just be a technicality and not a major monetary policy change, will be a leitmotif in the

ensuing discussion.

1. Interest Rate Tweaking: A weak instrument during market turbulence? In tranquil

times many instruments are good for achieving monetary objectives. Instruments, like

13
   As shown in Calvo (1998) central banks could erase their tracks by recovering the stock of (gross)
international reserves by buying back reserves in exchange for domestic bonds. If they did so, then the
fiscal implications of the two systems would be essentially the same.


                                                                                                          10
captains, are truly tested only in choppy waters. As noted, IRT can be so effective in

tranquil times as to be able to closely mimic any standard exchange-rate system.

However, the situation could be quite different during market turbulence if capital

markets are incomplete and the interest rate cannot be easily tied to random shocks.

Consider, for example, a log-linearized version of uncovered interest arbitrage condition,

                         εt +1 = κ t + it ,                                  (1)

where εt+1 is the expected rate of devaluation between periods t and t+1, it is the policy

interest rate from period t to t+1, and κt is a risk premium in period t (for simplicity, the

international interest rate is set equal to zero). Notice that, conditional on κt, εt+1 would

also be the expected rate of inflation of purely tradable goods (assuming, for simplicity,

that dollar inflation is zero). Thus, if i is set prior to knowing κ, the variance of expected

inflation of tradable goods would equal that of κ. If, for example, one proxies κ by the

EMBI (as computed by J.P. Morgan), Figure 1 shows that κ’s monthly standard deviation

has suffered major swings since 1991, reaching a staggering 300 basis points around the

1998 Russian crisis.14 Under the above conditions, the resulting swings in tradables’

expected rate of inflation would be totally outside the control of the monetary authority.

This is especially worrisome in developing countries, because empirical studies suggest

that exchange rate volatility is detrimental to trade. Since trade and growth appear to go

hand in hand (see Calvo and Reinhart, 2000), one is led to the conclusion that if the

policy instrument (in this case the policy interest rate) cannot prevent high volatility, the

central bank would be well advised to find another instrument that is more effective in


14
   See Data Appendix for definition of variables. Incidentally, EMBI and its volatility are positively
correlated. An OLS of these two variables measured in basic points and on monthly intervals for the period
Jan 1991-August 2006 with EMBI as dependent variable yields a coefficient of 0.06 on EMBI with a t-
statistic of 9.16 (significant at 1% level). The number of observations is 188, and R2 = 0.35.


                                                                                                       11
that respect, albeit on a temporary basis. FXI/exchange-rate-pegging is a natural

candidate. Pegging the exchange rate in a credible manner would significantly lower the

volatility of εt+1, shifting its volatility to


                                                            Figure 1: Volatility of EMBI

         300

         250

         200

         150

         100

          50

           0
               Jan-91


                        Jan-92


                                 Jan-93


                                          Jan-94


                                                   Jan-95


                                                            Jan-96


                                                                     Jan-97


                                                                              Jan-98


                                                                                       Jan-99


                                                                                                Jan-00


                                                                                                         Jan-01


                                                                                                                  Jan-02


                                                                                                                           Jan-03


                                                                                                                                    Jan-04


                                                                                                                                             Jan-05


                                                                                                                                                      Jan-06
                                                              Monthly Standard Deviation of EMBI Spread



the (now) market-determined it.15,16 A central bank that follows IT may thus have strong

incentives to peg the exchange rate during market turbulence, if tradable goods’ prices

are a major item in their price index and/or there is a large pass-through coefficient.

Moreover, unless the pass-through coefficient is very close to unity, pegging will become

even more attractive in the presence of DLD, because high exchange rate volatility is

more likely to trigger serious financial turmoil, possibly driving the economy into a “bad”




15
   Calvo and Reinhart (2000) shows that in developing countries interest rates are substantially more, and
exchange rates substantially less, volatile than in developing countries. This is in line with the above
observations since the data in the study corresponds to a period in which developing countries relied more
on pegging than on IRT.
16
   In general, κ will be a function of the exchange rate regime. However, this does not invalidate the
statement made in the text, unless the exchange rate peg is subject to serious credibility problems.


                                                                                                                                                      12
equilibrium.17 Furthermore, it should be recalled that IRT is, by nature, a poor nominal

anchor. To show this in a simple manner, consider the case in which the central bank

accommodates money supply in order to satisfy an exogenous interest rate target (for a

thorough discussion of IRT rules, see Woodford, 2003). First, let us assume that prices

are perfectly flexible and the demand for money is given by function L(i), where, again, i

is the policy interest rate. At equilibrium,

                          M
                            = L(i ).                                           (2)
                          P

where M and P are, respectively, money supply and the price level. Thus, given i, any

ratio M/P which satisfies equation (2) would be consistent with equilibrium. Uniqueness

is recovered in some sticky-price models, but non-uniqueness is still an implication in

many models with rational expectations under interest-rate targeting (see, e.g., Calvo,

1983).

         The above remarks do not directly apply to IRT, but they suggest that if the

reference interest rate is not sufficiently responsive to other macro variables, equilibrium

multiplicity could result, making IRT ineffective. The conjecture is right. Consider an

IRT rule in which i = φ(π,c), where function φ is the central bank’s policy function, and π

and c stand for inflation and output, respectively. Embedding this central bank reaction

function in the closed-economy model in Calvo (1983), for example, it is easy to show

(proof in the Technical Appendix) that if φπ < 1, nonuniqueness holds. Moreover, to




17
  There appears to be a worldwide trend towards smaller pass-through coefficients. This is typically seen
as a desirable development because it makes it easier to decouple inflation from exchange rate fluctuations.
However, under DLD, small pass-through coefficients may increase the probability of financial distress.


                                                                                                         13
ensure (local) uniqueness, we must have φπ > 1 and φc > 0, which is in line with Taylor’s

rule, for example.18

         Is this enough reason for comfort? I don’t think so. In the first place, notice that

nominal anchoring is achieved as a result of price stickiness, not nominal money supply

or pegging of the exchange rate. Although evidence from the North suggests that price-

setting mechanisms are stable, we lack systematic studies showing that the same degree

of stability is displayed in EMs, especially during market turbulence.19

         The policy interest rate, which is controlled by the central bank, is just one of a

number of interest rates existing in the market. If, as is typically the case, the policy

interest rate corresponds to short-term interest rates on central bank paper or its interbank

equivalent, IRT will certainly affect the cost of that kind of liquidity, but it may have very

little impact on overall liquidity. Actually, I suspect that the disconnect we have recently

seen between short and long rates of interest in the US and other advanced economies

(called “a conundrum” by former Fed Chairman Greenspan) may reflect financial

innovations that we still do not fully understand (e.g., Credit Default Swaps). Moreover,

such a disconnect is likely to be more common in EMs, given that they are undergoing a

deep process of financial development (as the expression “Emerging Markets” is

intended to suggest). To illustrate these possible complications, consider the case in

which the policy interest rate, denoted by icb, is the interest rate on money. Thus, the

demand for money (2) would become:



18
   In Calvo (1983), π stands for expected inflation (i.e., the right-hand derivative of log price level). Hence,
the rule is made contingent on expected inflation. However, as argued in Benhabib et al. (2003),
nonuniqueness problems do not go away if i is set to react to lagged inflation.
19
   Burstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2005) show compelling evidence that price stickiness cannot be ruled
out even in the context of large exchange rate devaluations. However, they stop short of arguing that the
price-setting mechanism remains invariant during those episodes.


                                                                                                             14
                                           M
                                             = L(i − i cb ).                                              (3)
                                           P

Under these circumstances, setting icb puts at best a lower bound on i but otherwise leaves

i completely unhinged, implying equilibrium indeterminacy. It can easily be verified that

indeterminacy would also hold if icb applied to any other financial asset yielding

“liquidity” services.20

         Therefore, the good news is that there are some reaction functions that ensure

uniqueness under stable price-setting mechanisms. But, on the other hand, the bad news

is that IRT may possess “birth defects” yet to be discovered.21 In contrast, Calvo and

Végh (1993), for example, show in an open-economy version of the same sticky prices

model where, in general, equilibrium is unique under pegged exchange rates, giving

additional grounds for the belief that pegging (with enough international reserves, of

course) could offer a more robust nominal anchor than interest rate tweaking.22

         There is an important parallel between pegging and tweaking. In both cases

money supply is endogenously determined. This is an attractive feature given that the

rapid pace of financial innovation has made it hard to assess the impact that individual

monetary aggregates (M1, M2, etc.) have on prices and wages. Advocates of flexible

exchange rates, though, criticize pegging by arguing that, at best, it controls a small set of

prices (i.e., prices of purely tradable goods and services), leaving plenty of room for real

exchange rate misalignment (especially for large and relatively closed economies like

20
   E.g., assets that directly or indirectly enter as arguments in utility functions. See Calvo and Végh (1995)
for a discussion.
21
   In the literature there are examples in which uniqueness is ensured even under interest rate targeting. For
instance, Woodford (2001) shows that uniqueness can be recovered if the primary fiscal surplus is
exogenous. However, fiscal discipline becomes highly questionable in periods of financial distress.
22
   As shown in Calvo and Végh (1993) imperfect credibility could impair the effectiveness of exchange-
rate-based inflation stabilization plans. But the same applies to IRT, as can easily be shown in terms of
Calvo (1983) or the model discussed in the Technical Appendix.


                                                                                                           15
Brazil, for example). This is a valid concern, especially under conditions of imperfect

credibility (see Calvo and Végh, 1993). However, as shown in previous example,

tweaking is also subject to similar concerns.

         Taylor (2000), for example, recognizes these difficulties but appears to be more

optimistic than my remarks convey. Maybe, after all, simple IRT rules work for unruly

EMs. There is, however, an aspect of the whole issue that we may have ignored, namely,

financial market volatility. Again, measuring it by EMBI’s volatility (see Figure 1), it is

clear that it has shown a marked declining trend since its 1998 heights. Thus, the recent

apparent success of IRT rules in EMs could partly be a consequence of a more stable

financial environment.

         Two clarifications are in order. First, the above remarks should not be taken to

imply that the central bank must freeze the exchange rate at the first sign of high

volatility. The implication is only that if high volatility is not just a passing nuisance, the

central bank may be justified in setting bounds to the exchange rate.23 Thus, my remarks

are consistent with a situation in which, for example, in the face of high volatility the

currency is allowed to devalue sharply but the central bank eventually resorts to FXI to

lower exchange rate volatility. Second, it should be noted that exchange rate pegging is

not without problems either. If the public is not prepared for the transitory policy change,

the latter may contribute to even higher volatility and, possibly, to the emergence of

Sudden Stop. This underlies the importance of fully alerting the public that they should

expect a transitory instrument switch as the economy transits into choppy waters.




23
   The emphasis here is on controlling “excessive” exchange rate volatility. It should not be confused with
trying to prevent real exchange rate misalignment, a policy that may result in weak nominal anchoring.


                                                                                                         16
2. International Reserves and Multiple Equilibria. The above discussion suggests that

FX Intervention could offer an effective remedy against excessive exchange rate

volatility in the short run—which, by the way, provides a rationale for the fear of floating

highlighted in Calvo and Reinhart (2002). A strong believer in “fundamentals,” however,

is likely to object, arguing that if IRT is ineffective, then FXI is bound to fail. Although

the argument cannot easily be dismissed when equilibrium is unique, it faces serious

challenges when the economy displays multiple equilibria—a situation that receives some

support in the literature (see, e.g., Calvo, 1998 and 2005; and Obstfeld, 1996). Under

equilibrium multiplicity, policy can help coordinate “good” or “bad” equilibria.

International reserves could play a key role in this coordination game, since, as pointed

out above, they could help to cushion destructive financial spillovers of Sudden Stop.

But, of course, for that to be the case, (a) the stock of reserves has to be large enough, (b)

reserves have to be wisely spent during crisis (as discussed in Section II), and (c) the

public has to trust that the government is prepared to use this kind of ammunition

(including the use of external credit lines) to the full extent possible.

        As noted at the outset, several EMs have substantially increased their international

reserves since 1998. Some critics suggest that the stock is already too large by showing

that these funds could get a much higher rate of return if invested in alternative financial

assets. However, this is highly debatable. The optimal stock of international reserves is a

function of their potential use. For example, if reserves are intended to fill the financing

gap in case there are problems in rolling over external short-term debt (the so-called

Greenspan-Guidotti criterion), then the levels prevailing in 2006 for Latin America, for

example, could easily be claimed to be excessive, since the ratio of reserves to such debt




                                                                                            17
hovers around 3.0 (about 60 percent more than in 1994, prior to the “Tequila” crisis).

However, if reserves are intended to reinforce the LOLR, then aggregates like export

credit and/or M2 could be a more appropriate denominator than external short-term

debt—and the picture that emerges could be significantly different. For example, in

Latin America international reserves in 2006 are around 37 percent of M2, which is only

about 10 percent higher than in 1994 (see Calvo, 1996b, for a discussion of these

issues).24, 25

         Among the conditions discussed above, item (c)—namely, that the public expects

that international reserves will be efficiently spent in case of Sudden Stop, thus

guaranteeing the effectiveness of the LOLR—requires good rapport between the central

bank and the public. Assuming an adequate level of reserves, the central bank should be

able to explain to the public that reserves are there to be used in case of incipient Sudden

Stop, and in order to prevent a full-fledged Sudden Stop. Thus, the central bank should

be able to convince the public that a loss of reserves is part of the solution, not part of the

problem.

         The above discussion employed the phrase “international reserves” without

providing a rigorous definition. It is now time to try to be somewhat more precise (a

more thorough discussion will be left for another occasion). Let me begin with a couple

of questions: What is the relevant concept, gross or net international reserves; and, if the

relevant concept is net, net of what? The IMF, for example, defines net international


24
   These figures are regional simple averages, and are based on data from the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook, September 2006. See Data Appendix for more information.
25
   It could be argued that if M2 is in local currency then international reserves are not needed, because the
LOLR could always bail out banks by printing local currency. It should be recalled, however, that as a
general rule the money-printing solution brings about large nominal and real devaluation, possibly
wreaking havoc in the financial sector (especially under DLD). This is an empirical issue that cannot be
discussed in this paper.


                                                                                                            18
reserves by subtracting from gross reserves official short-term foreign-exchange

denominated official debt. These questions are highly relevant because a large share of

the impressive accumulation of international reserves that took place in EMs since 1998

was carried out by increasing official debt (variously denominated in foreign exchange or

local currency). Thus, another question arises that comes closer to the heart of the issue:

If reserves are accumulated by borrowing (i.e., by resorting to sterilized intervention),

why would they be effective as insurance against Sudden Stop?26 This is an important

question that cannot be fully addressed in this paper. Instead, I will focus on the

particular case highlighted by the heading of this section, namely, multiple equilibria.

Suppose that international reserves are held in order to stave off “bad” equilibria. This

would tend to privilege “gross” over “net,” because gross reserves can be utilized to bail

out exporters, for instance, even if those reserves had been acquired by issuing

government obligations of equal value, currency denomination and maturity. To be sure,

this operation may not be a completely successful—as the 1994/5 “Tequila” crisis in

Mexico illustrates (see Calvo, 2005)—but using international reserves may still be

preferable to the grinding stop in exports that would otherwise inevitably follow if

exporters (in the present example) are suddenly excluded from international credit

markets. On the other hand, I would not subscribe to an unqualified “gross” reserves

concept. Suppose, for instance, that the central bank accumulates reserves by placing

debt in domestic banks’ balance sheets (a common fact in EMs). In that case, a bailout of

exporters would be undertaken at the expense of banks’ balance-sheet deterioration. The

latter, in turn, may give rise to bank runs, as depositors realize that banks have become

26
  Some observers conclude from the fact that much of the stock of international reserves is matched by
government obligations that a mercantilist objective is behind the large accumulation of reserves—more
concretely, a desire to generate an artificially high real exchange rate.


                                                                                                         19
more financially vulnerable, potentially leading to domestic payments difficulties, which

could actually trigger a bad equilibrium. This suggests a “net” concept that would

subtract from gross reserves the stock of short-term debt held by domestic banks. In

contrast, I do not see much sense in subtracting external short-term debt as implied by the

popular Greenspan-Guidotti criterion. Not paying external debt carries costs but, as the

recent Argentine default episode illustrates, domestic financial difficulties could far

outweigh those of external origin. Argentina’s freezing of deposits in domestic banks

(labeled the “corralito,” the Spanish word for “playpen”) proved to be much more

troublesome for Argentine policymakers than the default on obligations held by creditors

such as the Italian pensioners who ended up venting their rage against their financial

advisors, namely, Italian banks. In sum, the relevant concept of international reserves as

insurance against Sudden Stop depends on domestic and international financial/political

conditions that have to be weighed in each individual case. Most likely, though, neither

the standard gross nor net reserves definition fits the bill.

        In conclusion, the stock of (the relevant concept of) international reserves (or

credible international credit lines) should be large enough to prevent a major credit crisis

that paralyzes exports and threatens to cripple the domestic banking system, and the

public should be well informed about bailout mechanisms. The costs of this strategy may

be significant, but they have to be weighed against the benefit of avoiding deep financial

crises, which as Cerra et al. (2005) and the previous discussion suggest, could also be

large. Of course, this is unlikely to be the socially optimum for the world as a whole.

The counterpart of self-insurance is seigniorage accruing to developed economies (to the

extent that the interest rates on developed economies’ treasury bills, for example, fall




                                                                                           20
short of the opportunity cost of international reserves). Thus, developed economies

would be making monopoly profits that are distorting and unfair (especially if one looks

at the issue from a Rawlsian perspective). Nonetheless, it should be noted that fairer and

more efficient insurance schemes exist. One such scheme would be some kind of

Contingent Credit Line (CCL), but perhaps a version that is more agile and free of the

stigma that kept the original CCL proposal from being implemented when it was first

offered by the IMF.27


                                                IV. Conclusions

         Many EMs are at a serious disadvantage relative to developed economies in that

they lack an effective Lender of Last Resort, a disadvantage that becomes more acute

under Domestic Liability Dollarization. The economy’s fragility may not be noticeable

in normal and tranquil times, but its fault lines are revealed during turbulent periods, even

in the absence of a major crisis. This paper has focused on the use of a reference or

policy interest rate as an instrument for monetary policy. Although this is the instrument

of choice for developed economies, the paper claims that the instrument is inherently

weak, and in the case of EMs it could become uncomfortably weaker during periods of

high volatility. Thus, in choppy waters it may be advisable momentarily to switch to

more robust instruments such as some kind of exchange rate peg. To ensure that

instrument switching is not a source of confusion for the private sector, the central bank

should explain the nature of the policy switch, hopefully well in advance of when that


27
  Ugo Panizza (personal communication) proposes to rebate to the world’s poorest countries’ seigniorage
collected on account of their international reserve holdings. A similar proposal was unsuccessfully bandied
about in Washington when Argentina considered the possibility of adopting the US dollar as local currency.
However, the twist of doing this for the world’s poorest countries could prove politically appealing in this
era of MDGs.


                                                                                                         21
switch becomes necessary. However, the paper stops short of discussing what kind of

rules are optimal for switching instruments back and fore. I suspect that this issue will

depend on country-specific considerations, although global variables, like the EMBI, are

likely to be common to most optimal policy rules.

         Needless to say, countries that aspire to have an independent monetary policy

should aim at creating the conditions for eliminating Domestic Liability Dollarization and

other financial vulnerabilities. This is not an easy task if it is going to be carried out on a

voluntary basis. In the meantime, EMs will have to grapple with the kind of financial

vulnerabilities highlighted in these notes.28




28
   Absent from these notes, incidentally, is any reference to banking regulation, and issues such as
restrictions on capital mobility, which may attenuate or exacerbate financial vulnerabilities. These are
important issues that are better left for a separate note.



                                                                                                           22
                                              Data Appendix

The sample covers all developing countries included in World Development Indicators
(WDI). Due to lack of data on Reserves, Exports or Imports, a few countries were
dropped. The final list of countries includes 161 countries. The sample period spans from
1990 to 2004. Data are collected on a monthly basis unless otherwise stated. The
following table contains all data definitions and sources.

                      Variable                                 Definitions and Sources

EMBI Index                                   Emerging Markets Bond Index Spread (daily.) (Source: JP Morgan)
Volatility of EMBI                           Constructed by calculating the standard deviation of daily EMBI
                                             spread within a given month.
International Reserves in USD (RES)          International Reserves minus Gold in USD. International Reserves
                                             minus Gold in SDR multiplied by USD per SDR exchange rate.
                                             (Source: IFS, |line 1L.SZF|*|line 111..AA.ZF...|)
Nominal Exchange Rate (EXR)                  Exchange Rate National Currency per USD. (Source: IFS |line AE.ZF|)
Exports                                      Value of Exports in USD. (Source: IFS |line 70DZF| or DOTS |line
                                             70..DZD001|)
Imports                                      Value of Imports in USD. (Source: IFS |line 71DZF| or DOTS |line
                                             71..DZD001|)
Capital Flows Proxy                          Trade balance minus changes in international reserves. All figures are
                                             expressed in 2000
                                             US dollars.
Sudden Stop Dummy (SSD)                      Episodes of Sudden Stop (SS) were detected in a country-by-country
                                             basis by selecting periods of large and unexpected falls in Capital
                                             Flows Proxy; see Calvo et al (2004) for a general discussion of the
                                             methodology. Different from Calvo et al (2004), the SS dummy was
                                             calculated without imposing any requirement about economic activity.
Exchange Rate Regime (EXRR)                  3-way De Facto Classification of Exchange Rate Regimes (annual)
                                             (Source: Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2005))
Gross Domestic Product (GDP_USD)             Gross Domestic Product current prices in USD (annual) (Source: WDI)
Pre-crisis level of RES (PCRES)              Level of RES one month prior a SS, i.e. SSD=1.
Minimum level of RES during SS (MINRES)      Minimum level of RES during a window of continuum SS, i.e. SSD=1.
Maximum Loss of Reserves during SS           Calculated as the percentage difference between MINRES and PCRES:
                                             100*(MINRES/PCRES-1)
Maximum Loss of Reserves/GDP during SS       Calculated as: 100*(MINRES-PCRES)/GDP_USD. To avoid
                                             endogeneity problems, 1-year lagged GDP_USD is used.
Pre-crisis level of EXR (PCEXR)              Level of EXR one month prior a SS, i.e. SSD=1.
Maximum level of EXR during SS (MAXEXR) Maximum level of EXR during a window of continuum SS, i.e.
                                           SSD=1.
Maximum Nominal Depreciation               Calculated as the percentage difference between MAXEXR and
                                           PCEXR: 100*(MAXEXR/PCEXR-1)
Ratio Reserves to External Short-Term Debt Stock of Reserves over Short-Term Debt (Annual.) Simple Averages.
                                           Latin America includes: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador,
                                           Guatemala, Mexico and Venezuela. (Source: World Economic Outlook
                                           September 2006)
Ratio Reserves to M2                       Stock of Reserves over M2 (Broad Money) in USD (Annual.) Simple
                                           Averages. Latin America includes: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
                                           Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico and Venezuela. (Source: World
                                           Economic Outlook September 2006)




                                                                                                               23
                                    Technical Appendix

       Consider the model in Calvo (1983). According to equations (39), (40a) and

(40b) in that paper:

                                              v′(m)
                                                    = i,      Demand for money            (A1)
                                              u′(c)

                                            u′(c)
                                   c = −          [i − ρ − π], Euler equation            (A2)
                                            u′′(c)

and

                                   π = b( y − c),          Staggered prices,           (A3)

where the instantaneous utility function is given by v(m) + u(c); m and c stand,

respectively, for real monetary balances and consumption (there is no capital

accumulation). Moreover, i, ρ, π and y stand, respectively, for the central bank interest

rate, the subjective rate of discount, the rate of inflation, and full-capacity output. Calvo

(1983) shows that if i is exogenously given and money supply is endogenous (strict

interest rate targeting), then, by (A1), m is determined once c is known. Moreover, by

(A2) and (A3), the determination of c and π is independent of m. Thus, one can solve for

c and π from equations (A2) and (A3). Notice that the initial values of c and π are not

predetermined. Hence, uniqueness requires that system (A2) and (A3) in c and π be

unstable around the steady state. However, Calvo (1983) shows that the system displays

saddle-path stability, implying that there is a continuum of initial conditions (c0 , π0) that

give rise to a convergent equilibrium path, even though prices are sticky.

       Consider now the case mentioned in the text in which i = φ(π,c). If φπ > 1 and φc

> 0, then the sign pattern of the Jacobian, J, associated with the linear expansion of (A2)-

(A3) around the steady state, satisfies:


                                                                                            24
                                          ⎛+ +⎞
                                          ⎜⎜   ⎟⎟ .                                       (A4)
                                           ⎝− 0⎠

Thus, Determinant J > 0 and Trace J > 0, implying that the two characteristic roots have

positive real parts. Hence, system (A1)-(A2) is locally unstable, and the unique initial

vector (c0 , π0) consistent with an equilibrium that converges to the steady state (the

standard rational expectations’ local equilibrium definition) is the steady state. On the

other hand, if φπ < 1, the upper right cell in (A4) is negative, implying saddle-path

stability and, hence, that equilibrium nonuniqueness prevails. This proves the contention

in the text.




                                                                                            25
                                      References

BIS, 2005, “Foreign Exchange Market Intervention in Emerging Markets: Motives,

       Techniques and Implication,” BIS Papers No. 24, May.

Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe, 2003, “Backward-Looking

       Interest Rates, Interest Rates Smoothing, and Macroeconomic Stability,” Journal

       of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 35, No. 6, pp. 1379-1412.

Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2005, “Modeling Exchange-Rate

       Passthrough after Large Devaluations,” forthcoming in Journal of Monetary

       Economics.

Caballero, Ricardo, and A. Krishnamurthy, 2005, “Inflation Target and Sudden Stops,” in

       The Inflation Targeting Debate” edited by Ben Bernanke and Michael Woodford.

       Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1983, “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”

       Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, September, pp. 383-98. Reprinted in Calvo

       (1996 a).

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1996 a, Money, Exchange Rates, and Output; Cambridge, MA:

       MIT Press.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1996 b, “Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Management: Tequila

       Lessons,” International Journal of Finance Economics, 1, pp. 207-223.

       Reprinted in Calvo (2005).

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1998, “Varieties of Capital Market Crises,” in G. Calvo and M.

       King (eds.) The Debt Burden and its Consequences for Monetary Policy,

       Macmillan; reprinted in Calvo (2005).




                                                                                      26
Calvo, Guillermo A., 2005, Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad

       Policy?; Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis F. Mejía, 2004, “On the Empirics of

       Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,” NBER Working Paper

       10520, May.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen Reinhart, 2000, “Fixing for your Life,” Brookings

       Trade Forum 2000; reprinted in Calvo (2005).

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal

       of Economics, pp. 379-408; reprinted in Calvo (2005).

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1993, “Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilization

       under Imperfect Credibility,” IEA Conference on Open-Economy.

       Macroeconomics, editors H. Frisch and A. Worgötter; Hampshire, UK:

       Macmillan Press, Ltd. Reprinted in Calvo (1996 a).

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1995, “Fighting Inflation with High Interest

      Rates: The Small-Open-Economy Case under Flexible Prices,” Journal of Money,

    Credit, and Banking, March, pp. 49-66.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Végh, 1999, “Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises

       in Developing Countries,” in Chapter 24, Vol. 1C, Handbook of Macroeconomics,

       edited by J. Taylor and M. Woodford; Amsterdam, Holland: North-Holland.

Cerra, Valerie, and Chaman Saxena, Sweta, 2005, “Growth Dynamics: The Myth of

       Economic Recovery,” IMF Working Paper WP/05/147.

Céspedes, Luis F., Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco, 2001, “Dollarization of

       Liabilities, Net Worth Effects, and Optimal Monetary Policy,” manuscript.




                                                                                        27
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza, 2005, “The Pain of Original

       Sin,” in Eichengreen, B., and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People’s Money:

       Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies;

       Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Financial Times, 2002, “Brazil pledges loans to companies,” reported by Raymond

       Colitt, August 13, p. 1.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United States,

       1867-1960; Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2005, “De Facto Classification of

       Exchange Rate Regimes,” manuscript, Di Tella University, December.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., 1985, Models of Business Cycles; Yrjo Jahnsson Lectures, Oxford,

       UK: Basil Blackwell.

Mishkin, Frederic, 2006, The Great Next Globalization: How Disadvantaged Countries

       Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich, Princeton, NJ: Princeton

       University Press.

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1996, “Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features,”

       European Economic Review, March, pp. 72-81.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Bruce Greenwald, 2003, Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary

       Economics, Raffaele Mattioli Lectures; Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University

       Press.

Taylor, John, 2000, “Recent Developments in the Use of Monetary Policy Rules,” given

       at the conference “Inflation Targeting and Monetary Policies in Emerging




                                                                                      28
       Economies,” Central Bank of the Republic of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia, July

       13-14.

Woodford, Michael, 2001, “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability,” Journal of Money,

       Credit and Banking, 33, pp. 669-728.

Woodford, Michael, 2003, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary

       Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                                                                     29
