NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN IS DEMOCRACY AN EQUILIBRIUM?:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM COLOMBIA'S "LA VIOLENCIA"
Mario Chacon
James A. Robinson
Ragnar Torvik
Working Paper 12789
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12789

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

We thank Daron Acemoglu, Jorn Rattso, Stergios Skaperdas, Susan Stokes, Libby Wood and seminar
participants at Yale and Trondheim for their helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Mario Chacon, James A. Robinson, and Ragnar Torvik. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When is Democracy an Equilibrium?: Theory and Evidence from Colombia's "La Violencia"
Mario Chacon, James A. Robinson, and Ragnar Torvik
NBER Working Paper No. 12789
December 2006
JEL No. D72
ABSTRACT
The conventional wisdom in political science is that for a democracy to be consolidated, all groups
must have a chance to attain power. If they do not then they will subvert democracy and choose to
fight for power. In this paper we show that this wisdom is seriously incomplete because it considers
absolute, not relative payoffs. Although the probability of winning an election increases with the size
of a group, so does the probability of winning a fight. Thus in a situation where all groups have a high
chance of winning an election, they may also have a high chance of winning a fight. Indeed, in a natural
model, we show that democracy may never be consolidated in such a situation. Rather, democracy
may only be stable when one group is dominant. We provide a test of a key aspect of our model using
data from "La Violencia", a political conflict in Colombia during the years 1946-1950 between the
Liberal and Conservative parties. Consistent with our results, and contrary to the conventional wisdom,
we show that fighting between the parties was more intense in municipalities where the support of
the parties was more evenly balanced.
Mario Chacon
Yale Univ., Dept. of Political Science
PO Box 208301
New Haven, CT 06520-8301
Mario.Chacon@Yale.edu
James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu

Ragnar Torvik
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Department of Economics
N-7491 Trondheim
Norway
ragnar.torvik@svt.ntnu.no

I.

Introduction
When Mauritius and Guyana became independent from Britain in 1968 and 1966,

respectively, political conflict had coalesced into a struggle between those of East Indian
descent and the rest. In Mauritius, East Indians comprised about 70% of the population
and their interests were represented by the Labour Party headed by Seewoosagur Ramgoolam. In contrast, East Indians were only 50% of the population in Guyana under the
leadership of the People’s Progressive Party headed by Cheddi Jagan.
The conventional wisdom in political science makes a clear prediction about which
country was more likely to become a consolidated democracy. This prediction is based on
the idea that groups can either fight for power or they can instead decide to compete for
votes and abide by the outcome of elections. Democracy will arise and be consolidated
when all the groups anticipate that they have a chance of power in democracy. If they do
not then they will fight. As Przeworski (1991, pp. 30-31) puts it,
“compliance depends on the probability of winning within the democratic
institutions. A particular actor ... will comply if the probability it attaches
to being victorious in democratic competition ... is greater than some minimum ... Democracy will evoke generalized compliance when all the relevant
political forces have some specific minimum probability of doing well under
the particular system of institutions.”
The clear implication of this line of thinking is that it was Guyana which was more
likely to be a democracy. In Mauritius, those who opposed the Labour Party had no
chance of attaining power in a society where voting was along ethnic lines. In Guyana they
did, and hence the anti-East Indian coalition led by Forbes Burnham’s People’s National
Party could win an election. In contrast in Mauritius the anti-East Indian coalition led
by Gaetan Duval and his PMSD (Parti Mauricien Social Democrate) had no chance of
winning a majority of votes and therefore would be driven to subverting democracy. That
this was evidently not what happened in these two countries is illustrated by Figure 1
which shows their Polity scores since independence. In fact, in Guyana Burnham created
a one-party state with himself as dictator while Mauritius has experienced open and
democratic political competition. What went wrong?
1

In reality there are many sources of variation in the political regimes of countries and
the reason the conventional wisdom in political science fails to explain what happened in
Mauritius and Guyana could be due to any number of idiosyncratic factors. In this paper
however we argue that actually the failure of the predictions of the conventional wisdom
is indicative of a serious flaw in the underlying logic. This logic is incomplete because it
only considers half of the story. While it may be true that compliance with the rules of
democracy depends in part on the probability of winning within democratic institutions,
it clearly also depends on the probability of winning a fight. In a natural model, these
two things are closely connected. Indeed, the greater the chance that a group wins an
election may correspond to a greater chance that it wins a fight.
If the outcome of elections are close, so that all groups anticipate being able to attain
power in a democracy, then all groups have evenly matched support, or ‘strength’ in society. But strength does not simply map into votes in elections, it also determines fighting
strength. Therefore, it is precisely in the circumstances when groups have equal strength
that they may find it optimal to fight. When the parameters imply that democratic politics is competitive therefore, they also imply that fighting is attractive. Indeed, it can
be situations where strength is asymmetric, where elections are lopsided, that fighting
may not be attractive and democracy will be stable. The intuition for this is immediate.
When power is asymmetric, there is a dominant group, and the smaller group does not
fight because, even though it cannot win an election, the probability of success in fighting
is so small.
To illustrate this idea we develop a model of political competition between two political parties. The parties can either follow a democratic strategy and use policies to
attract votes, or alternatively they can fight for power. We assume that people in the
population have preferences not only over income but also over ideology, so that they
may be more or less attached to one of the parties (as in a standard probabilistic voting
model). We then examine the circumstances under which democracy is preferred by both
parties to fighting and how this depends on their underlying support in the population. In
the natural model we build, we show that democracy may only emerge as an equilibrium
when support is asymmetric in the sense that one of the parties dominates the other.
In contrast, when the support of parties is balanced, or in other words in circumstances
2

when both parties have a good chance of winning power in democracy, fighting may occur.
The model shows that while democracy can arise when support is symmetric, it does so
in a way inconsistent with the conventional wisdom since it is the stronger party, which
though it would do better under democracy than the weaker party, nevertheless initiates
conflict. Thus the conventional wisdom is never correct in our model.
These results are exactly the opposite of the conventional wisdom because scholars such as Przeworski (1991) or Weingast (1997) who have studied the circumstances
under which democracy is preferred to fighting have focused only on the payoﬀs from
democracy with an exogenous payoﬀ to fighting, independent of the democratic payoﬀ.
In consequence they emphasize the idea that the circumstance most propitious to the
consolidation of democracy is when parties are competitive, in the sense that both are
evenly matched. We show that this result is overturned when the payoﬀs to democracy
and fighting are interlinked. Colomer (2000, p. 10) reiterates this view when he writes
that “the establishment of democracy appears as a conventional agreement on new rules
of the political game. Agreement is possible because democracy gives diﬀerent actors reasonable expectations to gain or share power in some undetermined future.” In this case
both can hope to attain power via elections and neither is tempted to abandon democracy
and fight for power. We show, to the contrary, that this is precisely the situation where
the use of violence to attain political power may become most attractive.
In addition to providing a model which clarifies the relationship between democracy
and fighting, we investigate one of the implications of the model empirically. Though the
example of Mauritius and Guyana is telling, it is diﬃcult to pursue the issues empirically
using cross-national data. In most societies it is hard to measure the “support” of different groups or to calculate how likely they are to win elections. We therefore turn to
within national data where we can at least investigate the relationship between political
competition, support and the propensity to fight. Our model should apply in countries
where there is a clear distinction between diﬀerent political groups and where violence is
politically motivated. One of the clearest examples of such a country is Colombia. Since
the 1850s Colombia has been governed primarily by civilian governments of the Liberal
or Conservative parties. Periods of military rule have been very short and the traditional
view of Colombian society is that people have historically identified strongly with one
3

party or the other. The period since 1850 has seen both elections and civil wars between
the two parties, the most recent being La Violencia which began in the mid 1940s and
lasted until the early 1960s and in which between 100,000 and 200,000 people were killed.
La Violencia was contested between the parties who formed local militias and guerillas
and fought over the control of various parts of the country. We cannot use this experience
to really test the model, but it does allow us to investigate a crucial implication - in situations where support for the parties was evenly balanced we can observe conflict, whereas
where one of the parties was dominant, we observe peace. As we show in section 3, subject
to the usual caveats about identification, this is exactly what the data demonstrates.
If the conventional wisdom does not explain what factors induce democracy, what
does? Taken literally, our analysis suggests that the conditions for democracy are the
opposite of what is believed by political scientists. However, another interpretation is that
probably the issues on which scholars have focused are second-order compared to other
factors which promote democracy, such as the costs of conflict. Acemoglu and Robinson
(2006) develop a series of models where these costs are influenced by the structure of the
economy and asset holdings and this may be a much more important source of variation
in reality. In our model if the cost of conflict is suﬃciently high, democracy is preferred
at any distribution of support.
Our paper is related to the formal literature modelling the creation and consolidation
of democracy. Most closely related, Rosendorﬀ (2001) also examines the trade-oﬀ between
fighting and democracy, but focuses on factors that make democracy relatively less costly
for the combatants, such as lower inequality. The work by Acemoglu and Robinson
(2000, 2001, 2006) focuses on how democracy arises as a method of making credible
commitments to avoid social conflict. They show how the consolidation of democracy
depends on the ability of authoritarian elites to contest power in democracy. Specifically,
when elites do better in democracy, for example by forming successful political parties,
democracy becomes more tolerable and is more likely to be consolidated (subject to the
caveat that if elites do too well then democracy will be unconsolidated because it does
not deliver enough to the majority). Nevertheless, in their model the outcome of conflict
is deterministic and independent of the size of the groups contesting power. The analysis
presented here shows that when the technology of conflict is modelled more explicitly
4

there is an oﬀsetting eﬀect - though greater elite strength in democracy makes it more
tolerable, it also makes it easier to overthrow democracy. This suggests that the eﬀect of
elite strength on democratic consolidation is more complex, though obviously this depends
on the source of that strength.1 Other papers, such as by Conley and Temimi (2001),
Jack and Lagunoﬀ (2003), Lizzeri and Persico (2004) and Llavador and Oxoby (2005),
also do not discuss the issues which are the focus of this paper. For example, the latter
two papers examine how elites may voluntarily extend voting rights to maximize their
payoﬀs and so the issue of the consolidation of democracy does not arise.
The literature on conflict and international warfare has also posed in various ways
the question about which situations make conflict more likely. This research emphasizes
resources rather than people as an input into conflict and a source of power. This is
possibly because the literature on the collective action problem has stressed the idea that
larger groups have less rather than more power. Nevertheless, as Esteban and Ray (2001)
have shown, this is not a general implication of models of collective action and in our
model there are organizations, political parties, who mobilize support and thus there is
no collective action problem.
Early work by Hirshleifer (1991) and Skaperdas (1992) emphasized the ‘paradox of
power’ where asymmetric situations create conflict. In these models the initial distribution
of resources does not influence the equilibrium outcome. Subsequent work however showed
that conflict may be maximized when ‘power’ is either balanced or unbalanced. On the
one hand, Skaperdas and Syropoulos (1997) showed that in more general versions of the
Hirshleifer-Skaperdas model an agent’s probability of winning a conflict is increasing in his
relative endowment. In their model, if there is some cost of fighting, conflict is more likely
1

Acemoglu and Robinson (2005, Chapter 6) note another reason why the conventional wisdom we
question in this paper may be incorrect. In their model of democracy, the elite who dominate nondemocracy can never win power because policies always cater to the preference of the median voter. However,
they shows that this does not mean that the elite cannot get what they want in a democracy because
they may be able to threaten to undermine democracy. In response to such threats, the policies of the
median voter will cater to the preferences of the elite despite the fact that the elite itself do not form
the government. Indeed there is an irony here because according to the conventional wisdom, if the elite
cannot form a government then they will try to mount a coup and hence democracy is not consolidated.
Yet if they can overthrow the system by force then they must have eﬀective power and this is exactly
the situation where they will be able to get what they want from the government without having to
overthrow it. When the elite do not have such power, they do not get what they want from democracy,
but neither are they able to mount a coup. Hence the conventional wisdom is also false in the framework
of Acemoglu and Robinson although for a diﬀerent reason than in our paper.

5

when endowments are skewed. On the other hand, Esteban and Ray (1999) showed that
in their model conflict was maximized when society was polarized into two evenly matched
groups, and Bates (2000) argued that ethnic conflict was greatest in such situations.
None of these papers compare the option of fighting to dividing the pie in other ways.
More closely related therefore is the research which studies what sorts of negotiations can
avoid conflict. The main result in this literature is that, as Powell (1999, p.9) puts it,
“War is least likely when the international distribution of benefits reflects the underlying
distribution of power.” Anbarci, Skaperdas, and Syropoulos (2002) also study how various
bargaining solutions can determine the distribution of resources ‘under the shadow of
power’ without conflict taking place. The diﬀerence in our paper is that we fix a set of
institutions, democracy, that distributes the benefits in a specific way. This is less flexible
than some bargaining solution, but it does reflect the underlying distribution of power in
the sense that we model this as ‘support’ and both the expected utility of fighting and that
of democracy is increasing in support. However, as we show, in a natural model they do
not increase at the same rate. Powell’s remark precisely characterizes the circumstances
under which fighting occurs in our model. Our main point is that in a natural model it is
much more likely to happen when support is symmetric, which is exactly the circumstances
where the conventional wisdom in comparative politics asserts that democracy is more
attractive.

II.

A Model
In this section we develop a model of the trade-oﬀ between fighting and democracy.

To see the ideas at work it is simplest to consider a situation where there are two political
parties, denoted L and C contesting power. These parties care about being in power, and
the benefit of being in power is the income of the state from tax revenues, natural resources
etc. that is not transferred back to the population. The groups vie for the support
of citizens. There is one group of such citizens with total population mass normalized
to 1. Citizens are endowed initially with some income, which we assume is a stock of
the single consumption good in the economy, and in a democracy the parties compete
by oﬀering redistributive policies. Citizens get utility from consumption, and also, as
in the standard probabilistic voting model of Lindbeck and Weibull (1987), Dixit and
6

Londregan (1996, 1998) and Persson and Tabellini (2000), from fixed characteristics of
the political parties which we associate with ‘ideology.’ Individuals are heterogeneous
with respect to this characteristic and we assume that the parties know the distribution
of these characteristics.
When there is democracy the parties compete non-cooperatively to win the support
of citizens by oﬀering tax and transfer policies. The party which wins most votes wins the
election, takes power and consumes the rents which are implied by its’ policy platform.
When power is contested by fighting, political parties attempt to win support by coercing
people into fighting for them. The probability that a party wins the fight is increasing
in the number of citizens who support it. The key diﬀerence in our model is that in a
democracy parties do not know who voted for them and cannot make policy conditional
on this. When parties fight however it is clear who supports who and this allows parties
to target punishments or rewards.
We now develop our model of democracy.

A.

Democracy
We assume that the utility of consumption is linear and that all individuals have the

same endowment of income, denoted y ≥ 0. Parties compete by noncooperatively oﬀering
income transfers to voters which are not individual specific. Given a vector of policies

(yL , yC ) oﬀered by the two parties, an individual i supports party L if,
y + yL > y + yC + δ + σ i .

(1)

Here y +yL is the income (and therefore consumption and utility) of an individual which is
made up of initial income y, plus the transfer promised by party L, yL .2 This is the total
utility of voting for L. On the right side of the inequality, y + yC is income when voting
for party C. δ and σ i are the characteristics of the parties unrelated to their economic
promises - ‘overall popularity δ’ and ‘ideology σ i ’. The interpretation of δ + σ i is that it
represents the utility which is independent of economic policy to individual i of voting for
2
For simplicity we proceed by assuming that yL ≥ 0 and yC ≥ 0 but one can easily think of the vector
(yL , yC ) as being transfers net of taxes, in which case it is possible that they are negative in equilibrium.
The qualitative results of that model are identical to the one we study here.

7

C. These are preferences over some unalterable characteristic of the party. δ is common
to all, but σ i is specific to each individual.

h
i
1
1
We assume that δ is a random variable distributed uniformly on the interval − 2φ
, 2φ

with density φ > 0. σ i is individual specific and distributed uniformly on the interval
£ μ 1−μ ¤
− h , h with density h > 0. Thus a share μ ∈ [0, 1] of the population has an ideological

bias towards party L, while a share 1 − μ of the population has an ideological bias in

favor of party C. If μ =

1
2

we are back in the standard version of the probabilistic voting

model, where ideology is symmetrically distributed for the two parties. If μ >

1
2

we have

a situation where the distribution of ideology is skewed to the left so that a majority
ideologically prefers party L, while if μ <

1
2

party C enjoys an ideological advantage.

Thus μ may be though of as the share of the population that sympathizes with party L,
alternatively we may think of μ as the share of the population in one particular ethnic
group associated with party L, etc. We shall also refer to μ and 1 − μ as measuring the
underlying or the intrinsic support for a party.

For given policies and aggregate shock δ we can now calculate the fraction of people
ei , such that all individuals
who support L. To do this define a critical value of σi , denoted σ

ei strictly prefer to vote for L. Clearly from (1),
with σ i < σ
σ
ei = yL − yC − δ.

The fraction of the population who support L is then,
Z yL −yC −δ
hdi = μ + h (yL − yC − δ)

(2)

(3)

−μ
h

using the fact that the distribution of σi is uniform. The probability that L wins the
election, denoted π ∈ [0, 1], is simply the probability that this fraction is greater than one

half of the population, or,
¾
½
¾
½
μ − 12
1
= Pr δ < yL − yC +
π = Pr μ + h (yL − yC − δ) >
2
h
1
μ−
Z yL −yC + 2
h
=
φdi
1
− 2φ

=

φ(μ − 12 )
1
+ φ (yL − yC ) +
.
2
h

8

(4)

Consider now the optimal strategy of party L in a democracy. Party L’s optimization
problem can be written
max π(R − yL ).
yL

(5)

Here R > 0 denotes the exogenous (gross) rents from winning power. Taking into account
(4), the first-order condition for the choice of yL that maximizes expected utility is
φ (R − yL ) − π = 0.

(6)

(6) has a nice interpretation. The first term, φ (R − yL ), is the marginal benefit of increasing the amount of income transfer oﬀered to citizens. Holding constant the net amount of

rents, (R − yL ), this increases the probability that L wins the election by φ, the density
of δ. The second term, π, is the expected marginal cost of this. Holding constant the

probability of winning, expected utility falls by π when the party oﬀers voters more; π is
simply the probability of winning the election so that the politician has to deliver these
promises. Thus, note from (4) that on an expected basis election promises are, other
things equal, more costly for a party that has an ideological advantage in the population.
Since such a party is more likely to win the election there is a larger probability that
the promises have to be delivered. In contrast, if a party has little ideological support,
election promises are cheap as they most likely will not have to be paid for.
By (4) we can re-write (6) as,
yL =

μ − 12
R yC
1
+
−
−
.
2
2
4φ
2h

(7)

Since the probability that party C wins the election is 1 − π, it solves the optimization
problem, maxyC (1 − π) (R − yC ). Maximizing this with respect to yC gives,
φ (R − yC ) − (1 − π) = 0,

(8)

and solving as above gives,
yC =

μ − 12
1
R yL
+
−
+
.
2
2
4φ
2h

(9)

A (pure strategy) Nash equilibrium in this model is a vector of policies, (yL , yC ) that
simultaneously satisfy (9) and (7). Such an equilibrium exists here as the second-order
9

conditions for the two maximization problems are satisfied. Moreover, the equilibrium is
unique. By solving (9) and (7) we find
yL = R −

μ − 12
1
−
.
2φ
3h

(10)

yC = R −

μ − 12
1
+
.
2φ
3h

(11)

Consider first the case studied in the standard model of probabilistic voting where
the two ideological groups are of the same size; μ = 12 . Then we get the well known
result of policy convergence - the two groups oﬀer the same policy. As a consequence,
yL − yC = 0, and each party has a probability of

1
2

of winning the election. Politicians

oﬀer more income transfers the higher the rents of having power R, and the more voters
care about economic relative to other factors (high φ).
In our model, however, it can be seen from (10) and (11) that the standard result of

policy convergence in the probabilistic voting model does not hold when μ 6= 12 . When
μ>

1
2

so that party L has more underlying support in the population and thus an intrinsic

advantage over party C, party L oﬀers less to voters and party C more to voters than
in the symmetric case. The intuition for this is that in this case if the policies oﬀered
were the same, the probability of L winning would be greater than the probability of C
winning. But this implies that the expected cost of transfers is higher for L than for C.
Thus C oﬀers more than in the symmetric case, while L oﬀers less.
The consequences of this for the election probability can be found by inserting (10)
and (11) into (4). This yields
1 φ(μ − 12 )
.
π= +
2
3h
From the requirement π ∈ [0, 1] the parameter restriction

(12)
φ
3h

≤ 1 follows. Note that even if

the politician with a favorable ideological bias oﬀers less to voters, his election probability
is still higher. The eﬀect that politicians with strong ideological support oﬀer less to voters
can never outweigh the eﬀect of strong ideological support itself. This just means that
the endogenous choice of policies does not completely compensate for the bias in favor of
a politician, so that at the Nash equilibrium the politician with a favorable bias still has
a larger probability of winning the election. However, we note that

dπ
dμ

≤ 1, so that an

increased group share transforms into a smaller increase in the election probability than
10

the increase in the group share itself. The reason for this, of course, is that the politician
in part utilizes the increased support by oﬀering less to voters, leaving him better oﬀ both
as a result of an increased election probability and increased rents in case he should win
the election.
By inserting from (10) and (12) in (5) we find the expected utility of politician L
under democracy, ULD , which is
ULD

µ

μ − 12
1
+
=φ
2φ
3h

¶2

≡ ULD (μ).

(13)

We note that the utility of politician L increases with μ, so that the larger the group
that ideologically supports the politician, the higher is his expected rents of democracy.
A strong ideological support allows the politician to optimally choose a combination of a
high probability of winning the election and low transfers to voters.
Moreover, and this will turn out to be key to understanding the political choice
between democracy and fighting, the second derivative of ULD with respect to μ is positive.
The intuition for this can be seen from (10) and (12). Consider the eﬀect of tilting the
distribution of ideology or group size in favor of politician L, i.e. increasing μ. As can
be seen from (10) this decreases the transfers oﬀered by politician L linearly, and thus
also increases the rents of winning the election linearly. As seen from (12) the election
probability is also linear in μ. Consequently, an increased μ increases both the probability
of winning and the prize of winning linearly. As the expected utility of democracy is these
two terms multiplied, this explains why the expected utility increases faster than linearly
with an increased μ.
We can sum up the results of this section with the following result.
Proposition 1 There is a unique democratic Nash Equilibrium where the equilibrium
policy vector satisfies (10) and (11), and the expected utility of a party from democratic
competition is a strictly increasing and convex function of its intrinsic support.

B.

Fighting
A diﬀerence between democracy and fighting is that with democracy one oﬀers citi-

zens carrots, while with fighting one uses sticks. With elections a politician will not know
11

who voted for him and who did not. When it comes to a fight, however, it will be more
transparent who supports a politician and who does not. This opens up the possibility of
making it costly to support “the wrong side”. We assume that if a politician wins power
by a fight, he is able to punish those that did not support him by expropriating a share
τ ≤ 1 of their income. We assume that citizens have the same preferences as before with
respect to consumption and ideology. Since politicians use sticks rather than carrots, we
assume no direct income transfers are given to voters. When it comes to a fight, agents
need to decide which side to support. We denote the probability that politician L wins
the fight by ρ ∈ [0, 1]. A particular individual supports L if,
ρy + (1 − ρ)(1 − τ )y > (1 − ρ)y + ρ(1 − τ )y + δ + σ i .

(14)

Here the left hand side is the expected utility to individual i of supporting L; with a
probability ρ party L wins the fight in which case income is y, while with probability
1 − ρ party L looses the fight in which case income is (1 − τ )y. Thus it is costly to
support the loosing side. The right hand side of the inequality is what individual i gains

by supporting politician C. By rearranging the inequality we get,
σ i < −δ − (1 − 2ρ)τ y.

(15)

Denote by nL ∈ [0, 1] the expected number of people that supports politician L in a fight

and by 1 − nL those that support politician C. By using the same approach as above we

can then find3

nL = μ − h(1 − 2ρ)τ y.

(16)

To determine the probability of winning a fight we use the standard contest success
function of Tullock (1975) which has by now become standard in the literature on conflict
(see Powell, 1993, 1999). Thus
ρ=

nL
= nL .
nL + (1 − nL )

3

(17)

More formally nL = max [0, min [μ − h(1 − 2ρ)τ y, 1]]. Thus note that the requirement that nL ∈
[0, 1], implies that if μ − h(1 − 2ρ)τ y < 0, then nL = 0, while if μ − h(1 − 2ρ)τ y > 1, then nL = 1.

12

Inserting from (17) for ρ in (16) we then find the number of supporters for politician L
as4
nL =

μ − hτ y
.
1 − 2hτ y

(18)

The politician that wins a fight captures the rents R minus the eventual costs D ≥ 0

that may arise due to destruction because of fighting. In addition he expropriates income
from those who did not support him in the fight. Thus politician L’s expected utility of
fighting, ULF , is given by ULF = ρ[R − D + (1 − nL )τ y].
Inserting from (17) and (18) we obtain
∙
µ
¶ ¸
μ − hτ y
μ − hτ y
F
UL =
R−D+ 1−
τ y ≡ ULF (μ).
1 − 2hτ y
1 − 2hτ y

(19)

The first derivative of ULF (μ) with respect to μ is given by
∙
µ
¶ ¸
∂ULF (μ)
1
μ − hτ y
=
R−D+ 1−2
τy .
∂μ
1 − 2hτ y
1 − 2hτ y

(20)

A larger μ has two eﬀects on the payoﬀ from fighting. First, the direct eﬀect of an
increased μ is increased support and thus an increased probability of winning the fight.
Second, an increased μ makes the rents from winning smaller as the income expropriated
from losers will be smaller. It is evident from (20) that the first eﬀect will always dominate
for small μ, while

F (μ)
∂UL
∂μ

may become negative for high μ if R − D is suﬃciently small.

Note however that since the interesting case is R − D > 0, we have
in the case where

F (μ)
∂UL

∂μ

F (0)
∂UL
∂μ

> 0. Thus even

becomes negative it must start positive and then change sign as

μ increases.
Furthermore, note from (20) that the second derivative of ULF (μ) is given by
−2τ y
∂ 2 ULF (μ)
< 0.
=
2
∂μ
(1 − 2hτ y)

(21)

Thus the utility of fighting is concave in μ. The intuition for this is straightforward.
Winning a fight means winning the possibility of punishing the losers by expropriating
4

Although it may not be immediately evident it follows that when nL ∈ [0, 1], then μ − hτ y ≥ 0
and 1 − 2hτ y ≥ 0. Proof: ³When n´L ≥ 0, then from (16) μ ≥ h(1 − 2ρ)τ y. Inserting from (17) this
can be restated as nL ≥ 12 1 − hτμy . Inserting from nL from (18) yields after simple calculation that
μ − hτ y ≥ 0. From nL ∈ [0, 1] and (18) it then follows that 1 − 2hτ y ≥ μ − hτ y ≥ 0. Q.E.D.

13

part of their income. When μ increases the value of using this punishment is smaller as
there are less losers.5 Hence the following result,
Proposition 2 In the conflict model the expected utility of a party from fighting is a
concave function of its intrinsic support μ. The function is strictly increasing in μ when
μ is small (and may for a larger μ be increasing or decreasing in μ).

C.

Comparison of Payoﬀs
Taken together, Propositions 1 and 2 demonstrate that there is no a priori reason

why a group’s relative preference for democracy would increase when its support increases.
This is because the expected utility of fighting also increases with underlying support in
the population. Indeed, we now demonstrate that the expected utility of fighting may
increase faster, thus destabilizing democracy.
Recall that ULD (μ) denotes the expected utility of party L under democracy when L
has an ideological group of size μ. Then party C has an ideological group of size 1 − μ, so

that the corresponding utility of party C is UCD (1 − μ) etc. Democracy is then preferred

to fighting when the following two conditions hold simultaneously,
ULD (μ) > ULF (μ), and
UCD (1 − μ) > UCF (1 − μ),

(22)
(23)

which imply that for both parties, the expected utility of democracy must be greater than
that of fighting. Obviously, democracy can only be an equilibrium if it is preferred by
both parties. One party preferring to fight is enough for democracy to collapse.
Furthermore, since the eﬀect of group size μ on the expected utility of party L is
exactly the same as the eﬀect of group size 1 − μ for party C, we can restate these
5

As we have modelled it above people divide their support between the politicians without getting
paid for fighting. If the supporters (or soldiers) are hired at a constant wage w as often assumed in the
standard conflict literature, the payoﬀ from fighting would be given by ULF = ρ[R−D +(1−nL )τ y]−wnL .
Note, however, thath this would not³ change anything
´ i of substance in the model as in this case we would
μ−hτ y
μ−hτ y
F
have UL = 1−2hτ y R − D − w + 1 − 1−2hτ y τ y , i.e. introducing this would have the same eﬀect as
a higher D.

14

conditions as
ULD (μ) > ULF (μ), and
ULD (1 − μ) > ULF (1 − μ).

(24)
(25)

To determine the type of political equilibrium it thus suﬃces to investigate the expected utility curves of party L. There are three diﬀerent possible types of equilibria in
this model. In the first type democracy emerges independently of the level of underlying
support, μ. In the second type of equilibrium fighting results independently of μ. In the
third, and most interesting type, democracy or fighting emerge in a way that depends on
the ideological group size μ.
Consider first the case where for all μ we have ULD (μ) > ULF (μ). Then democracy will
always emerge. We note from (13) and (19) that this is more likely the lower the rents of
power R and the higher the destruction D.6
Consider next the case where the curves cross once at μ∗ , as depicted in Figure 2.
When politician L has a small group of ideological supporters he does not find it worthwhile to fight for power. Few people support him in the first place, and as a consequence
of that his chances of winning are small, making even fewer people support him as they
are afraid of ending up as supporters of the loser. For L accordingly, when μ is less
than μ∗ the payoﬀ from fighting is lower than the payoﬀ from democracy, so L prefers
democracy. Even though a group with such a small amount of support does not do very
well in democracy - there is little chance that it could win an election. Nevertheless, it
does even worse if it fights. Now note that as μ increases, the expected utility of fighting
increases faster than that of democracy and if μ is higher than μ∗ , fighting is preferred
by politician L. What about the preferences of C? When μ is smaller than μ∗ , so that L
prefers democracy, 1 − μ is bigger than μ∗ , and consequently politician C will be in favor
of fighting. Therefore, in this case the type of political equilibrium is independent of μ -

fighting will always result.
Next, consider the case where ULD and ULF cross twice, as in Figure 3 and where ULF
cuts ULD from below at some μS < 12 . For two crossings to happen the following three
6

Note that the situation ULD (μ) < ULF (μ) for all μ can never arise as from (13) and (19) it follows that
> ULF (0). Thus the curve for democracy must always start out above the curve for fighting.

ULD (0)

15

conditions have to be satisfied simultaneously:
ULD (0) > ULF (0),
ULD (μ) < ULF (μ) for 0 < μ < 1,
ULD (1) > ULF (1).
Here politician L prefers fighting for μS < μ < μH . It follows that politician C prefers
fighting for 1 − μH < μ < 1 − μL . Thus if μS < μ < μH or 1 − μH < μ < 1 − μL fighting

results, while otherwise democracy becomes the equilibrium.

In this case where the distribution of underlying support actually matters for the
equilibrium outcome, it is the likelihood of democracy and not of fighting that is maximized for small μ or 1 − μ. In the situation depicted in Figure 3, democracy is most
easily sustained when one group has a very small size and the other has a very big size.
This is contrary to the conventional wisdom which states that when one group is small
fighting is likely to result. Intuitively, when one group is dominant it is almost certain to
win democratic elections. Nevertheless, this does not lead democracy to collapse because
such a dominant group is almost certain to win a fight as well. In Figure 3 it is when
such a dominant group loses support to an opposition that democracy can collapse.
Another situation, that may initially look favorable to the conventional wisdom, arises
when ULF cuts ULD from below at μ∗ >
when μ > μ∗ >

1
2

1
2

as in Figure 4. Now politician L prefers fighting

while politician C prefers fighting when μ < 1 − μ∗ < 12 . Thus in this

case democracy arises only when support is balanced - but for the opposite reason from
what the standard wisdom predicts: It is the biggest and not the smallest group that
initiates conflict. In fact, if balanced support is necessary for democracy to consolidate,
the only way this can happen is when it is the biggest group that initiates conflict. A
result again completely contrary to the conventional wisdom.
The final type of situation that can arise when
5. This is when the curves cross twice but ULF cuts

F (μ)
∂UL
>
∂μ
ULD from

0 is depicted in Figure
below at μS > 12 . (An

equivalent case not drawn is when the curves cross twice and ULF cuts ULD from above at
μH < 12 ). Here democracy arises when μ ∈ [1 − μS , μS ], when the two groups are evenly
balanced. Note however, that in this case it is still true that democracy is also stable

when μ ≥ μH , so that it is not a necessary condition for democratic consolidation that
16

support be balanced.
For the sake of completeness we finally consider what happens when R − D is suf-

ficiently small that

F (μ)
∂UL
∂μ

> 0 for small μ but for higher μ,

F (μ)
∂UL
∂μ

< 0. The preceding

Figures show that this does not introduce any new phenomena. There are two cases,
either ULF cuts ULD once from below and the situation is qualitatively the same as Figures
2 and 4. Alternatively, ULF cuts ULD twice, first from below and then from above, in which
case we again have the two possibilities drawn in Figures 3 and 5.
Taken collectively this exhaustive analysis of the diﬀerent possible cases has an important implication. In no part of the parameter space is the conventional wisdom correct.
Even in the case of Figure 4 where democracy does dominate for symmetric distributions
of support, when fighting dominates it is the stronger group which initiates it. So it is
never the case that symmetric distributions of support are required for a democracy to be
stable because otherwise the group which does relatively poorly in democracy will fight
for power.

III.

Colombia’s La Violencia

The model above suggests that it is entirely plausible that the conventional wisdom
is completely wrong. To our knowledge there is no evidence which supports this or test of
the idea that democracy is consolidated when political power is balanced. Moreover, it is
quite easy to think of many other counterexamples. For instance, the conventional wisdom
suggests that the rising support for the Nazi Party in Germany in the early 1930s should
have helped to consolidate the Weimar Republic, which is not an obviously plausible
conjecture. Nevertheless, it could be correct. It is diﬃcult to test the above model using
cross-national data for several reasons. First, it is hard to identify in cross-national data
the underlying support for diﬀerent groups or parties. Sometimes this may be possible
when voting is along pure ethnic lines, as in Mauritius and Guyana at independence. In
the case of South Africa we could identify the Whites, Cape Coloureds and those of East
Indian descent as one group and black Africans as another (though again this case does
not look good for the conventional wisdom). Yet even here the situation is clouded by the
great heterogeneity of political identities and cleavages within the majority black African

17

community. Second, though one could look at variables such as the electoral outcomes
before coups, there are huge issues of endogeneity and omitted variable bias which will be
hard to solve. Finally, to take the model to the cross-national data it would be desirable
to have a richer sense of the observable circumstances which lead fighting to dominate
democracy.
Though testing the model is diﬃcult, in this section we provide some evidence concerning a key implication of the model - other things equal, fighting may be attractive
precisely when the support of diﬀerent parties is balanced. We do so in the context of La
Violencia, a civil war which gripped Colombia between 1946 and 1963. There are several
features of this conflict which make it ideal. First, it is a clear case where fighting was
along party political lines. Indeed, from the formation of the Liberal and Conservative
parties which first contested a presidential election in recognizable form in 1850, conflict
has been along party lines. After 1850 the parties competed in elections and fought continual civil wars over the results. There was therefore a recurring interplay between voting
and fighting (see Mazzuca and Robinson, 2006, for an analysis of this inter-relationship
for the structure of the electoral system in Colombia). Second, the apparently enduring
nature of political identities in Colombia makes it relatively straightforward to measure
the intrinsic support or strength of the parties.

A.

A Brief Historical Sketch of La Violencia
We now provide a quick sketch of the relevant period, accessible general accounts

as Bushnell (1993, Chapter 9) and Saﬀord and Palacios (2002, Chapter 14) with useful
more specialized overviews being Oquist (1980) or LeGrand (1997). The traditional historiography isolates the period between 1850, when the Liberal Party first came to power,
and 1886, when the Conservatives regained power, as the “Liberal Republic.” After 1886,
the Conservative party ruled until they split in the 1930 Presidential election and lost to
the Liberal Enrique Olaya Herrera. This created a new Liberal regime whose hegemony
collapsed at the beginning of La Violencia. The early decades of the century had been
relatively peaceful in Colombia, coming in the wake of the most murderous and damaging
of the civil wars - the “War of a Thousand days” which ended in 1902. After the ascension
of power by the Liberals in 1930, however, politics became more polarized. This was par18

ticularly so after the Presidency fell to Alfonso López Pumarejo in 1934. López Pumarejo
launched what he called the “Revolution on the March” which involved the introduction
of universal male suﬀrage and a whole vector of social reforms. López Pumarejo also
attempted to implement agrarian reforms in order to pacify the countryside where there
had been continual violence and land occupations for decades. The 1930s were an era of
rapid social change, industrialization and urbanization in Colombia and the Liberal party
attempted to reposition itself in policy space in order to appeal to the newly articulated
interests, particularly organized labor and those on the left who supported the dissident
Liberal caudillo, Jorge Eliécer Gaitán. López Pumarejo was followed in the presidency by
Eduardo Santos, but was re-elected in 1942. During this period the Conservative party
moved further to the right under the leadership of Laureano Gómez and politics became
more and more polarized. López Pumarejo resigned after a failed coup attempt in 1945
and in the 1946 presidential election the Conservative Mariano Ospina Pérez defeated a
Liberal party which split its support between Gaitán, running as an independent Liberal,
and the oﬃcial candidate Gabriel Turbay.
The return of the Conservative party led to heightened tensions since many Liberals
in the bureaucracy were replaced by Conservatives and low levels conflict between the
parties commenced. In consequence 1946 is usually taken to be the start of what came to
be La Violencia (Bushnell, 1993, p. 204). On 9th of April 1948 Gaitán was assassinated
in Bogotá and massive urban riots and conflict broke out all over the country. After this
Ospina Pérez declared a state of siege and soon after closed the Congress. All over the
country Liberal and Conservative groups formed militias and fought for control of the
countryside. In the 1950 presidential election the Liberals refused to run a candidate and
Laureano Gómez was elected unopposed. The regime Gómez constructed was aimed to
institutionalize Conservative dominance and his virulent anti-Liberalism eventually even
alienated his own supporters. He was overthrown by a military coup in 1953 led by
General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla which attracted wide support from Conservatives as well
as Liberals. Rojas Pinilla initially had some success in reducing the extent of violence and
managed to persuade many Liberal fighters to give up their arms. However, the fighting
soon intensified and it became clear that a real reconciliation between the parties was
required for peace to return. This happened in a series of meetings in Sitges in Spain in
19

1957 and later that year Rojas Pinilla was deposed by a military junta paving the way
for the emergence of the National Front regime in 1958. This regime was a pact between
the parties which legislated explicit power sharing at all levels of the administration and
government in an attempt to guarantee an equal share of the spoils of oﬃce to both
parties. After this reconciliation between the parties many independent guerilla groups
that the conflict had created persisted until the early 1960s.
The historical evidence suggest that we can diﬀerentiate between two main periods
of La Violencia. and the empirical evidence in Chacón (2005) suggests that there were
qualitative diﬀerences between the period of the early violence (1946-1953) and the late
violence period (1957-1963). In particular after the military coup and the subsequent
creation of the National Front regime, the conflict became less and less along party lines
and became much more of a guerilla conflict. Since our model is about fights for power
between well defined political groups, not guerilla warfare, we restrict our empirical analysis to the early period. Moreover, due to data availability we focus only on the period
1946-1950.

IV.

The Data
There are two crucial sorts of data for our empirical work. The first is a measure

of the underlying support for the two political parties. To measure this we use the
election results from the 1946 presidential election at the municipality level. As noted
above, there were two Liberals candidates, Jorge Eliécer Gaitán and Gabriel Turbay
competing against the Conservative Mariano Ospina Pérez. We aggregate the votes for
the two Liberal candidates. This is a plausible source for the variable we need because of
the fact that political identity was enduring over time which means that these numbers
give a good idea of support even subsequently in the 1950s. Moreover, in 1946 power
switched from the Liberals to the Conservatives and this is indicative of the fact that this
was a relatively uncorrupt election so that the recorded vote totals are meaningful. We
constructed various measures of political competition from these numbers. The left panel
of Figure 6 shows the municipalities with Liberal and Conservative majorities for the 1946
presidential elections. Of the 755 municipalities for which there is available information,
65% had a Liberal electoral majority. Of this 65%, only 19% were electorally competitive
20

(defined as a situation where the Liberals won between 51% and 60% of the vote). This
numbers indicate that in the great majority of Liberal municipalities there was political
hegemony. This percentage is similar for the municipalities with Conservative electoral
majorities. Only 20% of these were competitive in the 1946 election. The right panel
of Figure 6 distinguishes between municipalities with and without electoral competition.
We see that the competitive municipalities were mainly located in the departments of
Antioquia, Viejo Caldas (subsequently divided into the modern departments of Caldas,
Quindío and Risaralda), Tolima and Valle.
We used this political data in two ways. The first is just to construct a measure
of political competition based on the margin between the two vote totals. We did this
by taking the absolute value of the diﬀerence between the percentages of liberal and
conservative votes. Therefore the measurement of political competition used is:
Political Competition = 1 − |%Liberal-%Conservative| /100
On the one hand when the vote totals for the two parties are the same, we have a highly
competitive environment and the index takes the value of 1. On the other hand, when
all of the votes go to one of the other parties we have complete hegemony and the index
taxes the value of 0. The second way we looked at the data was to construct some
dummy variables which classify municipalities according to the percentage of the vote for
each party. Municipalities with 80% or more of votes for the Liberal party were classified
as a situation with “Liberal hegemony,” municipalities where the Liberals won between
60% and 79% were classified as being under “Liberal control”. We classified municipalities
where the Conservative party won in the same way. Finally, we classified municipalities
where one party won by less than 10% as competitive.
The second main type of data we need are measures of political conflict or fighting.
Here we use two sources. Unfortunately, we have oﬃcial information for the homicide rate
only at the departmental level. We therefore coded a dummy variable which indicates
the occurrence of violent deaths in a municipality (it takes the value of 1 if violent deaths
were registered in the period 1946-1950 and 0 if not). The information on violent deaths
was collected from several sources, specifically the more specialized regional studies by
Ortiz (1985), Henderson (1985), Guerrero (1991), Uribe (1996), Roldán (2002) and Pécaut
21

(2001). Particularly important is the two volume work by Guzmán Campos et al. (1980)
which attempted to provide a comprehensive overview of La Violencia. Figure 7 shows
the location of the municipalities which experienced partisan violence in this period.
In order to measure the intensity of the municipal violence we used the same sources
as above to construct a variable capturing number of years in which the municipality registered violent deaths directly related to the partisan conflict. This integer scale therefore
goes from 0 to 4.
In addition to these basic dependent and explanatory variables we used other variables to try to control for factors whose omission might bias the estimated relationship
between political competition and fighting. We first used a group of exogenous geographical variables, namely latitude, altitude, the distance in kilometers between municipalities
and the department capital, various measures of soil types and surface area in square
kilometers. All these variables were taken from the municipal data base of the CEDE
of the University of the Andes in Bogotá. A serious concern in estimating the causal
eﬀect of political competition on violence is that the relationship may be influenced by
omitted variables which help to determine both the extent of political competition and
violence. One idea might be that both of these stem from underlying variation in the
socio-economic structure of municipalities. By using the geographical variables therefore
we are using an exogenous source of variation which hopefully picks up important aspects
of this varying socio-economic structure. We should add however that the political geography of Colombia is enormously complex (see Pinzón de Lewin, 1989) and certainly defies
any simple explanation in terms of economic interests. Historically various parts of the
country identified with the diﬀerent parties, for example Antioquia with the Conservative
party, Santander with the Liberal party, and there also appear to be many idiosyncratic
sources of variation.
To further control for possibly relevant socio-economic factors we also used the literacy rate and a measurement of municipal urbanization. The literacy rate was calculated
as the population that knew how to read divided by the number population over seven
years of age. The measurement of urbanization was calculated as the proportion of the
population living in urban areas divided by the total municipality population. These
variables were calculated using the data from the 1951 National Census. Since a lot of
22

the discussion of La Violencia by historians and political scientists suggests that violence
may have been particularly pronounced in the coﬀee growing areas, we also used data
from the late 1920s Monsalve (1927) on the incidence of coﬀee growing. Specifically, we
calculated the total number of coﬀee trees per municipality divided by the population.
Our final strategy to try to control for omitted variables is to use departmental
fixed eﬀects. Colombia is traditionally thought of as a country of great regional divides
and strong regional and departmental identities (as in our observations about Antioquia
and Santander above). Historically this has been reflected in the relatively decentralized
political system in Colombia with departments having a large degree of autonomy. Indeed,
after the Rionegro Constitution of 1863 during the Liberal republic, Colombia became a
hyper-federal country where the national army did not have the right to intervene in the
aﬀairs of individual states! However, the system was to an extent re-centralized after
1886. In consequence many of the potentially omitted factors that might jointly influence
patterns of political identity and violence could vary systematically across departments.
Hence including departmental fixed eﬀects is an attractive way of trying to control for
such factors.
Another concern about potential endogeneity, particularly given Colombia’s history,
is that the spatial location of violence is highly persistent. If political parties then move to
control such municipalities then in estimating the casual eﬀect of political competition it
would be desirable to try to control for past conflicts. Though detailed information does
not exist from 19th century civil wars or the War of a Thousand Days on the location
of conflict, there does exist fairly comprehensive data collected by LeGrand (1988) on
agrarian conflicts. LeGrand (1988) shows that the department that reported the greatest
number of these type of conflicts during the period 1901-1931, was the Viejo Magdalena
department (actually the departments of Magdalena, Cesar and Guajira) with a total of
108 reported conflicts. For the same period, the region of Viejo Bolivar (currently the
Bolivar, Cordoba and Sucre departments) with 86 reported cases. These regions exhibited
the lowest homicides rates during la Violencia. LeGrand (1988) also collected information
of the distribution of public lands, something often initiated as an attempt to defuse rural
conflict. From LeGrand’s work we constructed several variables, the number of territorial
concessions made, the number of hectares of public land granted, and the number of
23

reported agrarian conflicts over uncultivated public lands. These variables are available
for the periods 1827-1869, 1870-1900, 1901-1918 and 1918 -1931. Table I records the basic
descriptive statistics of the data.

V.

Empirical Results

A.

Linear Models
We our start our empirical analysis by estimating a linear probability model of the

form
di = γci + x0i β + μj + vi ,

(26)

where di ∈ {0, 1} is a dummy variable which takes the value one if violence was present in

municipality i during the period 1946 to 1950, ci is our measure of political competition in
municipality i, μj is a fixed eﬀect for department j and vi is an error term which we assume

is orthogonal to the explanatory variables. x0i is a vector containing all the covariates or
control variables. The coeﬃcient of interest here is γ. Note that to consistently estimate
γ by OLS we require that cov (ci , vi ) = cov (xzi , vi ) = 0 for all z where xzi is the jth
element of the vector xi . In other words, this type of estimation requires that there be no
omitted variables correlated with the right-hand side variables in the model. This could
be problematic if there were municipality characteristics that influenced both the extent
of political support for the parties and also the propensity for violence. The best way
of dealing with this issue would be to have an instrument for ci . Since we do not have
such an instrument, we have to be cautious in interpreting our estimates of γ as being the
true causal eﬀect. Nevertheless, as we noted above, the origins of political identities in
Colombia seem to lie deep in idiosyncratic historical events of the nineteenth century, and
are not closely associated with such things as land inequality or socio-economic structure.
These facts lead us to be relatively confident that we can treat ci as econometrically
exogenous.
Table II provides the basic results from the estimation of equation (26) by OLS.7 Column 1 contains the simplest regression of the dummy for the presence of violence against
7

Since heteroskedasticity is prevalent in linear probability models, in all tables we report
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.

24

our measure of political competition. The estimated coeﬃcient suggests that the greater
is political competition, the greater is the probability of violence in the municipality. Column 2 looks at this in a diﬀerent way by using dummy variables corresponding to the
classification of municipalities described above. Here the coeﬃcients should be interpreted
as relative to the omitted category, which is Conservative hegemony (more than 80% of
conservative vote share). The estimated coeﬃcients suggest that any movement away
from Conservative hegemony increases the probability of violence with the movement to
political competition having the largest estimated eﬀect, consistent with the results in
column 1.
In the two next columns we return to the basic measure of political competition
to check the robustness of our result. In column 3 we add a full set of geographical and
economic controls and also our data on the distribution of government lands and historical
land conflicts. We also add a dummy variable for whether or not a municipality has a
Liberal majority to check whether or not the eﬀect of political competition depends on
which party has the (small) majority. The important thing to note from this and the last
two columns of the table is how robust the estimated coeﬃcient on political competition
is. Both the estimated coeﬃcient and the standard error are relatively unchanged by
the addition of many diﬀerent types of covariates. From the variables capturing land
grants or land conflicts, only the one measuring the number of land concessions per-capita
has a significant over the presence of violence. Interestingly, we find that previous land
concessions tend to reduce the probability that a municipality will be violent. Moreover,
historical land conflicts are associated with a greater probability of experiencing violence.
Also, we find that conditional on there being political competition, municipalities with a
Liberal majority do have a higher probability of experiencing violence. In column 4 we
add a full set of departmental fixed eﬀects to try to control for omitted variables which
are common at the departmental level. As we see, the results are very robust even after
controlling for these fixed eﬀects.
In the final two columns of Table II, as a further robustness check, we also take into
account the possibility of spatial autocorrelation. This a serious concern because our observations are spatially correlated, which means that the observations of a geographical
unit do not depend only of the characteristics of this unit but also on the characteristics
25

of other neighboring units.8 Spatial dependency can be due to the fact that the variable
measured goes beyond the boundaries of the spatial unit and may have a regional dimension. Thus, if spatial dependence is an issue, ignoring it would lead to unbiased and
inconsistent estimates of γ. To allow for the possibility of such eﬀects we estimated a
model of the form
di = ρW d + γci + x0i β + μj + vi ,

(27)

where d = (d1 , d2 , ., dn ) and W is a spatial weighting matrix. This is an inverse distances
matrix, standardized by rows, in which element ik (with i 6= k) contains the inverse

of the distance between the center of municipality i and the center of municipality k.

This matrix was calculated for all the municipalities in the sample using geographical
coordinates. This specification was chosen since we want to analyze if the expected
interactions between violent municipalities is an inverse function of the distance between
them.
Columns 5 and 6 contain the estimation of (27) using diﬀerent sets of covariates. The
models were estimated using the maximum likelihood method for autoregressive models
with spatially lagged dependent variable proposed by LeSage (1999).9 The results of these
models confirms the robustness of the estimates obtained previously. The estimated eﬀect
of political competition on the probability that a municipality will be violent obtained in
the linear-probability model is completely robust to correcting for the presence of spatial
eﬀects.
Table III investigates the robustness of the eﬀect of political competition on municipal
violence taking the count variable previously described as dependent variable. Here we
replicate all the estimations presented in Table II. Thus, the model estimated in columns
1 though 5 is exactly the same as (26) but with a dependent variable yi such that yi ∈

{0, 1, 2, 3, 4}. Again we find a very strong, positive, statistically significant eﬀect of our

political competition variable.
8

This is what in the spatial econometrics literature is known as spatial dependence. Spatial dependence is similar to temporal dependence displayed by time-series, which is corrected using lag operators.
Nevertheless, the spatial eﬀects cannot be corrected in the same way due to the multidirectional eﬀects
that potentially exist between spatial units.
9
This result is also robust to heteroscedastic errors. For more details see Chacón (2005).

26

B.

Non-Linear Models
One common argument against the linear probability model is that some fitted values

may lie outside the zero-one interval. Since our main interest is to consistently estimate
γ, the fact that some predicted values are outside this interval is not very important.
However, our estimate could be biased because the linear model implies that a ceteris
paribus change in ci has a constant eﬀect over the probability of violence, regardless of
the initial level of ci . To address these limitations we estimated a standard probit model
of the form
prob(di = 1 | ci , xi ) = Φ(γci + x0i β+μj ),

(28)

where Φ(.) represents the standard normal distribution function. To check the performance of the point estimates obtained by our linear specification (26) we can compare
them with the partial (marginal) eﬀects of the probit model. Table IV presents the results
from the estimation of equation (28) via Maximum Likelihood. In column 1 we replicate a
regression including our political competition measurement as the only explanatory variable. Again, the results suggest that greater is political competition, the greater is the
probability of violence. The magnitude of this eﬀect indicates that the diﬀerence in probability between a municipality with absolute hegemony of any of the two parties and one
in which there is perfect electoral competition is 21%. Remarkably, this eﬀect is very close
to the one obtained by the linear probability model (19%) and is robust to the inclusion
of departmental fixed-eﬀect and all other controls. This validates the robustness of the
estimated coeﬃcient on political competition and the performance of our linear model.
Finally, in the last two columns of Table IV we turn to the determinants of the
intensity of the conflict using the count variable we described above - the number of years
that the municipality was violent. Since the dependent variable now takes integer values,
0,1,2,3,4 we investigate the impact of political competition on the intensity of conflict by
using a count data model of the form
prob(yi | ci , xi ) =

exp(−λi )λyi i
yi !

(29)

where yi ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}. λi represents the conditional mean of yi and is assumed to take
27

the functional form lnλi = γci + x0i β+ μj (Wooldridge, 2002, Chapter 19). Column 5
presents the model where we only include dummy-variables according to electoral categorization. Once more and consistent with our previous finding, the higher values of
yi are predicted for municipalities moving away from Conservative hegemony to a full
electoral competition. In column 6 we present the complete model including the electoral
competition measure plus the full set of controls.

VI.

Conclusions
In this paper we have argued that the conventional wisdom about the circumstances

under which democracy is consolidated is flawed. The existing literature has focused on
the idea that political parties or groups will agree to play by the rules of the democratic
game when they anticipate that they can win power with a suﬃciently large probability.
Obviously, such a calculation is relevant to determining whether or not democracy will
be stable, and considering it is therefore a necessary part of the study of democratic
consolidation. However, in this paper we show that it is not suﬃcient to consider this
probability. This is because factors that influence the probability that a party wins power
under democracy will also influence its ability to win a fight if it decides to violate the
democratic rules. In particular this implies that an increase in the underlying support that
a party has in the population does not necessarily improve the prospects for democratic
consolidation because the expected utility of fighting for power may increase faster than
the expected utility of playing by the rules of the democratic game.
We constructed a simple model of two party competition to investigate how the
expected utilities of democracy and fighting depend on the distribution of support in
society. Though both the model of democratic politics and fighting are entirely standard
we showed that in a wide class of cases democracy may only be consolidated when one
party was hegemonic. In these situations, when the two parties are evenly balanced, the
situation where the conventional wisdom predicts that democracy is most likely to be
consolidated, one or both of the parties prefers to fight for power because the probability
of winning is suﬃciently high. Also, we showed that when balanced support was necessary
for democracy to consolidate this is not so because the weakest party will otherwise choose
fighting, but because the strongest party will do so. Again, this is completely contrary to
28

the conventional wisdom.
A model does not of course prove that the conventional wisdom is wrong. Nevertheless, the model does illustrate that the existing literature is logically incomplete and
the real relation between political support and democratic consolidation must be much
more complex than has been recognized. Clearly what is required is serious empirical
work on this topic. Though we did not provide a test of the conventional wisdom here,
we did use data from La Violencia, a civil war which influenced Colombia between 1946
and the early 1960s, to examine one key possibility derived from the model - that violence
and fights for power can occur when the support for political parties is evenly balanced.
The Colombian evidence is tentative, since we cannot be completely confident that we
have estimated the causal eﬀect of political competition on fighting, but nevertheless the
results we presented show that, other things equal, greater political competition at the
municipality level during this period in Colombia was associated with greater violence.
This is not consistent with the conventional wisdom, but it is consistent with our model.

VII.

References

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2001) “Why Did the West Extend
the Franchise?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXV, 1167-1199.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson

(2001) “A Theory of Political

Transitions,” American Economic Review, 91, 938-963.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, New York; Cambridge University Press.
Anbarci, Nejat, Stergios Skaperdas, and Constantinos Syropoulos (2002)
“Comparing Bargaining Solutions in the Shadow of Conflict: How Norms Against Threats
Can Have Real Eﬀects,” Journal of Economic Theory, 106, 1-16.
Arocha, Jaime (1979) La Violencia en el Quindío: Determinantes ecológicos y
económicos del homicidio en un municipio caficultor, Bogotá; Ediciones Tercer Mundo.
Bates, Robert H. (2000) “Ethnicity and Development in Africa: A Reappraisal,”
American Economic Review, 90, 131-134.
Betancourt, Darío and Martha L. García (1990) Matones y Cuadrilleros: Orí29

genes y evolución de la Violencia en el occidente colombiano, 1946-1965, Bogotá;Ediciones
Tercer Mundo.
Bushnell, David (1993) The Making of Modern Colombia: A Nation in Spite of
Itself, Berkeley; University of California Press.
Chacón, Mario (2004) “Dynamics and Determinants of the Violence during La
Violencia in Colombia, 1946-1963,” Unpublished Department of Political Science, Yale
University.
Colomer, Josep M. (2000) Strategic Transitions: Game Theory and Democratization, Baltimore; Johns Hopkins University Press.
Conley, John P. and Akram Temimi (2001) “Endogenous Enfranchisement
When Groups’ Preferences Conflict,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 79-107.
Dixit, Avinash K. and John B. Londregan (1996) “The Determinants of Success of Special Interest in Redistributive Politics,” Journal of Politics, LVIII, 1132-1155.
Dixit, Avinash K. and John B. Londregan (1998) “Ideology, Tactics, and
Eﬃciency in Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII, 497-530.
Esteban, Joan M. and Debraj Ray (1999) “Conflict and Distribution,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 87, 379—415.
Esteban, Joan M. and Debraj Ray (2001) “Collective Action and the Group
Size Paradox,” American Political Science Review 95, 663—672.
Guerrero, Javier (1991) Los Años del Olvido: Boyacá y los Orígenes de la Violencia, Bogotá; Ediciones Tercer Mundo.
Guzmán Campos, Germán, Orlando Fals Borda y Eduardo Umaña (1980)
La Violencia en Colombia, 2 vols. 9 ed. Bogotá; Valencia Editores.
Henderson, James D. (1985) When Colombia Bled: A History of the Violence in
Tolima, Tuscaloosa; University of Alabama Press.
Hirshleifer, Jack (1991) “The Paradox of Power,” Economics and Politics, 3,
177-200.
Jack, William and Roger Lagunoﬀ (2003) “Dynamic Enfranchisement,” Depart-

ment of Economics, Georgetown University, http://www.georgetown.edu/faculty/lagunoﬀ/franch10.pdf
LeSage, James (1999) "The Theory and Practice of Spatial Econometrics", Un30

published manuscrip, University of Toledo.
LeGrand, Catherine (1986) Frontier Expansion and Peasant Protest in Colombia,
1830-1936, Albuquerque; University of New Mexico Press.
LeGrand, Catherine (1997) “La política y La Violencia en Colombia, 1946-1965:
Interpretaciones en la década de los ochenta” Memoria y Sociedad, 2, 79-111.
Lindbeck, Assar and Jörgen Weibull (1987) “Balanced-Budget Redistribution
as the Outcome of Political Competition,” Public Choice, LII, 272-297.
Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2004) “Why Did the Elites Extend
the Suﬀrage? Democracy and the Scope of Government, With an Application to Britain’s
‘Age of Reform,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 707-765.
Llavador, Humberto and Robert J. Oxoby (2005) “Partisan Competition,
Growth and Franchise,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 1155-1189.
Mazzuca, Sebastián and James A. Robinson (2006) “Political Conflict and
Power-sharing in the Origins of Modern Colombia,” NBER Working Paper #12099.
Monsalve, Diego (1927) Colombia Cafetera, Barcelona; Artes Graficas, s.a., sucesores de Heinrich y c.a..
Ortiz, Carlos Miguel (1985) Estado y Subversión en Colombia. La Violencia en
el Quindío Años 50, Bogotá; CIDER Universidad de los Andes.
Oquist, Paul (1980) Violence, Conflict, and Politics in Colombia, New York; Academic Press.
Pécaut, Daniel (2001) Orden y violencia: evolución socio-política entre 1930 y
1953, Bogotá; Norma.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining
Economic Policy, Cambridge; MIT Press.
Pinzón de Lewin, Patricia (1989) Pueblos, Regiones y Partidos: “La Regionalización Electoral” Atlas Electoral Colombiano, Bogotá; Ediciones Universidad de Los
Andes.
Powell, Robert (1993) “Guns, Butter and Anarchy,” American Political Science
Review, 87, 115-132.
Powell, Robert (1999) In the Shadow of Power: States and Strategies in Interna31

tional Politics, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
Przeworski, Adam (1991) Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic
Reforms in Eastern Europe and Latin America , New York; Cambridge University Press.
Roldán, Mary. (2002) Blood and Fire: La Violencia in Antioquia, Colombia,
1946-1953, Durham; Duke University Press.
Rosendorﬀ, B. Peter (2001) “Choosing Democracy,” Economics and Politics, 13,
1-29.
Saﬀord, Frank P. and Marco Palacios (2002) Colombia: Fragmented Land,
Divided Society, New York; Oxford University Press.
Sánchez, Gonzalo and Peter Bakewell (1985) “La Violencia in Colombia: New
Research, New Questions,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 65, 789-807.
Sánchez, Gonzalo and Donny Meertens (1983) Bandoleros, gamonales y campesinos:
El caso de la Violencia en Colombia, Bogotá; El Ancora.
Skaperdas, Stergios (1992) “Cooperation, Conflict and Power in the absence of
Property Rights,” American Economic Review, 82, 720-739.
Skaperdas, Stergios and Constantinos Syropoulos (1997) “The Distribution
of Income in the presence of Appropriate Activities,” Economica, 64, 101-117.
Tullock, Gordon (1975) “On The Eﬃcient Organization of Trials,” Kyklos, 28,
745-762.
Uribe, Maria Victoria (1996) Matar, Rematar y Contra rematar. Las Masacres
de la Violencia en el Tolima 1948-1964, Bogotá; CINEP.
Weingast, Barry R. (1997) “The Political Foundations of Democracy and the
Rule of Law,” American Political Science Review, 91, 245-263.
Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel
Data, Cambridge; MIT Press.

32

Figure 1: Polity Score for Mauritius and Guyana
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

Guyana

Mauritius

2001

1998

1995

1992

1989

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

-6
-8

Figure 2: The Impossibility of Democracy
UDL , UFL
Payoff to
Fighting

Payoff to
Democracy
µ*
0

1

µ

Figure 3: Democracy with asymmetric
Distributions of Support
UDL , UFL

Payoff to
Democracy
Payoff to
Fighting

1-µ H
0

µS

1-µ S

µH
1

µ

Figure 4: Democracy with symmetric
Distributions of Support
UDL , UFL
Payoff to
Fighting

Payoff to
Democracy
µ*
0

1

µ

Figure 5: Democracy possible with symmetric and
asymmetric Distributions of Support
UDL , UFL

Payoff to
Democracy
Payoff to
Fighting

1-µ H
0

1-µ S

µS
½

µH
1

µ

Figure 6: 1946 Presidential Election Results

Figure 7: Violent Municipalities, 1946-1950

Table I-Descriptive Statistics
Dependent Variable

No.

Percentage

Violent Municipalities 1946-1950

184

24.4

Political Variables
Liberal Hegemony
Conservative Hegemony
Liberal Control
Conservative Control
Electoral Competition
Liberal Majority

184
112
214
98
147
494

24.4
14.8
28.3
13.0
19.5
65.4

256
173

33.9
22.9

Land Variable
Land Concessions
Land Conflicts
Granted Land (percentage of arable land)

0.06 (0.21)

Economic Controls
Literacy Rate
Rural Index
Urban Index
Log GDP per capita
Cafetos per capita
Number of Observations
Note: Standard deviations in parenthesis

Mean

0.49 (0.15)
0.75 (0.2)
0.24 (0.2)
0.25 (0.55)
1.34 (0.55)
755

Table II- OLS & Spatial Estimates
Model 1
OLS

Model 2
OLS

Model 3
OLS

Model 4
OLS

Model 5
Model 6
Spatial Autoregressive

Dependent Variable: Municipal Violence
Political Competition

0.22
(0.05)

Liberal Hegemony*

0.15
(0.05)

0.19
(0.05)

0.09
(0.03)
-0.001
(0.0007)
0.06
(0.08)
-0.002
(0.01)

0.08
(0.03)
-0.001
(0.0005)
-0.05
(0.12)
0.01
(0.01)

Political Competition*
Conservative Control*
Liberal Majority*
Land Concessions (per capita)
Granted Land (% municipality surface)
Land Conflicts
Spatial Lag (dependent variable)

2

R
Number of observations

0.19
(0.05)

0.25
(0.05)

0.07
(0.03)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.060
(0.008)
0.010
(0.008)
0.110
(0.02)

0.13
(0.03)
0.21
(0.04)
0.25
(0.04)
0.16
(0.05)

Liberal Control*

Geographical Controls
Economic Controls
Departmental Fixed Effects

0.22
(0.05)

No
No
No

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.02
755

0.03
755

0.11
755

0.19
755

Note: Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *Dummy variables.

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.02
755

0.18
755

Table III- OLS & Spatial Estimatesª

Model 1
OLS

Model 2
OLS

Model 3
OLS

Model 4
OLS

Model 5
Spatial

Dependent Variable: Number of violent years

Political Competition

0.28
(0.08)

0.16
(0.08)

0.27
(0.09)

0.27
(0.08)

0.13
(0.05)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.04
(0.1)
-0.01
(0.01)

0.11
(0.05)
-0.002
(0.0008)
-0 14
(0.15)
-0.003
(0.01)

0.11
(0.05)
-0.004
(0.0007)
-0 .04
(0.14)
0.01
(0.01)
0.03
(0.04)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

R
0.01
0.02
0.1
Number of observations
755
755
755
Note: Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *Dummy variables.

0.17
755

0.17
755

Liberal Hegemony*

0.17
(0.06)
0.29
(0.06)
0.31
(0.07)
0.24
(0.08)

Liberal Control*
Political Competition*
Conservative Control*
Liberal Majority*
Land Concessions (per capita)
Granted Land (% municipality surface)
Land Conflicts
Spatial Lag (dependent variable)

Geographical Controls
Economic Controls
Departmental Fixed Effects
2

No
No
No

No
No
No

Table IV- Limited Dependent Variable Modelsª
Model 1
Probit

Model 2
Probit

Model 3
Probit

Model 4
Probit

Dependent Variable: Municipal Violence
Political Competition

0.23
(0.05)

Liberal Hegemony*

0.14
(0.05)

Political Competition*
Conservative Control*
Liberal Majority*
Land Concessions (per capita)
Granted Land (% municipality surface)
Land Conflicts

Geographical Controls
Economic Controls
Departmental Fixed Effects
2

Pseudo R
Number of observations

Model 6
Poisson

Dependent Variable:
Number Violent Years

0.21
(0.05)

0.2
(0.07)
0.29
(0.06)
0.34
(0.07)
0.25
(0.08)

Liberal Control*

Model 5
Poisson

0.08
(0.02)
0.37
(0.19)
0.53
(0.2)
0.62
(0.25)
0.54
(0.28)

0.10
(0.03)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.02
(0.06)
[0]

0.09
(0.03)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.04
0.09
0.006
(0.008)

0.04
(0.01)
-0.001
(0.0008)
-0.03
(0.03)
[0]

No
No
No

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.02
755

0.03
755

0.11
755

0.17
755

0,02
755

0.16
755

a:Marginal effects calculated at the mean of the explanatory variables reported. Robust
heteroskedastic standard errors in parenthesis. *Dummy variables.

