NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONG-TERM CHANGES IN LABOR SUPPLY AND TAXES:
EVIDENCE FROM OECD COUNTRIES, 1956-2004
Lee Ohanian
Andrea Raffo
Richard Rogerson
Working Paper 12786
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12786

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

We would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Ariel Burstein, Hal Cole, Chuck Carlstrom, Mark Doms, Christian
Haefke, Gary Hansen, Ed Prescott and participants at the Research Department at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta and Kansas City, 2006 Midwest Macroeconomic Meetings, 2006 NBER Summer
Institute, 2006 ECB-IMOP conference, Society for Economic Dynamics 2004 Annual Meeting and
UC Davis for comments. We thank Cara McDaniel for supplying us with her tax rate series. Sonal
Hate provided excellent research assistance. Rogerson thanks the NSF for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Lee Ohanian, Andrea Raffo, and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Long-Term Changes in Labor Supply and Taxes: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1956-2004
Lee Ohanian, Andrea Raffo, and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 12786
December 2006
JEL No. E2,J22
ABSTRACT
We document large differences in trend changes in hours worked across OECD countries over the
period 1956-2004. We then assess the extent to which these changes are consistent with the intratemporal
first order condition from the neoclassical growth model. We find large and trending deviations from
this condition, and that the model can account for virtually none of the changes in hours worked. We
then extend the model to incorporate observed changes in taxes. Our findings suggest that taxes can
account for much of the variation in hours worked both over time and across countries.
Lee Ohanian
8283 Bunch Hall
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu
Andrea Raffo
Economist
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
925 Grand Blvd.
Kansas City, MO 64198
andrea.raffo@kc.frb.org

Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics
College of Business
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
and NBER
richard.rogerson@asu.edu

1

Introduction

Macroeconomists have long been interested in understanding the time series behavior of
aggregate hours of work. Much e¤ort has been devoted to one particular context –changes
in hours worked at business cycle frequencies in the US economy –and assessing the role of
various model features in accounting for these changes. The starting point for this paper is
the observation that trend changes in hours of work across OECD countries over the last 50
years exceed business cycle changes in hours of work by roughly an order of magnitude. We
believe that these large trend changes warrant a systematic analysis similar to that which
has occurred for business cycle movements. This paper takes a …rst step in this direction.
In particular, we assess the ability of several versions of the neoclassical growth model to
account for trend changes in hours of work for a sample of 21 OECD countries over the
period 1956 - 2004. One goal is to isolate those episodes, i.e., time periods in speci…c
countries, which seem most puzzling from the perspective of this theoretical framework.
To our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive analysis of long-run labor supply using
the growth model.
Our main …ndings follow. First, the standard version of the growth model can account
for only a small fraction of the large, trend decreases in hours of work observed over this
period. This conclusion is robust to the value of the labor supply elasticity assumed, the
inclusion of a subsistence consumption term in preferences, and to assumptions regarding how individuals value government provision of goods and services. Second, when the
analysis is extended to incorporate taxes on consumption and labor income, we …nd that
the model can account for almost all of the average decrease in hours of work over the
sample period. Additionally, the model with consumption and labor taxes represents an
improvement in accounting for changes at the individual country level. Third, although
the model with distorting taxes can largely account for the average change in hours of
work over time, there are several episodes that the model does not account for. Some of

1

these episodes entail periods in which hours do not fall enough in speci…c countries, while
others entail periods in which hours fall too much in speci…c countries. Importantly, those
episodes which are singled out as puzzling relative to this extension of the standard model
are signi…cantly di¤erent from those episodes which stand out as puzzling relative to the
standard model without distorting taxes. Fourth, we present statistical evidence to show
that taxes are important even after controlling for a variety of other features that have
been suggested as important determinants of cross-country di¤erences in labor supply.
Given that the one-sector growth model has become the standard framework for interpreting aggregate economic data, it is the natural starting point for trying to understand
trend changes in hours across countries. To assess the ability of this framework to account
for the large changes in hours worked, we employ a methodology that has been found to be
very useful in the business cycle literature. Speci…cally, we focus on the static …rst order
condition implied by equilibrium and assess the extent to which this condition holds at
each point in time in the data. One feature of this exercise is that it does not require us to
assume that preferences or technology are the same across countries. We implement this
exercise both for a benchmark model and for several extensions of the benchmark model,
and assess how various extensions in‡uence the extent to which the condition holds. Isolating those episodes where the condition is farthest from being satis…ed serve to identify
those episodes on which we need to focus and on the direction in which the model fails.
This same methodology has been pro…tably employed in the business cycle literature
by Parkin (1988), Bencivenga (1992), Ingram, Kocherlakota, Savin (1994), Hall (1997),
Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2002), and Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002). Mulligan
(2002) uses this method to analyze changes in hours of work in the US over the 20th century,
while Cole and Ohanian (2004) use it to shed light on changes in hours worked during the
U.S. Great Depression.
In studying the e¤ects of taxes on labor supply, the study most similar to ours is Prescott
(2004). He assesses the extent to which the standard growth model with taxes can account
2

for the changes in hours of work for a small set of countries between two particular points
in time. Relative to Prescott, our contribution is fourfold. First, we extend the analysis to
a much larger set of countries. Second, we consider a much longer time period. Third, we
assess the equilibrium condition for all years in our data set and not just at two distinct
points in time. Fourth, we assess how several other modi…cations of the theory a¤ect the
…ndings.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we document the large and
persistent changes in total hours worked across OECD countries over the last …fty years. In
particular, we document the large reduction over time in the cross-sectional mean of hours
worked and the large dispersion in the extent of the decrease across countries. In Section
3 we describe the benchmark model and the methodology that we employ to construct
labor wedges from the static optimality condition. Section 4 presents our …ndings for the
benchmark model, and Section 5 considers several extensions. Section 6 extends the analysis
to consider distorting taxes. Section 7 carries out a statistical analysis of the wedges from
our benchmark analysis and several factors thought to be important in in‡uencing labor
market outcomes. Section 8 concludes.

2

Hours Worked in 21 OECD Countries: 1956-2004

In this section we describe some key features of the distribution of hours worked across 21
OECD countries for the period 1956-2004. Our measure of aggregate hours worked is the
product of total civilian employment and annual hours worked per person in employment,
divided by the size of the population aged 15-64.1 Speci…cally, we document the following
three features:
(1) On average, labor supply is falling: mean hours of work in these countries have
decreased substantially between 1956-2004.
(2) The magnitude of the decline in hours worked varies signi…cantly across countries
1

Information about data sources is contained in the Appendix.

3

between 1956 and 2004.
(3) Di¤erences in trend changes in hours worked account for much of the variance in
hours worked across countries and over time.
We begin with the behavior of average hours worked over time. Figure 1 plots the
cross-country average of hours worked for each year from 1956 to 2004.

[Insert here Figure 1. Mean Hours Worked]
As is easily seen, this time period has witnessed a dramatic decrease in mean hours
worked, with the 2004 value almost 20% less than the 1956 value. This decline occurs
at a relatively steady pace over the period 1956-1985, at which point mean hours worked
becomes relatively ‡at.
The second property that we establish is that changes in hours of work between 1956
and 2004 have been far from uniform across countries. Table 1 displays the value of hours
worked in 2004 relative to 1956 for all 21 countries in our sample.
[Insert here Table 1. Hours Worked in 2004 Relative to 1956]

While the average change is a 20% decrease, the changes range from an increase of 8% for
Canada to a decrease of 40% for Germany, with other countries distributed throughout.
It is also of interest to examine the time series changes for each of the countries. We
classify countries into 4 groups based on the trend behavior of hours worked between 1956
and 2004. Group 1 includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, and
Italy. These countries experienced the steepest decline in hours worked in the postwar
period, and exhibit a monotonic decline over time until hours worked level o¤ around
1990. Group 2 includes Japan, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, and the UK. Similar to Group
1, these countries experienced a monotonic decrease in hours prior to leveling o¤ at the
4

end of the period, but the overall decrease is of a smaller magnitude than for Group
1. Group 3 includes those countries for which there is no major trend in hours worked,
namely Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the US. The fourth and …nal group consists
of Greece, Ireland, Netherlands, Spain and Switzerland. A distinctive feature of this fourth
group is that the trend behavior in hours worked is not monotone. For simplicity, Figure
2 depicts the behavior of mean hours for Groups 1, 2 and 32 .
[Insert here Figure 2. Mean Hours Worked by Group]
Consistent with the de…nition of the three groups, Groups 1 and 2 both display substantial
decreases over time, with Group 1 showing the larger decline, while Group 3 displays
relatively little change over time.
The …nal property that we document is the importance of the di¤erences in trend
changes in hours worked in accounting for the dispersion in hours worked in the panel of
countries. We …rst note that the dispersion of hours worked across countries is large at
all points in time during the period 1956-2004. In particular, the cross-sectional standard
deviation of log hours averages roughly 0:12, and never falls below 0:09. In contrast, the
standard deviation of the cyclical component of log hours worked in the US time series
is only 0:02. To indicate the importance of di¤erences in trends in accounting for this
dispersion, we run a panel regression of log hours on a common constant term and a
country speci…c linear time trend:
log hit = a + bi t + "it
where hit is hours worked for country i in period t, and t runs from 1 to 49. The R-squared
from this regression is 0:76.3 In contrast, if we run the same regression imposing that the
trend coe¢ cient is the same across all countries then the R-squared drops to :26.
2

We do not include average hours worked for Group 4 because of the high heterogeneity within the
group. The …gure is available upon request.
3
If one adds a country speci…c intercept the R-squared for this regression increases to 0:89.

5

To summarize, the most striking features of this international comparison of hours
worked is that hours have fallen substantially in most countries. In addition, this process
of declining hours is not uniform, but di¤ers considerably across countries. Finally, these
di¤erences in trend rates of decline are the dominant source of dispersion of hours worked
in the panel of countries over the period 1956-2004. We next develop a benchmark growth
model to evaluate these long-run patterns.

3

Wedges in a Benchmark Model

Given that the one-sector growth model has become the standard framework for organizing and interpreting aggregate data, it is also the natural starting point for our analysis of
changes in aggregate hours worked across countries. In this section we describe our benchmark model and de…ne the concept of a wedge in the static …rst order condition governing
the choice of the household’s allocation of time that serve as the focus of our analysis.

3.1

Model

While the details of this model are standard, we describe them brie‡y in order to introduce
the notation that is needed subsequently. The economy consists of a single household with
utility de…ned over streams of (private) consumption (Ct ) and leisure time (H

Ht ) given

by:
1
X

t

U (Ct ; H

Ht )

(1)

t=0

where 0 <

< 1 is the discount factor. The household is endowed with H units of time

each period, and Ht represents time devoted to market work. As is standard, we restrict
the form of the utility function U to be consistent with balanced growth.4 We further
4

One may interpret the trend decline in hours worked as evidence against balanced growth preferences.
See, for example, Blanchard (2005). Our exercise should be intepreted as assessing the ability of a model
with balanced growth preferences to account for the long-term changes in hours worked.

6

restrict the utility function to be of the form:

U (Ct ; H
where

0, and 0

Ht ) =

log Ct + (1

)

(H

Ht )1
1

1

(2)

1. This form of the utility function is of particular interest

because varying the parameter

changes the elasticity of substitution between leisure and

consumption, which is known to be an important parameter in analyzing how various
factors in‡uence hours of work in equilibrium.5
Technology is speci…ed by a Cobb-Douglas production function:
Yt = At Kt Ht1

(3)

where At is a measure of technology at time t, and Kt and Ht represent inputs of capital
and labor services at time t. Output at time t must be divided between consumption and
investment (Xt ) and the capital stock evolves according to the standard law of motion:

Kt+1 = (1
where 0 <

3.2

)Kt + Xt

(4)

< 1 is the depreciation rate.

Wedges

We focus on the competitive equilibrium allocation for this economy. Combining the …rst
order conditions from the consumer and …rm problems, one derives the so-called “static”
…rst order condition as one of the conditions characterizing the competitive equilibrium
allocation:
U2 (Ct ; H
U1 (Ct ; H

Ht )
= F2 (Kt ; Ht ; At ):
Ht )

(5)

This condition states that in equilibrium, the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure must equal the marginal product of labor at each point in time. Given
5

Conditional on restricting attention to balanced growth preferences, the assumption of separability
plays no substantive role in the analysis.

7

our functional form assumptions it reduces to:
(1

)

Ct
= (1
(H Ht )

)

Yt
Ht

(6)

While this is only one of the conditions imposed by equilibrium, it has proven to be a
useful and widely-used diagnostic both to assess the model’s ability to account for observed
changes in hours, and to provide information as to what types of additional factors would
allow the model to better account for the data. As noted in the introduction, this analysis
has typically examined the changes in hours worked within a given country at business
cycle frequencies. Our goal is to use this condition to help shed light on the trend changes
documented in the previous section.
Because our interest is in assessing the extent to which this …rst order condition does
not hold in the data, it is convenient to introduce some notation to capture this. For
notational convenience we abstract from the country index in what follows. Let Ht , Yt , and
Ct denote actual time series data for a given country. We de…ne a time series for

t

for

this same country by requiring that the following equation hold at each point in time:
(1
We will refer to
t

t

)

Ht
= (1
(H Ht )

t )(1

)

Yt
Ct

(7)

as the wedge in period t. Note that given our de…nition, a value of

= 0 implies that the equilibrium …rst order condition holds exactly in the data. Written

somewhat more compactly,

t

can be expressed as:
t

M RSt
M P Lt

=1

(8)

where M RSt is the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption as implied by the data in period t, and M P Lt is the marginal product of labor as implied by
the data in period t. Thus, the wedge measures the percentage deviation between the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal product of labor. If the benchmark model is
successful, then the wedge factors will be small over time and across countries. For future
8

reference, we note that if the wedge is positive, this implies that hours in the model are
“too low”relative to hours in the data.

4

Results for the Benchmark Model

In this section we compute time series for the wedge for each of the 21 countries in our
sample, and analyze their properties. We report results for two di¤erent calculations. In
the …rst calculation we focus on the time series for each country considered individually.
The advantage of this approach is that it does not require us to assume that preference and
technology parameters are the same across countries. In the second calculation we assume
that technology and preference parameters are the same across countries and compute the
wedges required for the model to account for the cross-country dispersion in hours worked.

4.1

Country-Level Analysis

Letting i denote country and t denote year, de…ne Bit by:

Bit =

Hit
Cit
:
(H Hit ) Yit

(9)

It follows directly from equation (7) that:
1
1

it+s
it

=

Bit+s
Bit

(10)

It is apparent that one can compute the time series values for the wedge relative to some
benchmark year without any information about the values of

and .

Given that one of our interests is in understanding what factors are able to account
for the large changes in hours worked across time, we focus on the change in the wedge
over time as well, without trying to assess the absolute level of the wedge. In view of
this we normalize the wedge factor to equal 0 in what we call a normalization year for
all countries and then use equation (10) to compute the time series for the wedge relative
to the normalization year in all the other years. In what follows we choose 1980 as the
9

normalization year for all countries. Although it is not necessary to supply values for
and

to carry out this exercise, it is necessary to assume values for

compute a series for

it .

and H in order to

The results presented here are for the case in which preferences

are log in consumption and leisure, i.e., the limiting case as
sensitivity of the results to the choice of

tends to one. We discuss

later on. The value of H is set to 14 365 = 5110

for these calculations.
Given values for

and H, the time series for

can be computed given data for con-

sumption, output and hours worked.6 Our measure of output is GDP. For our benchmark
results in this section our measure of consumption is private consumption expenditures on
nondurables, services, and durables7 .
The …rst property we report is the time series for the cross-sectional average of wedge
factors across countries. This is shown in Figure 3, along with a line showing the change
in mean log hours relative to 1980.

[Insert Figure 3. Mean Wedge and Mean Hours]
The average wedge increases at a fairly steady rate from 1956 though to the mid 1980s,
at which point it levels o¤. Overall, the increase is about 0:4. Given our normalization of
the wedge to be zero in all countries in 1980, it is only the change in the wedge that has
any signi…cance. The negative comovement between the hours and wedge series is striking.
In fact, the correlation between the two series is nearly -1.00.
Before examining the series at the country level, we contrast the behavior of the average
wedge across the three groups de…ned earlier in the paper. This is done in Figure 4.

[Insert Figure 4. Mean Wedge by Group]
6

Details of the data used are provided in the Appendix.
While it would be of interest to use a measure of consumption which incorporates the ‡ow of services
from durables rather than expenditures on durables, we do not pursue it due to data limitations for a
number of countries.
7

10

Recalling the …gure that showed the behavior of mean hours for these three groups, we
note that there is again a striking pattern between the behavior of mean hours and mean
wedges even at the group level. Group 1 exhibits a larger change (in absolute value) for
both hours and the wedge as compared to Group 2. Hours and wedges are relatively ‡at
after 1985 for both groups as well. And Group 3 displays little trend for either hours or
the wedge.
We next examine the correlation between hours and wedges over time at the country
level. Because our main goal is to understand the changes in the trend component of hours
worked rather than the business cycle component, we isolate the trend component of each
series using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) …lter with a smoothing parameter of 100. Table 2
presents the correlations between the trend components of the two series.
[Insert Table 2. Correlation Hours and Wedges: Trend Components]
As the table indicates, the two series exhibit a very strong negative correlation across
virtually all countries. The majority of the values exceed 0:97 in absolute value, and only
three values are less than 0:80. Though we will not be interested in cyclical movements,
for completeness we report the correlations between the cyclical components in Table 3.

[Insert Table 3. Correlation Hours and Wedges: Cyclical Components]
Consistent with earlier studies, we …nd a very large and negative correlation for the US.
The table indicates that a negative correlation is found for all the other countries, though
the correlation is not as strong as for the US. The mean correlation across countries is equal
to

0:79.
Table 1 documented that trend changes in hours worked di¤ered signi…cantly across

countries. In light of this property of the data, we examine how trend changes in wedges
di¤er across countries, and how they are correlated with trend changes in hours worked.
11

Figure 5 plots the country-level pairs for the change in log hours worked from 1956 to 2004
and the change in wedges from 1956 to 2004.
[Insert Figure 5. Change in Wedges and Hours]
As the …gure indicates, changes in hours and changes in wedges are strongly negatively
correlated. In fact, the correlation between the two is

0:83.

The above statistics provide a fairly strong characterization of the evolution of the
wedges over time, together with their relation with the evolution of hours worked. For
completeness, given that we did not display hours worked in Group 4 (countries with nonmonotonic hours), we examine the wedges for these countries. In the interest of space we
show the results for Netherlands and Spain in Figures 6 and 7. Most noteworthy here is
the fact that in both cases, the turning points in trend hours are associated with turning
points in the wedge.

[Insert Figure 6. Wedges and Hours: Netherlands]
[Insert Figure 7. Wedges and Hours: Spain]

4.2

Cross-Country Comparison

To this point we have only compared the changes in wedges over time for di¤erent countries.
However, given the large dispersion in hours of work across countries at any point in time,
it is also of interest to assess the wedges associated with the cross-section of countries.
In order to make such a calculation one must be explicit about the relative values of
and

across countries. In this section we assume that these values are the same for all

countries. In this sense our calculations should be understood as measuring the wedges
that are implied by requiring that all countries have the same values for , , and .8
8

Note that no assumption is required regarding the relative value of the TFP parameter A, either across
time or across countries. Similarly, the analysis does not require any assumption regarding the values of
the discount factor , or the depreciation rate , since they do not enter the static …rst order condition.

12

With all parameters constant across countries, one can treat a cross-section of observations across countries analogously to how we previously treated observations across time for
a given country. In particular, we do this exercise for the 2004 cross-section and normalize
the wedge factor for the US to be equal to zero. Figure 8 shows the pairs of wedges and
log deviation of hours from the US value for the 21 countries in our sample.

[Insert Figure 8. Hours and Wedges Relative to US (2004) ]
Once again, there is a striking negative correlation between the values. The correlation
is equal to

0:82. This calculation can be repeated for each year of the sample. The results

are summarized in Figure 9, which simply reports the time series of the correlation between
hours worked and wedges for each cross-section.
[Insert Figure 9. Correlation of Hours and Wedges]
As Figure 9 shows, there is nothing special about the 2004 cross-section. At all points
in time, there is a strong negative correlation between hours of work and the wedge ranging
between

4.3

0:77 and

0:89.

The Role of Consumption/Output

The fact that our preceding analysis …nds large wedges implies that there are large differences in hours that the model does not account for, both in the time series and the
cross-section. While it is revealing that there is much that the model does not account
for, it is also of interest to learn how much of the variation in hours worked is accounted
for by the model. It is useful to …rst note that our …nding of a strong negative correlation
between hours and wedges does not necessarily imply that the model accounts for little of
the variation in hours. To see why, consider an example in which the model accounts for
half of all changes in hours worked. In this case one would still …nd large wedges and they
would still be strongly negatively correlated with hours, even though the model accounts
13

for half of the variation in hours. In this section we show that reality is quite far from this
hypothetical example. Speci…cally, we show that not only is the model unable to account
for the variation in hours worked, but that in many cases it actually predicts di¤erences in
hours of the opposite sign from that found in the data.
To begin our analysis, note that if

= 1, the expression for the static …rst-order

condition can be rearranged to yield:
Ht =

(1
1
(1 )
1

)

+

Ct
Yt

H

(11)

This condition makes it clear that the model predicts changes in Ht only to the extent that
there are changes in Ct =Yt , with the implied changes being negatively correlated. Assessing
the extent to which di¤erences in hours of work (either over time for a given country or
across countries at a point in time) are correlated with di¤erences in C=Y is a natural …rst
step to address the extent to which the model can account for the changes in hours worked.
From the perspective of accounting for the change in hours worked in a given country
between 1956 and 2004, the relevant calculation is the change in C=Y for that country
between those two years. Table 4 shows the change in C=Y for each country in our sample
over this time period.
[Insert Table 4. Changes in C=Y : 1956–2004 ]
Two points emerge. First, many of the changes are negative, while in order to account
for a decrease in hours one would require an increase in C=Y . Second, the correlation of
these changes with changes in hours worked is 0:12. The low correlation is evidenced by
Figure 10, which is a scatter plot for the changes in C=Y and the changes in (log) hours
worked between 1956 and 2004.

[Insert Figure 10. Changes in C/Y and Log Hours ]

14

Similar …ndings emerge when we examine cross-sectional di¤erences in the value of C=Y
at a given point in time. For example, in 2004, the correlation between di¤erences in log
hours and C=Y relative to the US is 0:23, and the scatter plot of values is shown in Figure
11.
[Insert Figure 11. C=Y and Hours in 2004 ]

Note that many counties have a C=Y ratio that di¤ers substantially from that in the US,
but since the di¤erence is negative the benchmark model predicts that this should be associated with larger values for hours worked rather than smaller, so that di¤erences in C=Y
actually contribute negatively to accounting for di¤erences in hours of work. Incidentally,
in the 2004 cross-section the US has the highest value of C=Y .
The preceding analysis has examined the relationship between H and C=Y at a qualitative level. The main conclusion that emerges is that from the perspective of the benchmark
model, the di¤erences in C=Y either over time for a given country or across countries at a
given point in time are typically of the wrong sign in order to account for the di¤erence in
hours of work.
Nonetheless, it is also of interest to ask what the model implies for the quantitative relation between C=Y and hours of work. To assess the quantitative implications of equation
(11) we need to specify values for

and . We assume

= 0:37,

= 1=3 and an initial

value of C=Y equal to 0:8. These values would be consistent with an investment to output
ratio of 0:2 and time to devoted to market work equal to 1=3 of the time endowment in the
steady state of the benchmark model. Changes in C=Y to 0:7 or 0:9 yield changes in H of
9:1% and

7:7% respectively. These results are a¤ected very little by reasonable changes

in , , or the initial value of C=Y .
It follows that in order to explain a drop of hours worked of 30 percent as was observed
in several countries, one would need to observe an increase in C=Y of nearly 0:4. Moreover,
15

in order to explain di¤erences in hours worked in the 2004 cross-section one would need
the countries with low hours of work to have C=Y ratios that are as much as 0:5 higher
than in the countries with high hours of work.
To summarize, the main …nding of this subsection is that the magnitude of di¤erences
in C=Y found either in the time series or the cross-section are not large enough to be a
quantitatively signi…cant factor in accounting for the variation in hours found in the data.
In addition, qualitatively the di¤erences in C=Y move in the direction opposite to that
required to account for the di¤erences in hours.

5

Sensitivity

In this section we examine the sensitivity of the previous …ndings along three dimensions.
First, we ask to what extent the results are a¤ected by the value of the labor supply
elasticity parameter . Second, we ask to what extent the results are a¤ected if we allow
for the possibility that government consumption is a substitute for private consumption.
Lastly, we examine how the results are a¤ected by considering Stone-Geary preferences
that include a subsistence consumption term.

5.1

Sensitivity to Labor Supply Elasticity

Our previous calculations were for the case in which we assigned the labor supply elasticity
parameter, ; equals 1 (log utility over leisure). In this subsection we examine how our
previous results are a¤ected by the value of this parameter. The key observation is that
subject to normalizing the wedge to equal zero in a particular year, di¤erent choices of
serve simply to either increase or decrease all wedges in absolute value. While the change
is not exactly proportionate, it is su¢ ciently close to proportionate that none of our earlier
conclusions is signi…cantly a¤ected. Speci…cally, our …ndings regarding relative magnitudes
of changes and correlations all continue to hold.
To see the e¤ect of changes in

recall that
16

is de…ned by:

1

t

(1
(1

=

)
Ht
Ct
) (H Ht ) Yt

(12)

For simplicity, assume that there is no variation in C=Y . Letting t = b denote the base
year, and following our earlier procedure that normalizes the wedge to be zero in period b,
the wedge in period t is given by:

1

t

It follows that changing the value of

=

Ht H
(
Hb H

Hb
)
Ht

(13)

changes the value of the wedge solely through its

e¤ect on the second term on the right-hand side. This term, however, has the property
that it is strictly increasing in Ht and is equal to zero when Ht = Hb ; independently of .
Hence, the parameter

a¤ects only the slope of the relation between Ht and

To illustrate the e¤ect of changes in

on the implied series for

implied time series for the wedge for France, assuming values of

t.

, Figure 12 shows the
equal to 0, 1, and 3.

[Insert Figure 12. Wedge and Labor Supply Elasticity ]
As the …gure indicates, in all three cases the series exhibits the same upward sloping
behavior. The only e¤ect is to alter the e¤ect of the slope. As

increases the increase in

the wedge between 1956 and 2004 increases, being equal to 0:47; 0:60 and 0:80 for the cases
of

5.2

= 0; 1 and 3 respectively.

Government Consumption

Our benchmark calculations assumed that only private consumption entered into the household’s utility function. All of the economies that we are studying, however, have signi…cant
government expenditure on consumption, and for most countries this has increased over
time. Our analyses thus far are consistent with two di¤erent assumptions about government spending on goods and services. One is that households do not attach any value
to the goods and services provided by the government. The second is that households do
17

value these goods and services but that they enter the utility function in a manner that
is separable with respect to private consumption and leisure. In contrast, if government
consumption is at least partially a substitute for private consumption, our …ndings could
be a¤ected. Given that governments provide many di¤erent types of goods and services,
some of which are at least partial substitutes for private consumption, and that the particular activities in which they are involved vary considerably both across time and across
countries, it is likely to be quite challenging to account for government consumption in the
most appropriate way.
However, we can gauge the extent to which incorporating government expenditures into
the analysis will a¤ect our results by examining the polar extreme case to that previously
considered, i.e., we now consider the case in which households consider all government
expenditures on goods and services to be a perfect substitute for private consumption. To
do this, we adjust our previous calculations by replacing C=Y with (C + G)=Y , where
G is government expenditures on goods and services. This latter speci…cation is clearly
an overestimate of how much households value government spending, as certain categories
of government spending (e.g., military expenditures) provide little substitution for private
consumption.
A very simple …nding emerges when we do this exercise. The e¤ect of this change is to
reduce the time series change in the average wedge by a small amount, and to leave all of
the previous properties unchanged. This is well-illustrated by looking at the time series for
the mean value of the wedge. Figure 13 shows the two mean wedge series based on whether
government expenditures on goods and services are included.
[Insert Figure 13. Wedge and Government Consumption]

This …gure shows that the two series move together very closely, with the only di¤erence
being that the original series starts at a slightly lower value.

18

This change also does not a¤ect our results concerning the extent to which di¤erences
in C=Y can account for di¤erences in hours of work, either across time within a country,
or across countries at a point in time. The main e¤ect is that di¤erences in (C + G)=Y are
much less than di¤erences in C=Y both in the cross-section and the time series, but the
correlations of di¤erences in (C + G)=Y and H remain weakly positive in both cases. In
fact, the reason that the wedges decrease when one uses (C + G)=Y is that by decreasing
the di¤erences in this ratio we are decreasing the impact of a factor that for the most part
goes in the wrong direction.
One may conjecture that very di¤erent results might be obtained if the nature of government consumption changes over time and di¤ers across countries (in other words, the
extent to which it substitutes for private consumption varies). While such a possibility
certainly increases the potential for variation in (C + G)=Y to play a greater role, we report two simple calculations that suggest that it is somewhat unlikely for this role to be
quantitatively important.
The …rst calculation is concerned with the time series changes within countries. Consider
a country such as France, which exhibits one of the larger decreases in hours of work between
1956 and 2004, equal to 35%. In order to be consistent with this decrease, the model would
require that C=Y increases during this period. An extreme lower bound for C=Y in 1956
for France would be the ratio of private consumption to GDP. And an extreme upper bound
for C=Y in 2004 would be the ratio of private plus government consumption to GDP. But
even with this extreme case the increase in C=Y is only from 0:58 to 0:76. With the values
of

and

used earlier, the predicted decrease in H is only 13%.

The second calculation carries out a similar exercise in the context of the 2004 crosssection. Again, an extreme lower bound on C=Y for the US is the ratio of private consumption to GDP, while an extreme upper bound for other countries is the ratio of private
plus government consumption to GDP. This lower bound for the US is equal to 0:65, while
the extreme upper bound is less than 0:8 except for three countries: Greece, the UK, and
19

Portugal. Again, even extreme assumptions do not suggest that variation in C=Y plays a
large role. These calculations show that government spending does not eliminate the large
wedges in the …rst-order condition governing labor supply.

5.3

Subsistence Consumption

One of the features in the data is that almost all countries experience a decrease in hours
between 1956 and 1985. There is substantial evidence to indicate that the process of
development is initially associated with a decrease in the workweek, after which it appears
to level o¤.9 Stone-Geary preferences of the form:
U (Ct ; H

Ht ) =

log(Ct

C) + (1

)

(H

Ht )1
1

1

(14)

can account for this phenomenon. With preferences of this form, a country that starts
from a low initial level of productivity and experiences ongoing technological change that is
labor augmenting will asymptotically converge to a balanced growth path in which hours of
work are constant, but during the early part of the transition to this asymptotic balanced
growth path the economy will experience a decrease in hours of work. It is only in the
limit as Ct becomes large compared to C that the balanced growth path is achieved. In
this regard it is noteworthy that the four countries that do not experience any signi…cant
drop in hours worked in the early part of the time period being studied, Australia, Canada,
New Zealand and the US, are all among the most productive countries in the sample as of
the beginning of the period.10 In view of this we explore the possibility that the dynamics
associated with subsistence consumption might be relevant in accounting for some part of
the decrease in hours of work during our sample period.
9

See for example, Maddisson (1995) for estimates of changes in the annual hours of work per person in
employment.
10
Rogerson (2006a) used this observation to argue that di¤erences in productivity in the early part of
the time period studied are a potentially important factor in accounting for di¤erences in hours worked
across countries.

20

Repeating the previous analysis, we obtain the following expression for the wedge:
1

t

=

(1
(1

Ht
)
Ct C
) (H Ht )
Yt

In order to implement this extension one needs to assume a value of C. We report
results here that correspond to a value of C equal to 10% of total US consumption in
1956. For these results we assume that the measure of consumption is the sum of private
consumption plus government expenditure on goods and services. The results were quite
similar when C was set to 5% of total US consumption in 1956. We begin by showing the
e¤ect that this has on the mean wedge series, as compared to our original calculations.
Figure 14 shows the results for the trend components of the two series for average wedges.
[Insert Figure 14. E¤ect of Subsistence on

]

Three features are worth noting. First, the two curves have the same qualitative features. They both exhibit relatively steady increases up until the mid 1980s, and are relatively ‡at thereafter. Second, the magnitude of the change is signi…cantly larger for the
case without subsistence consumption. Third, in the post 1980 period, the two curves are
virtually identical. This last …nding is perhaps not too surprising–since the e¤ect of the subsistence term diminishes as consumption increases, we expect that the e¤ect of subsistence
will decrease over the course of the time period being studied.
Once again, although this extension to the benchmark model does reduce the magnitude of the wedge, all of the properties that we previously established continue to hold:
di¤erences in hours worked are associated with large di¤erences in wedges, both in the time
series and in the cross-section. As one additional illustration of this, in Figure 15 we plot
the pairs of changes in log hours and changes in wedges between 1956 and 2004 for the 21
countries in our sample.
[Insert Figure 15. Change in Hours and Wedges with Subsistence]
As before, this plot shows a strong negative correlation between the two variables.
21

5.4

Summary

Having explored sensitivity along three dimensions, and presented a substantial amount of
additional information, we summarize the main message from these exercises. Although
there are variations/extensions that serve to reduce the magnitude of the wedges that we
found earlier, we …nd that the standard growth model is unable to account for a large part
of the changes in hours worked during the period 1956-2004.

6

The Role of Taxes

A simple conclusion emerges from the preceding analysis. Any extension to the standard
growth model that is going to successfully account for the large changes in hours of work
over time and across countries must be capable of producing a “static”…rst order condition
that in equilibrium contains a term like the wedge that we introduced earlier. It is relatively
well-known that various factors can give rise to such wedges, including distorting taxation,
product market regulation, non-competitive wage setting and labor market regulation. In
this section we extend the original model to include a government that taxes labor income
and uses the proceeds to both purchase goods and services and fund a transfer program.
Our motivation for focusing on taxes is two-fold. First, prior work by Prescott (2004)
and Rogerson (2005) has argued that taxation may be a quantitatively important factor in
accounting for changes in hours worked over time for a small set of countries, and Davis
and Henrekson (2004) argue that taxes help to account for di¤erences in hours worked in
a cross-section of countries. Second, although there are issues associated with measuring
tax rates, from the list of factors just o¤ered, taxes may be the factor that is easiest to
measure, making them a natural …rst choice.
In this section we therefore repeat the earlier analysis to see how incorporating taxes
will a¤ect the …ndings. We …rst modify the theoretical framework to include taxes into the
wedge calculation. We then graphically present the wedges from the model with taxes, and

22

compare them to the wedges without taxes. We also conduct a complementary analysis that
graphically compares hours as predicted by the model to actual hours. We …nally examine
particular episodes/countries that are puzzling from the perspective of the theory and show
how our views on these puzzles are shaped by incorporating taxes into the analysis.

6.1

Model

The only change that we make to the earlier model is to add a government sector that
places a proportional tax of

ht

on labor income and

ct

on consumption expenditures.

Government spending on goods and services in period t is given by Gt , and the remaining
tax revenues are used to …nance a lump sum transfer Tt so as to balance the budget each
period.
We modify preferences to explicitly allow for the possibility that consumers value the
goods and services purchased by the government. In particular, we assume a one period
utility function of the form:
U (Ct ; H

Ht ; Gt ) =

log(Ct + Gt

C) + (1

)

Ht )1
1

(H

1

(15)

While the assumption that private and public consumption are additive is somewhat restrictive, as previously noted, consideration of the two extreme cases of

= 0 and

=1

will be su¢ cient for us to bound the importance of G for the analysis. While we incorporate
the subsistence term C in the preferences, we will present results for the case in which this
value is set to zero as well as to a positive value.
Solving for a competitive equilibrium in this case, and following the same steps as before,
one can derive the following modi…ed version of the “static”…rst order condition:
U2 (Ct ; H
U1 (Ct ; H

(1
H t ; Gt )
=
(1 +
H t ; Gt )

ht )
ct )

F2 (Kt ; Ht ; At )

To simplify notation it is convenient to de…ne a single tax term
consumption taxes as follows:
23

t

(16)

by combining labor and

(1

t)

(1
(1 +

ht )
ct )

(17)

:

Given our functional forms, this equation now reduces to:
(1

)

Ht
= (1
(H Ht )

t )(1

)

Yt
(Ct + Gt

(18)

C)

and if we introduce the wedge as before we now have:
(1

)

Ht
= (1
(H Ht )

e t )(1

t )(1

)

Yt
(Ct + Gt

C)

(19)

where e t denotes the after-tax wedge.

6.2

Results with Taxes

We now quantitatively evaluate how distorting taxation in‡uences the size of the wedge
over time and across the countries. Again we consider the

= 1 case as our benchmark.

In order to compute the wedge we need series for both labor and consumption taxes, plus
a value for . We use series for average taxes from McDaniel (2006), who extends the
procedure of Prescott (2004) to a larger set of countries and a longer time period.11 We
note that unlike Prescott, we do not make any adjustment to turn average tax rates into
marginal tax rates. Due to data limitations we do not have tax series for all countries, so
we will only present results for 15 countries in what follows.12 Consistent with our earlier
results, it turns out that the value of

matters very little for most of the countries in our

sample. For the results presented below we assume that

= 1.

We begin by showing how the inclusion of taxes a¤ects the mean series for wedges, …rst
for the case where C = 0, and next for the case in which C is set to 10 percent of US
11
Following Mendoza et al (1994), Carey and Rabesona (2005) have produced series for average labor
tax rates for a large set of countries from 1970 on. The series from McDaniel produce very similar values
for di¤erences in tax rates across time and countries for the overlapping time periods and countries. We
use the McDaniel series because there are large changes in hours in the early part of the period that is not
covered by the other available series. Our …ndings are virtually identical when we use the other tax series
for the larger sample of countries for the smaller time period.
12
The countries not included are Denmark, Greece, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, and Portugal. We
include Australia, although the tax series for this country begins in 1960 rather than 1956.

24

consumption in 1956. Figure 16a shows the average wedge series for the …rst case, and for
comparison includes the comparable series derived assuming no taxes.13
[Insert Figure 16a. Mean Wedge and Taxes]
The contribution of taxes is striking. Whereas the original wedge calculated without
taxes exhibited a large positive trend, the new series displays virtually no trend. It follows
that this model is able to account for the fact that average hours of work have decreased
about 20%.
Figure 16b reports the mean after-tax wedge calculated under Stone-Geary preferences,
i.e., the case in which C is positive. The new series not only eliminate the large positive
trend from mean wedges, but actually induces a downward trend. We will return to this
point later when we analyze group patterns.
[Insert Figure 16b. Mean Wedge and Taxes (Stone-Geary)]
Next we examine the patterns at a more disaggregated level. We begin by displaying the
mean wedge series for Groups 1-3 as before, suitably modi…ed due to the sample restriction.
Again, we present …gures both for the case of C = 0 and C equal to ten percent of US
consumption in 1956. These are contained in Figure 17a and 17b.
[Insert Figure 17. Mean Wedges, Groups 1-3]
Several interesting patterns emerge. We begin by discussing Figure 17a, which does
not allow for subsistence consumption. The average wedge for the Group 1 countries still
displays a period of steady increase, but this period of an increasing wedge ends in the early
1970s, as opposed to the mid 1980s without taxes. Moreover, while in our initial analysis
the mean wedge increased by about 0:5 for this group, in this …gure the increase is only
13

The no-tax series in this …gure is also computed for the 15 country sample, and so is not identical to
that depicted earlier.

25

about 0:15. For Group 2, the pro…le has switched from having a substantial upward trend
without taxes to being relatively ‡at with taxes. The implication is that once the model
is augmented to allow for taxes, it is now able to explain the bulk of the decrease in hours
in these countries. Finally, the series for Group 3 shows a substantial downward trend,
and one that accelerates around 1980. Overall the decrease is about 0:15. In contrast, the
wedge series for this group from the original analysis was relatively ‡at. For this group,
the issue becomes how to explain why hours worked have not fallen given the changes in
taxes.
When subsistence consumption is incorporated, the results are further modi…ed. Perhaps not surprisingly given our earlier …ndings on the e¤ects of adding subsistence consumption, this modi…cation induces a negative trend in the wedge series. The overall result
is that the wedge series for Group 1 is now relatively ‡at while the trend series for Groups
2 and 3 display downward trends.
[Insert Figure 17b. Mean Wedges, Groups 1-3 (Stone-Geary)]
Based on this analysis, we conclude that once one allows for subsistence consumption,
taxes are able to account for the bulk of the change in hours worked in the countries
belonging to Group 1. For Groups 2 and 3 the puzzle is to account for the fact that hours
of work did not decrease by more than they did in the data.

6.3

Predicted and Actual Hours

Thus far we have presented our results by reporting properties of the wedge series. Another
useful calculation is to solve for the series of hours of work for each country that is consistent
with no wedge given observed values for C, G, Y and taxes. Comparing this series to the
actual series for hours of work provides some perspective on the extent to which the model
is able to account for the data. The advantage of this approach is that it is perhaps easier
to interpret a deviation between actual hours and model hours than it is to interpret the
signi…cance of a wedge of a given magnitude.
26

Because our wedges are all normalized to be zero in a particular year, when we do the
calculation for hours we also need to normalize model hours in a particular year. In what
follows we have normalized model hours so that hours worked in 1956 are the same as in
the data. For simplicity, we present a few representative countries to illustrate our results,
namely the Netherlands, Germany, Sweden and the US. Figures 18-21 report the actual
and predicted series for these countries, for the speci…cation which includes subsistence
consumption.
[Insert Figure 18. Actual and Predicted: Netherlands]
[Insert Figure 19. Actual and Predicted: Germany]
[Insert Figure 20. Actual and Predicted: Sweden]
[Insert Figure 21. Actual and Predicted: US]

As noted, we chose these four countries because they illustrate the variety of outcomes.
The Netherlands is a case in which actual and predicted hours are very similar. We obtain
this result for Finland as well. Note, in particular, that in the case of the Netherlands
the model is able to capture the non-monotonic behavior of hours. Germany is a case
in which the model is able to account for a large share of the decline in hours worked,
but not all of it. Other countries …tting this pattern are Austria, Belgium, France, Italy,
Japan and UK. Switzerland and Spain fall also in this category, but while for the former
the model replicates qualitatively the non-monotonic behavior displayed by hours worked,
for the latter this is not so. We …nd Sweden to be a particularly interesting case in that
the model predicts a larger drop than what we observe in the data. Finally, the US is a
country which shows little trend in hours of work, but for which the model predicts that
there should be a small decrease. Other countries …tting this pattern are Australia and
Canada.

27

6.4

Puzzling Episodes

One of the useful products of our analysis is a comprehensive analysis of which time periods
in which countries are “puzzling” from the perspective of the growth model that incorporates various features. Simply put, if the change in the wedge for a particular country in
a given time period is “large”, then this represents an episode which is puzzling in the
context of the speci…cation in which the wedge is derived. Since the growth model is the
standard benchmark model in macroeconomics, this information should be very useful in
helping to focus future research e¤orts in the area.
In this spirit, we contrast how incorporating taxes alters one’s views about which
episodes are puzzling, and what the nature of the puzzle is. In particular, we compute
changes in wedges over …ve time periods for our sample of 15 countries, comparing pre-tax
changes in the wedge to after-tax changes (both with and without a subsistence term). The
…ve time periods are 1956-1964, 1965-1974, 1975-1984, 1985-1994 and 1995-2003. In order
to summarize this information, Table 5 shows the frequency count for the distribution of
changes in wedges across the time periods for the three di¤erent cases.
[Insert Table 5. Distribution of Changes in Wedges by Decade]
As a rough guide to interpreting the sizes of these changes in wedges, we note that with
= 1 a 10 percent increase in the wedge corresponds to roughly a gap between actual and
predicted hours between 6 and 7 percent. Given that business cycle ‡uctuations may involve
swings in hours on the order of 6

8 percent from peak to trough, we consider a criterion

in which we isolate those episodes experiencing changes in the wedge exceeding 0:125 in
absolute value as reasonable. When taxes are not included in the analysis, the number
of such episodes is 25, and all but two of them are cases in which the wedge increases.
Not surprisingly, most episodes are concentrated in countries belonging to Group 1, with
France and Belgium experiencing large changes in three out of …ve decades. The two
negative changes in the wedge, on the other side, refer to Spain and Netherlands during
28

the last decade. Again, this …nding does not come as a surprise given that hours in these
two countries display remarkable non-monotonicities.
After including taxes in the analysis, we obtain a di¤erent picture. When we do not
consider subsistence consumption, the number of episodes with large changes is only 14,
with 9 of these displaying an increase in the wedge. More generally, Table 5 indicates
that the distribution of changes in wedges is more concentrated around 0, and is much
less skewed toward positive values. When we consider after-tax wedge changes with StoneGeary preferences, instead, we obtain 13 episodes with changes larger than 0:125 in absolute
value. However, in 9 out of 13 cases we measure a large decrease in the wedge: Spain alone
accounts for 4 of these episodes (and 1 with positive changes) while Italy accounts for 2 of
them.

7

Statistical Analysis of Other Factors

There are many institutional, policy, and regulatory factors other than taxes that are
typically thought to in‡uence the determination of hours of work. Incorporating many of
them into the analysis requires substantial extensions of the model, and do not produce
simple analytical expressions. We therefore leave this task for future work.
However, we felt that a simple statistical analysis might be valuable in giving a crude
sense of the possible importance of these other factors. The idea of this analysis is to
check which factors might be highly correlated with the wedges that are produced from
our benchmark analysis. Loosely speaking, any factor that is not highly correlated with
the wedges is probably not likely to be of great importance in accounting for changes in
hours worked over time. Our strategy is to perform panel regressions to investigate the
importance of taxes and indices of labor market institutions in explaining the evolution in
wedges. We stress that our exercise is not intended to provide estimates of deep parameters,
but simply some prima facie evidence regarding the potential importance of various factors.
With respect to the institutional variables, we refer the reader to the Labour Market
29

Institutions Database constructed by Nickell and Nunziata (2001) and collect the following
variables:
1. EP = index for Employment Protection
2. UDNET = Net Union Density
3. CO and COW = measures of bargaining coordination
4. BRR = Bene…t Replacement Ratio
5. BD = Bene…t Duration
These variables have been used extensively in the literature to capture institutional
di¤erences that are of potential importance in accounting for labor market outcomes. Our
speci…cation is

log(1
where

it

it )

= ai + b log(1

it )

+

0

Xit + "it

is the time series of wedges, ai is a country …xed e¤ect,

it

is the tax rate used

in our analysis, and Xit includes the institutional regressors14 . Data on the institutional
variables restricts the sample period to the years 1975-1995 and our sample includes all
15 countries considered in our previous analysis.15 The wedge series that we use in these
regressions corresponds to the values calculated when we include government consumption in our measure of household consumption, but assumes that there is no subsistence
consumption.16 Table 6 reports our regression results.
14

Including a country …xed e¤ect ai is consistent with the exercise in which we did not impose that the
preference and technology parameters and were the same across countries. We also ran the regressions
with the variables in levels instead of logarithm. Results are not a¤ected.
15
Although the average hours series is relatively ‡at after the early 1980s, there is still a great deal of
variation across countries during the period 1975-1995.
16
We note that subsistence consumption is mostly relevant in the period 1956-1970, when consumption
levels are lower.

30

[Insert Figure Table 6. Regression Results. Dependent Variable: Wedge]
There are three main …ndings. First, taxes are able to account for a signi…cant fraction
of the variation in wedges. Second, this …nding is una¤ected by the inclusion of any of the
other factors, either individually or collectively. Third, although many of the other factors
are statistically signi…cant, they add relatively little explanatory power either individually
or collectively.
While these regressions can only be interpreted as identifying correlations and partial
correlations, we …nd it interesting that of the factors considered, taxes appear to be the
most highly correlated.

8

Summary and Conclusion

We have used the neoclassical growth model to shed light on the large reduction in hours
worked observed in 21 OECD countries over the last 50 years, and the large variation in
the magnitude of this reduction across countries. The standard growth model without
distortions is able to account for virtually none of the observed reduction in hours worked.
In contrast, a model that allows for tax distortions as observed in the data is able to account
for virtually all of the average reduction across countries. Looking at individual countries,
we …nd that in some cases the model implies too large of a reduction in hours, while in
others it implies too small of a reduction. Future work should focus on understanding what
additional factors might account for these discrepancies between theory and data.
There are several avenues which we think are likely to be important. First, our analysis
has abstracted from potentially important features of the tax and transfer schemes. For
example, Ragan (2005) and Rogerson (2006b) argue that the e¤ect of tax distortions in
Scandinavian countries is partly undone by the fact that tax revenues are used to subsidize
market activities such as child and elderly care. Second, our analysis has abstracted from
home production. Recent work by Aguiar and Hurst (2005) and Francis and Ramey (2005)
31

shows that the increase in market work in the US over the last 40 years re‡ects a decrease
in time spent in home production and not a reduction in leisure. Additionally, Freeman and
Schettkat (2006) show that time devoted to home production in many European countries
is higher than in the US. The lack of time series data on home production precludes
one carrying out our exercise in a model that explicitly allows for home production, but
assessing the impact of home production on our …ndings remains a relevant issue.17 Third,
it is important to assess the role of other factors in accounting for the wedges that we have
measured.

17

Ingram et al (1994) show how to infer a time series for time spent in home production for a given
country assuming that the wedge series is identically zero. This calculation is of interest, but cannot be
used to determine the e¤ect of adding home production on the size of the wedge.

32

9

Appendix : Data

Data on consumption, government consumption and GDP are taken from PWT.
Data on employment and population are from OECD’s Economic Outlook and Main Economic Indicators. Series for hours worked are from Groningen Growth and Development
Centre (GGDC) and The Conference Board. For population we consider working age population (between 15 and 64 years old), while hours is the total number of hours worked
over the year divided by the average numbers of people in employment.
In our regressions, we use as measures of institutional variables the indices available from
the Nickell-Nunziata Labor Market Institutional database (2001). We invite the reader to
consult the original source for the exact details behind the construction of these variables.

33

References
[1] Aguiar, M. and AE. Hurst, (2006), "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of
Time over Five Decades", NBER Working Paper 12082.
[2] Bencivenga, Valerie R., (1992),"An Econometric Study of Hours and Output Variation
with Preference Shocks", International Economic Review, 33(2), pp. 449-71.
[3] Blanchard, O. (2005), “The Economic Future of Europe,” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
[4] Chari, V.V., Kehoe Patrick J. and McGrattan Ellen R., (2004), ”Business Cycle Accounting”, NBER Working Paper 10351.
[5] Cole, Harold and Ohanian, Lee E. (2002), “The Great U.S. and U.K. Depressions
through the Lens of Neoclassical Theory, American Economic Review.
[6] Davis, S., and Henrekson, M. (2004), “Tax E¤ects on Work Activity, Industry Mix and
Shadow Economy Size: Evidence from Rich Country Comparisons”, NBER Working
Paper #10509.
[7] Francis. N. and V. Ramey (2005) “A Century of Work and Leisure,” mimeo, UCSD,
2005.
[8] Freeman, R., and Schettkat R., “Marketization of Household Production and the EUUS Gap in Work”, Economic Policy 20 (2005), 6-50.
[9] Gali’, Jordi, Gertler, Mark and Lopez-Salido, J. David, (2002), “Mark-ups, Gaps, and
the Welfare Cost of Business Fluctuations”, NBER Working Paper 8850.
[10] Hall, Robert E, (1997), “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time”,
Journal of Labor Economics, January, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 223-250.

34

[11] Ingram, Beth, Kocherlakota, Narayana and Savin, N.E., (1994), “Explaining Business
Cycle: A Multiple Shock Approach”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 34 (3), 415-428.
[12] Maddison, A., Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992, OECD, Paris, 1995.
[13] McDaniel, Cara, (2006), “E¤ective Tax Rates for 15 OECD Countries: 1950-2003”,
mimeo, Arizona State University.
[14] Mulligan, Casey B., (2002), "A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions", NBER Working
Paper 8774.
[15] Nickell, S. and L. Nunziata (2001), ”Labor Market Institutions Database”, Center for
Economic Performance.
[16] Parkin, Michael, (1988), "A Method for Determining Whether Parameters in Aggregative Models are Structural", Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
29, pp.215-52.
[17] Prescott, Edward C., (2004), ”Why Do Americans Work So Much More than Europeans?”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 28, No. 1, July,
pp. 2-13.
[18] Ragan, K., “Taxes, Transfers and Time Use: Fiscal Policy in a Household Production
Model,”mimeo, University of Chicago, 2005.
[19] Rogerson, Richard, (2005), “Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European Labor Market Outcomes,”mimeo, Arizona State University.
[20] Rogerson, Richard (2006a), “Understanding Di¤erences in Hours Worked,”Review of
Economic Dynamics 9, 365-409.
[21] Rogerson, Richard, (2006b), ”Taxation and Market Work: Is Scandinavia an Outlier?”,
forthcoming, Economic Theory.
35

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France

Table 1. Hours Worked in 2004 Relative to 1956
0:97
Germany
0:60
Norway
0:82
0:74
Greece
0:99
Portugal
0:84
0:70
Ireland
0:70
Spain
0:86
1:08
Italy
0:74
Sweden
0:80
0:71
Japan
0:85
Switzerland
0:83
0:75
Netherlands 0:81
United Kingdom 0:79
0:67
New Zealand 1:05
United States
1:01

36

Table 2. Correlation Hours and Wedges: Trend Components
Australia
0:88
Germany
1:00
Norway
0:99
Austria
1:00
Greece
0:07
Portugal
0:82
Belgium
0:98
Ireland
0:97
Spain
0:99
Canada
0:57
Italy
0:98
Sweden
0:99
Denmark
0:99
Japan
0:96
Switzerland
0:98
Finland
0:98
Netherlands
0:98
UK
0:95
France
1:00
New Zealand
0:79
US
0:96

37

Table 3. Correlation Hours and Wedges: Cyclical Components
Australia
0:80
Germany
0:83
Norway
0:75
Austria
0:78
Greece
0:39
Portugal
0:74
Belgium
0:76
Ireland
0:72
Spain
0:93
Canada
0:88
Italy
0:82
Sweden
0:88
Denmark
0:70
Japan
0:65
Switzerland
0:76
Finland
0:81
Netherlands
0:83
UK
0:90
France
0:81
New Zealand
0:92
US
0:94

38

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France

Table
0:04
0:03
0:11
0:08
0:24
0:10
0:04

4. Changes in C=Y : 1956–2004
Germany
0:09
Norway
Greece
0:01
Portugal
Ireland
0:35
Spain
Italy
0:15
Sweden
Japan
0:11
Switzerland
Netherlands
0:00
UK
New Zealand
0:02
US

39

0:19
0:20
0:09
0:21
0:03
0:12
0:10

Table 5. Changes in Wedges by Decade
Number of Observations
Change in Wedges

Pre-Tax Wedges

After-Tax Wedges
Standard Pref.

Stone-Geary Pref.

2

5

9

( :125; :075]

4

7

14

( :075; :025)

7

11

16

[ :025; +:025]

13

18

13

(+025; +:075)

17

15

11

[+:075; +:125)

9

9

7

23

9

4

:125

+:125

40

Table 6. Regression Results. Dependent Variable:Wedge
Variable

(1)

(2)

Tax

1.051

1.010

(0 .0 5 3 )

(0 .0 5 4 )

EP

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1.101 1.073 1.035 1.076
(0 .0 5 4 )

(0 .0 5 3 )

(0 .0 5 3 )

(0 .0 6 1 )

(8)

0.925

1.000

(0 .0 5 7 )

(0 .0 6 4 )

-0.045

-0.043

(0 .0 1 6 )

(0 .0 1 7 )

UD

CO

0.239

0.202

(0 .0 6 5 )

(0 .0 6 6 )

0.075

0.070

(0 .0 3 2 )

(0 .0 3 5 )

COW

BRR

0.028

0.006

(0 .0 1 3 )

(0 .0 1 4 )

0.029

0.053

(0 .0 3 6 )

(0 .0 3 7 )

-0.155 -0.139

BD

R2

(7)

0.470

0.479

0.485 0.476 0.476 0.471

41

(0 .0 2 9 )

(0 .0 2 9 )

0.501

0.528

Figure 1. Mean Hours Worked

1400

1350

Mean Hours Worked

1300

1250

1200

1150

1100

1050

1000
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980
Year

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

Figure 2. Mean Hours Worked by Group

1450
1400
1350
1300

Hours Worked

1250
1200
1150
1100
1050
1000
950
900
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976
Group 1

1980

1984

Year Group 2

1988

1992
Group 3

1996

2000

2004

Figure 3. Mean Wedge and Mean Hours

0.2

0.1

Change from 1980

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980
Year
Wedge

1984

1988
Hours

1992

1996

2000

2004

Figure 4. Mean Wedge by Group

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

Group 1

1980

1984

Group 2

1988

1992

Group 3

1996

2000

2004

Figure 5. Change in Wedges and Hours

0.2

0.1

Chnage in Log Hours 1956 -2004

0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6
-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Change in Wedge 1956 -2004

0.8

1.0

1.2

Figure 6. Wedge and Hours: Netherlands

0.4
0.3
0.2

Change from 1980

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
1956

1964

1972

1980

1988

Year

Wedge

Log Hours

1996

2004

Figure 7. Wedge and Hours: Spain

0.4
0.3
0.2

Change from 1980

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
1956

1964

1972

1980

1988

Year
Wedge

Log Hours

1996

2004

Figure 8. Hours and Wedge Relative to US (2004)

0.6

Wedge Factors

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
-0.4

-0.35

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

Log Hours Relative to US

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

Figure 9. Correlation of Hours and Wedges

-0.7

Correlation of Wedge and Hours

-0.75

-0.8

-0.85

-0.9

-0.95

-1
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980
Year

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

Figure 10. Changes in C/Y and Hours
0.2

0.1

Change in Log Hours

0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5

-0.6
-0.35

-0.30

-0.25

-0.20

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

Change in C/Y

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Figure 11. Changes in C/Y and Hours in 2004
0.05

0

Difference in Log Hours from US

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15

-0.2

-0.25

-0.3

-0.35

-0.4
-0.35

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

Difference in C/Y from US

-0.1

-0.05

0

Figure 12. Wedge and Labor Supply Elasticity
0.4

0.2

Wedge

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

Year

Gamma = 0

Gamma = 1

Gamma = 3

2000

2004

Figure 13. Wedge and Government Consumption
0.2

0.1

0

Wedge

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

Year
Wedge with C

Wedge with TC = C +G

4
20
0

1
20
0

8
19
9

5
19
9

2
19
9

9
19
8

6
19
8

3

0

19
8

4

1

8

5

2

9

7

19
8

19
7

19
7

19
7

19
6

19
6

19
6

19
5

19
5

6

-0.5

Figure 14. Effect of Subsistence on Wedge
0.2

0.1

0

Wedge

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

Year
Wedge without Subsistence

Wedge with Subsistence

2000

2004

Figure 15. Change in Hours and Wedges with Subsistence
0.7

0.6

0.5

Change in Wedge:1966-2004

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3
-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

Change in Log Hours 1966-2004

-0.1

0

0.1

Figure 16a. Mean Wedge and Taxes
0.2

0.1

Mean Wedge

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

Year

Pre-tax Wedge

After tax Wedge

1996

2000

Figure 16b. Mean Wedge and Taxes (Stone Geary)
0.2

0.1

Mean Wedge

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

Year
Pre- tax Wedge

After tax wedge

1996

2000

2004

Figure 17a. After Tax Mean Wedges

0.2

0.1

Mean Wedge

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

Year
G1

G2

G3

1992

1996

2000

Figure 17b. After tax Mean Wedges (Stone-Geary)
0.2

0.1

Mean Wedge

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

-0.5
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

Year
G1

G2

G3

1992

1996

2000

Figure 18. Actual and Predicted: Netherlands
1500

1400

Hours Worked

1300

1200

1100

1000

900

800
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

Year
Actual

Predicted

1992

1996

2000

2004

Figure 19. Actual and Predicted: Germany
1600

1500

Hours Worked

1400

1300

1200

1100

1000

900
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

Year
Actual

Predicted

1992

1996

2000

2004

Figure 20. Actual and Predicted: Sweden
1550

1450

Hours Worked

1350

1250

1150

1050

950

850
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

Year
Actual

Predicted

1992

1996

2000

2004

Figure 21. Actual and Predicted: US
1550

1450

Hours Worked

1350

1250

1150

1050

950

850
1956

1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

Year
Actual

Predicted

1992

1996

2000

2004

