                    NBE.R WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     UNANTICIPATED MONEY AND
                          INTEREST RATES



                          V. Vance Roley

                          Carl B. Walsh



                      Working Paper No. 1218




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 198)4




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #1278
                                                      February 1984




                  Tnanticipated Money and Interest Rates


                                 ABSTRACT


      Evidence on the relationship between unanticipated money and interest

rates has been provided by two types of studies. First, several researchers

have investigated the relationship using quarterly data. Second, a

number of researchers have examined the effect of money announcement

surprises on interest rates. In both instances, the correlation between

money surprises and interest rites has usually been found to be non-negative.

This paper first provides an interpretation of the correlation between

unanticipated money and interest rates in terms of Federal Reserve policy

objectives and operating procedures. Then, the correlation of unanticipated

money and both short- and long-term interest rates is examined over weekly

intervals, combining several aspects of the previous quarterly and

announcement studies. In addition, the distinction between unpredicted and

unperceived money also is considered.



                                             V. Vance Roley
                                             Department of Finance DJ-lO
                                             Graduate School of Business Administration
                                             University of Washington
                                             Seattle, WA 98195
                                             (206) 545-7476

                                             Carl B. Walsh
                                             Department of Economics
                                             Princeton University
                                             Princeton, NJ 08544
                                              (609)   452-4026
                                                                November 1983

                    UNANTiCIPATED MONEY AND INTEREST RATES


                        V. Vance Roley and Carl E. Walsh *


     The relationship between money and interest rates is of fundamental import-

ance to economic policymakers. In the absence of the liquidity trap, Keynesian

theory emphasized the negative relationship between money and interest rates,

thereby providing a role for the monetary authority to engage in countercyclical

policy, Milton Friedman's accelerationist theory, however, questioned the ef-

ficacy of monetary policy activism. This theory predicted that increases in

money growth would lead to identical increases in long-term in-
terest rates. As a result, money growth and interest rates would be expected

to exhibit po5itive correlation.

     With the advent of rational expectations and efficient markets theories,

the focus of this debate has shifted to the correlation of unantici-

pated money and interest rates. Despite the change in emphasis, the issues

remain largely unchanged. In particular, do unanticipated increases in money

lower real interest rates and hence stimulate economic activity? Or, alternatively,

do unanticipated increases merely lead to similar rises in expected inflation,

leaving real rates virtually constant?

     Evidence on the relationship between unanticipated money and interest

rates has been provided by two types of studies. First, several researcliqrs

have investigated the relationship using quarterly data. knong these, Frederic

Mishkin (1981, 1982) found no evidence of negative correlation. Instead, his

results indicated either positive or zero correlations for both short- and long-

tenri interest rates.

     Second, a nimber of researchers have examined the effect of money announce-
                                            -2-

ment surprises on interest rates. Again, these studies have uniformly found
positive correlations between surprises in announced money and           both short- an
long-term interest rates. In contrast to Mishkin, who very cautiously inter-

prets his   results,   researchers examining      the   effects of weekly money announce-

ments   have typically preferred one of two       caiimon explanations for the positive

correlation.      One explanation advanced by a nunber of researchers is that the

positive   correlation resulted fran short-run Federal Reserve policy (see,          for
example,   Jacob Grossman, Thanas Urich and       Paul Wachtel, and   Roley). Under this

hypothesis, the Federal Reserve attempts to offset short-run deviations in

money growth due to shifts in money         demand. The other explanation, advanced by
Bradford Cornell, suggests that       the   positive correlation is due to associated
changes    in expected   inflation.
      The purpose of this paper is first to provide an interpretation of the
positive correlation between unanticipated money and interest rates in terms of

Federal Reserve policy objectives and operating procedures. Then, the correla-

tion of unanticipated money and both short- and long-term interest rates is

examined over weekly intervals. This empirical investigation ccmbines sane of

the   aspects of Mishkints quarterly studies with those of the money announcement
studies.     In   addition, the distinction between unpredicted and unperceived
money, emphasized by Robert Barro and Zvi Hercowitz, is also considered.


I. Federal Reserve Policy and Unanticipated Money

        Unanticipated changes in money have been frequently interpreted as discre-

tionary changes induced by the Federal Reserve. If institutional features of

Federal Reserve policymaking are taken into account, however, this interpreta-

tion is only one of several possible alternatives. To consider the potential

sources of unanticipated money, the role of Federal Reserve policy in general

and monetary targets in particular should be examined.
                                             -3-



        As   is well kncn, the Federal Reserve has targets for a set of monetary
 and credit aggregates for both annual        and shorter    periods. A set of annual
 targets     is   announced for each calendar year in conjunction with the Huiphrey-

Hawkins      Act.   While   the Federal Reserve has   the   opportunity to change these
 long-run     targets at a mid-year review, this opportunity has seldom       been used.
Moreover,      at the mid-year review, the Federal Reserve is required to spe-

cify preliminary annual targets for the following calendar year. Thus, expli-

cit annual targets, along with statements by Federal Reserve
                                                                        officialspertain-
ing to trend monetary growth, enable the public to infer the long-run goals of

current monetary policy.

        Short-run monetary targets are set throughout the year at meetings of the

Federal Open Market Committee (FC1C). These targets are usually set such that

future money growth will eventually fall within the annual target ranges. In

contrast to the annual targets, however, current short-run objectives are in

principal unknown to the public until around the time of the next FC1C meeting.

Thus, the public must assess the Federal Reserve's short-run objectives on the

basis of observed policy actions.

        A third relevant feature of monetary policy ccncerns the time at which

monetary infomation becomes available to the Federal Reserve. Because of re-

porting lags, data on the narrowly defined money stock are available only

shortly before the Federal Reserve's weekly money announcements. As a result,

contemporaneous money is unknown to the Federal Reserve in any given statement

week.

    What do these institutional features imply about unanticipated money

growth? One implication is that there are three potential sources of money

surprises. First, unanticipated money may reflect changes in the Federal Re-
                                    —4-


serve's long-run monetary targets. Such changes, however, would most likely

reflect changes within the stated target ranges. Second, money surprises may

either result fran the public's misconception of short-run monetary policy

objectives or unanticipated changes in these objectives. Finally, unanticipa-

ted money growth may reflect weekly fluctuations unimown to both the public

and the Federal Reserve.

    Depending on which of these sources is most prevalent, the positive corre-

lation between money surprises and interest rates may be interpreted several

different ways. If unanticipated money results fran discretionary changes in

the Federal Reserve's long-run targets, or trend money growth in general, such

unanticipated changes would be expected to be correlated with changes in expect-

ed inflation. In turn, the response of long-term interest rates, and perhaps

to sane extent short-term interest rates as well, would be due to changes in

expected inflation.

     If, however, unanticipated money does not reflect changes in long-run

policy objectives, it is difficult to ascribe the response of interest rates to

changes in expected inflation. Instead, the positive correlation between un-

anticipated money and interest rates may be due to the Federal Reserve's desire

to offset short-run deviations in money growth. Again, such deviations only

becane apparent to the Federal Reserve after the statement week in which they

occur. In this case, we have demonstrated in an earlier paper that the observed

positive correlation between unanticipated announced changes in money and both

short- and long-term interest rates may be explained in a model incorporating

such policy responses. Our evidence further suggested that the Federal Reserve

offsets short-run deviations in money within one year, implying that unantici-

pated money does not relate to changes in trend money growth.

     In this same study, we also considered the possible effects of different

Federal Reserve operating procedures on the correlation between unanticipated
                                       -5-

announced changes in money and   interest    rates. The larger positive correlation

found after October 1979 - - when the Federal Reserve shifted from a federal

funds   rate to a nonborrowed reserves operating procedure - - could be    explained

by two factors. In particular, following Walsh, greater volatility in short-

tern interest rates may have led to a reduction in the interest rate elasticity

of the demand for money. Thus, if shifts in money demand are persistent,

larger movements in interest rates would be required to return money to its

long-run target. Moreover, money announcements also provide information about

the aggregate demand for required reserves because of lagged reserve accounting.

With the adoption of the reserves aggregate operating procedure in October 1979,

this factor also helps to explain the increased positive response of short-tern

interest rates to positive surprises in announced money.



II. Empirical Evidence

       As mentioned, evidence suggesting positive, or at least nonnegative, cor-

relation between unanticipated money and interest rates has been provided by

both quarterly studies and investigations of the response to weekly money an-

nouncements. The empirical investigation reported here attempts to combine

some of the aspects of these different approaches. In particular, movements

in interest rates are measured over an entire statement week. This enables

the role of the money announcement occurring in     a statement   week to be deter-

mined. The   hypothesis underlying this approach is that the money announcement
is   used to revise the estimate of the current week's money stock. The corre-

lation of this revision, as well as the expectational error that remains, with

both short- and long-tern interest rates is then empirically examined. The

amount of unperceived money in the current statement week is further decomposed

into the forecast error associated with the money stock as first announced and

as eventually revised.
                                             -6-

      The basic specification used to examine the response of interest rates to

unanticipated money may be represented as

                               =
(1)                                b0 + bi.UMt + b4M + Ut

where tRt is the change in either the 3-month Treasury bill yield (R21) or the

10-year constant-maturity Treasury security yield (R1OY) fr 3:30 p.m. on

Wednesday of the previous statement week (t-l) to 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday of the

current statement week (t); iK is the difference between the log of the actual

level of the narrcly defined money stock in week t and its expected level as

of the end of week t-1;        is the log of the expected level of the money stock

in week t as of week t-1; u. IS a         randaii   error teni uncorrelated with all pub-

licly available infoimation in week t-1; and            the   b1 are coefficients to be es-

timated.2 Under the hypothesis of rational expectations, the effect of antici-

pated money equals zero (b4 =       0).
      Unanticipated money (1..Nt), defined to equal the log of week t' s actual

money stock minus   the   log of the market's expectation prior to the Friday an-

nouncement, can   be decnposed into three separate factors:


(2)



where Mt is the log of the actual narrowly defined money stock (as of October

1983), M is the expectation of Mt before the Friday announcement, M is the

expectation after the announcement, and            M is   the initially announced value of

Mt. M is the figure released on Friday of week t+2.

      To fonn the expectation of the current week's narrowly defined money stock,

a simple autoregressive process is used. However, to take advantage of avail-

able survey data on the level of the money stock to be announced in the current

statement week, the current week's expected money stock before the announcement

is taken as the fitted value of
                                                                 -7-




                                   M=            + a1•M2 +
(3)
                                        a0
                                                                   i=2    a1.M1 + Vt
where M          2   is a survey measure for the money announcement in week t;                         v is a
random error term; and the a are coefficients to be estimated.3 The expecta-
tion      of the current week's money stock after the money announcement is then

taken as the fitted value of



(4)                            M = a0' + a1' -2 +                      Eaj'   M_j_1 +   e
where e is a random error                        term and    the       other variables are defined as before.

Thus,      v.    is used to represent unanticipated money in week t as initially an-

nounced in week t+2, and
                                            et    is used as the measure          of unanticipated money after
M2        becomes known.


          Equation (2) can            now be       rewritten as


(5)                                  IJMt =       (Mt
                                                        -
                                                            M)
                                                                 + e + (Vt - et).

This      formulation highlights data revisions, following Barro and Hercowitz, and
expectations revisions in response to the new information about M2 available
during week          t.        Note that v -          e     simply represents the revision in the estimate
of    the current week's money stock due to the weekly money announcement. If

      =
          a1',   this measure equals the money announcement surprise.4 In contrast,

both e and (M -                       are unperceived in the agg-egate throughout the current
                                M)
statement week. To allow different responses to the different cauponents of

unanticipated money, the specification examined empirically is

(1')
                     =
                          b0
                               +
                                   bi.(vt
                                            -
                                                 e)     +
                                                            b2e         b3.(M -   ) + bM     +
                                                                                                 Ut.
          To further allow for different interest rate response due to different Fe-

deral Reserve operating procedures, equation (1') is estimated separately for
                                                -8-

the    pre- and   post-October    1979 periods. For the pre-October 1979 period - -

beginning   with the statement week of September 29, 1977 arid                         ending      with the

statement week of October 5, 1979 --            the   estimation results are


         R1t=-9.850 - l7.S67(vt-e)              +                  -                     +                 +
(5)
                                                     4.3l3e            2.403(M_?)            1.692M
                   (5.745)     (14.813)             (4.764)            (3.096)               (0.981)
                      = .019              SE = .300                          DW = 2.056



(6) l0Y = - 1.855
                -
                               4.l82(v-e)    +
                                                 l.8S7e
                                                               -
                                                                       0.063(N-M)
                                                                                       +
                                                                                             0.320M
                                                                                                       +


                    (2.023)    (5.229)           (1.682)           (1.093)                 (0.346)

                      =   -.009           SE = .106                          DW = 1.728


where standard errors of estimated coefficients are in parentheses, SE is the

standard error, 2 is the multiple correlation coefficient corrected for degrees

of freedem, and DW        is   the Durbin-Watson statistic. The estimation results for

both    the 3-month and 10-year yields fail to indicate a significant response to
any of the categories of unanticipated or anticipated money. In contrast to
weekly money announcement studies, the impact of this new information (Vt - et)
is insignificant. However, this result is not totally unexpected in light of
the    small intervals used previously to            obtain estimated responses to money

announcement      surprises. Similarly,      measures of unperceived money are                         not
statistically significant         in either regression.

        For the post-October 1979 period - -          beginning with the               statement       week of
October 8, 1979 and ending with the statement week of October 13, 1982 --                                      the
estimation results are5

                  = 2.802 +                                                                    -
(5')                           38.9ÔO*(vt_et)
                                                 +
                                                     47.O62*et
                                                                        +
                                                                            10.l98(Mt-M)           0.479M      + u.
                   (7.288) (16.951)                  (8.132)                (10.366)               (1.200)

                     = .227               SE = .714                         DW = 2.027
                                                 -9-

 (6') 110Y =        5.410    -
                                 o.6O7(v
                                           -
                                               et)
                                                     +   16649*e +                   -             +
                                                                     0.896(Mt-M)         0.897M        u.
                   (3.783) (8.799)                       (4.222)     (5.381)             (0.623)
                    = .128                 SE = .370               DW = 1.788


where asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 5 percent level. These
estiiation results differ sharply from those obtained in the pre-October 1979
 period. First, the money announcement surprise significantly affects the 3-month

yield. The estimated coefficient implies that a 1 percent money surprise causes

 the 3-month yield to increase by almost 39 basis points. Second, changes in

both the 3-month and 10-year yields are significantly correlated with the expec-

tational error remaining after the current weekts money announcement, but not

with the error associated with subsequent data revisions. In the case of the

3-month yield, for example, a 1 percent positive surprise results in over a 47

basis points increase.

      Because e is unperceived during week t, it is not likely that its effect

on interest rates can        be   attributed to any        induced revision    of expected infla-

tion. This      positive    response can, however, be interpreted in             tenns    of short-

run   reserve   adjusthient by banks    to     weekly fluctuations in      private   sector money
demand. An upward shift in money demand                  can exert a contemporaneous upward
effect   on interest rates, even under lagged reserve accounting, as individual

banks begin to adjust their reserve position. Prior to October 1979, the Fed-

eral Reserve would have prevented rates from moving.

      To suiniiarize, no significant correlation between interest rates and unan-

ticipated money was found in the pre-October 1979 period. Not even announced

money surprises were found to significantly affect interest rates over weekly

periods. This result is, however, probably due to the substantially larger

variance in the change in interest rates when moving from daily to weekly inter-

vals. In the post-October 1979 period, announced money surprises nevertheless
had a   significant positive correlation with the 3-month yield. Moreover,

another canponent of unanticipated money - -     measuring the expectational error
remaining after the current week's money announcement -- was statistically

significant   and   positively   correlated with changes in both short- and   long-tenii

interest rates. The most plausible explanation of this response is again based
on bank reserve adjustment and the      anticipated reaction of the Federal Reserve
to   short-run deviations in money growth.

       The nature of money market shocks which characterize the post-October 1979

sample period has led to a positive correlation, as Friedman      predicted,    between

money shocks and interest    rates. This correlation, however, has little, if
anything,   to do with expected inflation.
                                          - 1i -



                                       FOOTNOTES



*
     University   of Washington and the National Bureau of Economic Research, and

     Princeton University and the National Bureau of Econc*nic Research, respec-

     tively. We are grateful to Rich Troll for research assistance.


1. In contrast to the positive correlation found in most studies, John Makin's

     results suggest negative correlation. His use of averaged interest rate

     data, however, may account for at least some of the difference.


2.   Following James Pesarido, the random-walk model       is   used to represent weekly
     movements in interest rates. This approximation is likely to be good for

     the 10-year yield, but it may be somewhat inadequate for the 3-month yield.


3. The source of the     survey data is Money Market Services. As        discussed below,

     separate autoregressions were estimated for the pre- and post-October 1979

     periods. For all autoregressions, however, the last value of the money stock

     included is MtS. Also, despite the notation, lagged values of the money

     stock include revisions laiown as of     the beginning of week t.

4. The   hypothesis that a1   =
                                  a1' in both the pre- and post-October 1979 periods
     could   not be rejected at the 5 percent      significance level.

5.   The estimation period ends in October 1982 due to the Federal Reserve's

     apparent de-emphasis of the reserves-aggregate operating procedure around

     that time.
                                     REFERENCES



Barro,    Robert J. and Hercowitz, Zvi, "Money Stock Revisions and Unanticipated

      Money Growth," Journal of Monetary Econcinics, April 1980, 6, 257-67.

Cornell, Bradford, "Money Supply Announcenents and Interest Rates: Another View,"

         Journal of Business, January 1983, 56, 1-24.

Friedman, Milton, "The Role of Monetary Policy," sAmerican Economic Review, May

         1968, 58, 1-17.

Grossman, Jacob, "The Rationality of Money Supply Expectations and the Short-Run

         Response of Interest Rates to Monetary Surprises," Journal of Money, Credit

         arid Banking, November 1981, 13, 409-424.

Makin, John H., "Real Interest, Money Surprises, Anticipated Inflation and Fiscal

         Deficits," Review of Econciuiics and Statistics, August 1983, 65, 374-384.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Interest Rates: An Eff i-

         cient Markets Approach," Journal of Monetary Economics, January 1981, 7,

         29-55.

_________ "Monetary Policy and Short-Tern Interest Rates: An Efficient Markets-
         Rational Expectations Approach," Journal of Finance, March 1982, 37, 63-72.

Pesando, James E., "On the Random Walk Characteristics of Short- and Long-Tenii

         Interest Rates in an Efficient Market," Journal of Money, Credit arid

                November 1979, 11, 455-466.

Roley, V. Vance, "The Response of Short-Tern Interest Rates to Weekly Money An-

         nouncements," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, August 1983, 15, 344-

         354.

_________ and Walsh, Carl E., "Monetary Policy Regimes, Expected Inflation, and
         the Response of Interest Rates to Money Announcements," Working Paper No.

         1181, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1983.
                                          -13-




Urich, Thcinas J., and   Wachtel,   Paul, "Marlet   Responses   to the Weekly Money Supply
      Announcnents    in the   1970's," Journal of Finance, Decenber 1981, 36, 1063-

     1072.

Walsh, Carl E., "Interest   Rate Volatility and Monetary        Policy," Journal   of Money,
     Credit and   Banking, forthccthng.
