NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIXED-TERM EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS IN AN EQUILIBRIUM SEARCH
MODEL
Fernando Alvarez
Marcelo Veracierto
Working Paper 12791
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12791

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

We thank A. Atkeson, S. Bentolila, R. Lucas, R. Rogerson, R. Shimer, N. Stokey, J. Villaverde for
their comments. The views expressed here do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Fernando Alvarez and Marcelo Veracierto. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fixed-Term Employment Contracts in an Equilibrium Search Model
Fernando Alvarez and Marcelo Veracierto
NBER Working Paper No. 12791
December 2006, Revised October 2008
JEL No. E24,J08,J3,J31,J63,J64,J65
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the effects of fixed-term contracts using a version of the Lucas and Prescott island
model with undirected search. A fixed-term contract of length J is modeled as a tax on separations
of workers with tenure higher than J . While in principle these policies require a very large state space
to analyze the firms and households’ problems, we show that equilibrium allocations solve a simple
dynamic programming problem. Analyzing this problem we show that equilibrium employment dynamics
are characterized by two dimensional inaction sets. Finally, to understand the effect of these contracts,
we compare them with two extreme cases: for J = 1 the fixed-term contracts are equivalent to the case
of firing taxes, and for large J they are equivalent to the laissez-faire case. In a calibrated version of
the model, we find that temporary contracts with J equivalent to three years length close about half
of the gap between those two extremes.

Fernando Alvarez
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu
Marcelo Veracierto
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Research Department
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, Illinois 60604
mveracie@frbchi.org

1

Introduction

This paper analyzes an undirected search version of the Lucas-Prescott (1974) model of equilibrium
unemployment. This is an important extension because it combines features of the Mc Call (1970)
search model (which focuses on the decision problem of an unemployed worker) with features of
the Hopenhayn (1992) industry equilibrium model (which focuses on the employment dynamics
of firms). The model turns out to be very tractable: In spite of the search frictions and the large
amount of heterogeneity across islands we show that the optimal allocations are characterized by
a simple dynamic programming problem, which we refer to as the “island planning problem”. The
equivalence between these optimal allocations and two alternative equilibrium decentralizations
is also demonstrated. The framework allows us to analyze an important class of policies that
includes firing taxes (as in Hopenhayn and Rogerson, 1993) and temporary employment contracts
(as in Cabrales and Hopenhayn, 1997) as special cases.1 In principle, this class of policies requires
keeping track of the distribution of workers across tenure levels in each island. However, we show
that the undirected search assumption leads to a state space representation that is simple enough
to provide a sharp characterization of equilibrium allocations and wages.
The structure of the economy is as follows. Production takes place in a large number of
locations (or islands). All islands operate the same decreasing returns to scale technology but are
subject to island-specific productivity shocks. Changes in the island-specific productivity shock
give raise to changes in labor demand across locations. Moving a worker across locations is costly:
It requires one period during which the agent neither works nor enjoys leisure. In addition, agents
that search arrive randomly to one of the islands in the economy (i.e., search is undirected).
Workers that separate from their islands have to choose between two alternative activities: to
work at home (i.e., to leave the labor force) or to search (i.e., to become unemployed).
The employment protection system that we consider is characterized by two parameters: the
firing tax τ and the length of the fixed-term contracts J. Firms must pay a firing tax τ when they
1

Both types of policies are common in Europe and Latin America. While firing costs have been introduced to

provide workers with employment protection, temporary contracts have been introduced as a way of giving firms
some type of flexibility in the hiring and firing process. Temporary contracts stipulate a period of time during
which workers can be dismissed at zero (or very low) cost. If workers are retained beyond this period standard
separation costs apply.

2

reduce their employment of permanent workers (those that have a tenure level equal to or greater
than J) but are exempt from paying firing taxes on temporary workers (those with a tenure level
less than J). When J = 1 this employment protection system reduces to the firing tax regime
analyzed by Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993).
We consider two alternative (yet equivalent) concepts of competitive equilibrium: one with
spot labor markets and one with multiperiod employment relations. In the spot labor markets
equilibrium, workers and firms solve problems that are natural extensions of the McCall (1970)
search model and the Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) firing costs model, respectively. This
equilibrium concept has two advantages: It can be easily related to the previous literature and
it is simple to analyze. However, it has a considerable drawback: It assumes that the separation
cost τ is triggered by the tenure level J of a worker in an island, not in an individual firm. The
equilibrium with multiperiod employment relations is more complex but captures the nature of
fixed-term employment contracts in a much more realistic way. In particular, it assumes that the
separation cost τ is triggered by the tenure level J of a worker in an individual firm.
In the spot labor market equilibrium, workers are diﬀerentiated by their tenure levels, participate in diﬀerent labor markets, and receive diﬀerent wages. Given the presence of tenure-dependent
firing costs, firms solve a modified (S,s) optimization problem. In turn, workers at each tenure
level face a standard search problem: They decide whether to stay on the island where they are
currently located or become non-employed. Both firms and workers take as given the island-level
law of motion for wages across tenure levels. At equilibrium, this island-level process must be
such that the island labor markets clear at each island-wide state. An economy-wide equilibrium
is completed by an invariant distribution across island states. This economy-wide distribution is
needed to describe the benefits of search and the aggregate demand for labor.
To describe the structure of eﬃcient allocations and their relationship with equilibrium allocations it is useful to consider two cases: 1) when the separation costs are a technological feature
of the environment, and 2) when the separation costs are taxes rebated lump-sum to households
(the interesting case to consider for policy analysis). In the first case, we show that the first and
second welfare theorems hold. In the second case, the welfare theorems do not apply but we can
still use a slightly modified version of the planning problem to characterize a competitive equilibrium. In particular, we can break the economy-wide planning problem into a series of island-wide
planning problems, one for each island. Each of these island-wide social planners solves a similar

3

problem: to maximize the expected discounted value of output by deciding how many workers to
keep and how many workers to take out from the island. In this problem, the island-wide planner
takes the constant flow U of new arrivals to the island as given (this flow is independent of the
characteristics of the island because of the assumption of undirected search). The island’s planner
also takes as given the shadow value of returning a worker to non-employment. This shadow value
is tenure dependent, taking into account that the separation cost τ applies only to permanent
workers. While the state of this problem is the distribution of workers across tenure levels, which
is a J dimensional object, we show that it can be reduced to a two-dimensional object: the number
of temporary workers and the number of permanent workers. We also show that the solution to
this control problem is characterized by two-dimensional sets of inaction, one set for each value of
the idiosyncratic productivity shock. Given the solution to the island-wide planning problem, the
economy-wide equilibrium is obtained by finding two unknowns: the equilibrium shadow value of
non-employment and the equilibrium number of agents that search U.
We use our model to explore to what extent fixed-term contracts of diﬀerent lengths add
flexibility to the labor market. Notice that introducing fixed-term contracts of suﬃciently large J
is equivalent to eliminating all the separation costs (since workers never gain permanent status).
Thus, we address the question of the added flexibility by computing how much of the gap between
the firing-tax case (J = 1) and the laissez-faire case (J = ∞) is closed when fixed-term contracts
of empirically reasonable length are introduced. To this end we consider the case of Spain in the
mid-eighties, which introduced long temporary contracts in a labor market characterized by large
firing costs. Calibrating the model to a stylized version of that economy, we find that temporary
contracts of three years duration (roughly the length of the contracts introduced in Spain) close
about half of the welfare gap between the firing-tax and the laissez-faire cases.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 relates the paper to the previous literature. Section
3 describes the economy. Section 4 defines eﬃcient allocations. Section 5 characterizes eﬃcient
stationary allocations. Section 6 considers the two alternative notions of competitive equilibrium.
Finally, Section 7 performs the computational experiments. Seven appendices contain some of the
more technical analysis.

4

2

Related literature

This is not the first paper to introduce undirected search in the Lucas-Prescott (1974) islands
model. The paper by Jovanovic (1987) is an early precursor. More recently, Alvarez and Veracierto
(1999) used a similar type of structure to evaluate a number of simple policies, Veracierto (2008)
considered a version with aggregate productivity shocks to analyze business cycle fluctuations,
and Kambourov and Manovskii (2007) used a version with island-specific human capital to study
occupational mobility. This paper diﬀers from the previous literature in that it analyzes a diﬀerent
class of policies and in that it provides a systematic characterization of equilibrium and eﬃcient
allocations.
Our paper is also closely related to the literature analyzing separation taxes and temporary
contracts. Within the class of papers studying separation taxes (e.g. Bentolila and Bertola, 1990,
Millard and Mortensen, 1997, etc.) the general equilibrium model of Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) is probably the most closely related. However, our analysis extends Hopenhayn and
Rogerson’s by incorporating search frictions and by evaluating the eﬀects of separation taxes on
unemployment. Within the extensive literature studying the eﬀects of temporary contracts (e.g.
Blanchard and Landier, 2002, Nagypal, 2002, etc.) the papers that are more similar in spirit
to ours are Bentolila and Saint Paul (1992), Cabrales and Hopenhayn (1997), Aguiregabiria and
Alonso-Borrego (2004), Veracierto (2007) and Alonso-Borrego et al. (2005), since they all study
labor demand models with dynamic adjustment costs. An important diﬀerence with Bentolila and
Saint Paul (1992), Cabrales and Hopenhayn (1997), and Aguiregabiria and Alonso-Borrego (2004)
is that these papers consider partial equilibrium models and do not introduce unemployment.
Veracierto (2007) introduces unemployment but in a partial equilibrium model with exogenous
wages. In principle, Alonso-Borrego et al. (2005) is the most closely related paper since it performs a general equilibrium analysis with search frictions.2 However, its model is very diﬀerent.
In particular, it assumes that: 1) agents face exogenous borrowing constraints, 2) employment
2

Blanchard and Landier (200s2) also perform a general equilibrium analysis with search fricitions but they do

so in a framework closely related to Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), in which wages are determined through Nash
bargaining and the matching process is subject to externalities. In such a context, Blanchard and Landier find that
introducing labor market flexibility through fixed-term contracts may lead to lower welfare levels. As we explain
in the next paragraph, this can never take place in the framework that we consider.

5

contracts specify a constant wage rate as long as the employment relation lasts, 3) fixed-term
contracts last only one model period, and 4) the matching process is subject to congestion externalities. While some of these assumptions are meant to provide realism, they complicate the
interpretation of the results quite significantly. For instance, it is unclear to what extent the main
result in the paper (which is that higher firing costs reduce unemployment and improve welfare)
depends on the ad-hoc wage contracts assumed.3
In this paper we evaluate the eﬀects of firing taxes and temporary contracts in a model with
complete markets. In such a setup, government interventions cannot improve the set of mutually
beneficial trades between private parties as may happen in models in which the bilateral contractual
arrangements are restricted in arbitrary ways (e.g. Alvarez and Veracierto, 2001, and AlonsoBorrego, 2005). Moreover, due to convexity and lack of externalities, the laissez-faire equilibrium
in our model is Pareto optimum and hence the firing taxes and temporary contracts can only reduce
welfare. In performing policy analysis in this type of setting we follow the common practice in
the public finance and international trade literature of measuring Harberger triangles, i.e. of
measuring the eﬃciency costs of the policy considered. In fact, this is also the approach that
Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) and others have previously followed in evaluating the eﬀects of
firing taxes.

3

Description of the Economy

Production takes place in a continuum (measure one) of diﬀerent locations, or “islands.” On each
island consumption goods are produced according to F (E, z), a neoclassical production function,
where E is employment and z is a productivity shock that takes values in the set Z. The process
for z is Markov with transition function Q (zt+1 |zt ), and realizations are i.i.d. across islands. We
let f (E, z) ≡ ∂F (E, z) /∂E and assume that f is continuous and strictly decreasing in E, strictly
increasing in z, and that limE→0 f (E, z) = ∞, where z ≡ min {z : z ∈ Z} .
There is a continuum of agents with mass equal to N. Agents participate in one of the following
three activities: work on an island, perform home production (or, equivalently, enjoy leisure), or
3

In Alvarez and Veracierto (2001), on which Alonso-Borrego (2005) is based, higher firing taxes also reduce

unemployment and improve welfare. In that setting, we show that the rigid wage contracts assumed play a crucial
role in generating the results while the borrowing constraints play no important role.

6

search. Non-employed agents, whom we sometimes refer to as “agents being at a central location,”
either work at home (enjoy leisure) or search for a job. If they work at home during the current
period, they start the following period as non-employed. If a non-employed agent searches in the
current period, she does not produce during the current period but arrives randomly to one of
the islands at the beginning of the next period. We assume that search is undirected, so the
probability of arriving to an island of any given type is given by the fraction of islands of that type
in the economy. An agent located on an island at the beginning of the period can decide whether
to stay on the island or become non-employed. If she stays, she works and starts the following
period in the same location.
We let Lt be the number of agents engaged in home production at time t, and Ut the fraction
engaged in search at time t. The period utility function for the household consuming ct units of
consumption goods and Lt units of leisure is the following:
−1
c1−γ
u (ct , Lt ) = t
+ ωLt .
1−γ
As it is well known, the linearity of leisure in household preferences can represent an economy with
indivisible labor and employment lotteries, as in Rogerson (1988). To simplify the description of the
planner’s problem, we will focus in the case where consumption and leisure are perfect substitutes,
which is obtained by setting γ = 0. In this case we consider home production as an alternative
activity that produces ω consumption goods per period, and we let the household’s utility function
P
t
simply be given by E0 ∞
t=0 β ct . As we explain in Section 4, this assumption is without loss of

generality, in the sense that there is a simple mapping between stationary allocations with diﬀerent
values of γ.
Up to this point the environment is a modification of the equilibrium search model of Lucas

and Prescott (1974) that introduces household production and undirected search, as in Alvarez
and Veracierto (1999). We now introduce a tenure-dependent separation cost. In this section we
introduce this separation cost as being a technological feature of the environment. In Section 5
we show how to use the eﬃcient allocation of this economy to construct an equilibrium where the
separation cost is a tax levied on firms and rebated to households in a lump-sum way.
The tenure-dependent separation cost works as follows: If an agent has worked for J or more
periods in a location, τ consumption goods are lost from the island’s production at the time that
that worker returns to the central location. If the worker returns to the central location after less

7

than J periods, no separation cost is incurred. In Section 5 we present an equilibrium concept
that shows that this tenure-dependent separation cost at the island level captures salient features
of the temporary employment contracts used in the real world.

4

Eﬃcient Allocations: A Formal Definition

Since the separation cost depends on tenure levels, a description of an allocation must include the
distribution of workers by tenure on each island. We refer to workers with tenure j = 1, ..., J − 1 in
a location as temporary workers and to those with tenure j ≥ J as permanent workers. Thus the
state of a location is given by its productivity shock z and a J dimensional vector T indicating the
number of workers with diﬀerent tenure levels. In the sequential notation, locations are indexed by
their state at time t = 0, denoted by X = T0 . We use z t = (z0 , ..., zt−1 , zt ) for the history of shocks
of length t and index each location at time t by (z t , X), its history of shocks and its initial state.
The initial state of the economy is described by a distribution of locations across pairs (z0 , X) and
by U−1 , the number of agents that searched during t = −1. We let η (X|z0 ) be the fraction of
locations with state X conditional on z0 , and q0 (z) the initial distribution of z0 . We assume that
q0 equals the unique invariant distribution associated with the transition function Q. We denote
by qt (z t ) the fraction of islands with history z t , which by the Law of Large Numbers satisfies
¡
¢
¡ ¢
qt+1 z t , zt+1 = Q (zt+1 |zt ) qt z t .

We indicate the employment of agents with tenure j at a location (z t , X) by Ejt (z t , X), for
j = 0, ..., J, z t ∈ Z t and t ≥ 0. Likewise, we denote by Sjt (z t , X) the separations, i.e., the number
of agents with tenure j that return to the central location.
Formally, we say that {Ejt , Sjt , Ut , Ht }, given η and U−1 , is a feasible allocation if the following
conditions hold:
i) the island’s law of motion
¢
¢
¢
¡
¡
¡
Ej,t z t , X = Ej−1,t−1 z t−1 , X − Sj,t z t , X , j = 1, 2, ..., J − 1,
¡
¡
¡
¡
¢
¢
¢
¢
EJ,t z t , X = EJ−1,t−1 z t−1 , X + EJ,t−1 z t−1 , X − SJ,t z t , X ,
¢
¡ ¢
¡
E0,t z t = Ut−1 − S0,t z t , X ,

Sj,t (z t , X) ≥ 0 for t ≥ 0, z t ∈ Z t , X ∈ supp(η);

8

ii) the feasibility constraint for the labor market
Ut +

J
XXX
zt

X

j=0

¢ ¡ ¢
¡
Ej,t z t , X qt z t η (X|z0 ) + Lt = N

Ut , Lt ≥ 0 for all t = 0, 1, ... ;
and iii) the initial conditions
Ej−1,−1 = Xj for j = 1, 2, ..., J − 1,
EJ−1,−1 + EJ,−1 = XJ ,
where E0,−1 = U−1 .
The first constraint states that the number of employed workers of tenure j ≤ J − 1 is given by
the number of workers of tenure j − 1 that were employed on the island during the previous period
minus the number of these workers taken out of the island during the current period. The second
constraint is analogous to the first constraint for workers of tenure J or higher. It diﬀers from the
first one because we don’t keep track of workers of tenure j ≥ J separately (they are all lumped
together into tenure J). The third constraint says that the employment of tenure zero workers is
given by those just arrived to the island, minus the number of them taken out of the island. The
fourth constraint states that the sum of total unemployment, total employment, and agents out
of the labor force equals the population N. The fifth and sixth equations define Ej,−1 in terms of
the initial conditions Xj , for j = 1, ..., J.
Henceforth we define Tj,t (z t , X) as the number of workers of tenure j available at the beginning
of the period t on an island of type (z t , X), so that
¢
¢
¡
¡
Tj,t z t , X = Ej−1,t−1 z t−1 , X , j = 1, 2, ..., J − 1,
¢
¢
¢
¡
¡
¡
TJ,t z t , X = EJ−1,t−1 z t−1 , X + EJ,t−1 z t−1 , X ,
¡ ¢
T0,t z t = Ut−1

(1)
(2)
(3)

Hence condition i) in the definition of feasibility is equivalent to

¢
¢
¡
¡
Ej,t z t , X ≤ Tj,t z t , X for all j.

With these objects at hand we can define a planning problem whose solutions characterize
the set of eﬃcient allocations. We say that {Ejt , Sjt , Tj,t , Ut , Lt } is an eﬃcient allocation if it
9

maximizes
X
t

βt

XX
zt

X

" Ã J
!
#
X
X
¡ t ¢
¡ t ¢
¡ ¢
F
Ej,t z , X , zt − τ SJ,t z , X qt z t η (X|z0 ) +
β t ωLt
t

j=0

over all feasible allocations, given the initial conditions η and U−1 .
Given initial conditions η, U−1 , a feasible allocation {Ejt , Sjt , Tj,t , Ut , Lt } is stationary if
Ut , Lt and the cross sectional distribution η t are constant over time, where η t is given by
η t+1 (K|z 0 ) =

XX

z t ∈Z t X

¢
¡
¡ ¢
IK z t , X η 0 (X|z0 ) qt z t Q (z 0 |zt ) ,

and IK is an indicator defined as
⎧
⎫
t
t
⎨
¢
¡
1, if [T1,t (z , X) , ..., TJ,t (z , X)] ∈ K ⎬
IK z t , X =
⎩
⎭
0, otherwise

J
for all z t ∈ Z t , X ∈ supp(η), and Borel measurable K ⊂ R+
. Finally, we say that {L, U, η} is a
n
o
stationary eﬃcient allocation if there is some eﬃcient allocation Êjt , Ŝjt , T̂j,t , Ût , L̂t with initial

condition Û−1 , η̂ which is stationary and for which

Û−1 = Ût = U, L̂t = L, and η̂ t = η for all t ≥ 0 .

5

Characterization of Eﬃcient Stationary Allocations

An eﬃcient allocation is interior if agents are engaged in all three activities: search, home production, and work. Our characterization of interior eﬃcient stationary allocations consists on the
solution to two equations in two unknowns: (U, θ) , where U is unemployment and θ is the shadow
value of being non-employed. One equation states that the shadow value of search equals the
expected value of randomly arriving to an island next period, according to the invariant distribution. The second equation ensures that agents are indiﬀerent between doing search and home
production. The first equation is quite complex- it involves solving a dynamic programing problem
and using the invariant distribution generated by its optimal policies. We refer to this dynamic
programing problem as the island planning problem.
The state of this problem is given by (T, z) , where T is a vector describing the number of
workers across tenure levels j = 1, 2, ..., J at the beginning of the period and z is the current

10

productivity shock. The island planner receives U workers with tenure j = 0 every period. The
planner decides how many workers to employ at each tenure level and returns workers to the
central location at a shadow value given by θ. The planner incurs a cost τ per worker with tenure
J that is returned to the central location. Formally,
( Ã J
!
Ã
!
J
X
X
V (T, z; U, θ) = max F
Ej , z + θ [U − E0 ] +
[Tj − Ej ] − τ [TJ − EJ ]
{Ej }

+β

j=0

X
z0

j=1

)

V (E0 , E1 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ; U, θ) Q (z 0 |z)

subject to 0 ≤ Ej ≤ Tj for j = 1, .., J and 0 ≤ E0 ≤ U. We let G (T, z; U, θ) be the optimal

0
employment decision and T 0 = A (T, z) the implied transition function with Tj+1
= Gj (T, z) for

j = 0, ..., J − 2 and TJ0 = GJ (T, z) + GJ−1 (T, z).
It is intuitive to see that if U is the economy-wide eﬃcient unemployment level and θ is the
economy-wide shadow value of non-employment, the employment decisions of the island planners’
problem recover the economy-wide eﬃcient employment decisions. To see why, notice that each
island faces the same value for U, since search is undirected, and the same value of θ, since workers
are identical once they leave the island and arrive to the central location.
As stated above, the shadow value of non-employment is equal to the discounted expected
value of randomly arriving (with zero tenure) to an island under the invariant distribution. To
find the shadow value of workers with tenure zero at each island, we define the problem of an
island’s planner that faces a flow of unemployed workers equal to Û for one period but that reverts
to the constant flow U thereafter:
( Ã J
!
Ã
!
J
³
´
i X
h
X
V̂ T, z; Û, θ = max F
Ej , z + θ Û − E0 +
[Tj − Ej ] − τ [TJ − EJ ] (4)
Ej

+β

j=0

X
z0

j=1

)

V (E0 , E1 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ; U, θ) Q (z 0 |z)

subject to 0 ≤ Ej ≤ Tj for j = 1, .., J and E0 ≤ Û . Using this problem we define the value of an
extra zero-tenure worker in a location with state (T, z) as:
³
´
∂ V̂ T, z; Û, θ
|Û =U
λ (T, z; U, θ) =
∂ Û

(5)

where ∂ V̂ /∂ Û is a subgradient of V̂ (in the case it is not diﬀerentiable). The next theorem gives
a characterization of the stationary eﬃcient allocations.

11

Theorem 1 . Let (U, θ) be an arbitrary pair. Let V (·; U, θ) be the solution of the island planning
problem, and let G (·; U, θ) , λ (·; U, θ) be the the associated optimal policies and shadow value for
zero-tenure workers, respectively. Suppose that:
i) μ (·; U, θ) is a stationary distribution for the process (T, z) with transition functions given by
Q (z 0 |z) for z 0 and A (T, z) for T 0 ;
ii) the value of search σ is given by
Z
σ = β λ (T, z ; U, θ) μ (dT × dz ; U, θ) ;
iii) the number of agents engaged in home production L satisfies
#
Z "X
J
L=N −U −
Gj (T, z ; U, θ) μ (dT × dz ; U, θ) ≥ 0;
j=0

iv) the labor force participation decisions are optimal, in the sense that
θ = max {σ, ω + βθ} ,

and 0 = L [θ − ω − βθ] .

Finally, define η (T, z) = μ (T |z) as the distribution of T conditional on z. Then {L, U, η} is an
eﬃcient stationary allocation.
Conditions (i) and (ii) have been explained above. Condition (iii) defines the number of agents
doing home production as total population minus the sum of unemployment and employment,
and states that home production must be nonnegative. The first equation in condition (iv) states
that the value of non-employment must be the best of two alternatives: the value of search, which
is σ, and the value of doing home production during the current period and being non-employed
the following period, which is ω + βθ. The second equation in condition (iv) is a complementary
slackness condition for home production.
Theorem 1 implies that characterizing eﬃcient stationary allocations is reduced to solving
two equations in two unknowns and checking that an inequality is satisfied. Given an arbitrary
pair (U, θ), the functions V (·, U, θ), G(·, U, θ), λ(·, U, θ), and the distribution μ(·, U, θ) can be
found using standard recursive techniques. Defining σ(U, θ) and L(U, θ) as the left-hand sides of
conditions (ii) and (iii), respectively, the two equations that U and θ must satisfy are:
θ = max {σ (U, θ) , ω + βθ}

and 0 = L (U, θ) [θ − ω − βθ] ,
12

and the inequality that must be satisfied is that L (U, θ) ≥ 0. A consequence of this simple
characterization is that Theorem 1 can be used for constructing a computational algorithm and
establishing the existence and uniqueness of a stationary eﬃcient allocation.
The households’ optimality condition when γ > 0 and the allocation is interior (i.e., one with
a strictly positive amount of time dedicated to leisure and a strictly positive amount of search) is
to equate the marginal rate of substitution with the flow value of search:
ω
= (1 − β) σ,
(c)

(6)

u0

where c is aggregate consumption. In such interior equilibrium the value of search is equal to the
value of non-employment (i.e., σ = θ).

5.1

Island Planning Problem

We now turn to the analysis of the island planning problem, which is at the center of our characterization. We start by analyzing the derivatives of V , which can be shown to be diﬀerentiable.
The standard proof by Benveniste and Scheikman does not apply because the optimal choice of
E is not interior. In Appendix A we construct an alternative proof and find expressions for the
derivatives of V . Intuitively, the marginal value of an additional worker of tenure j is given by
the sum of two terms. The first term is the expected discounted sum of the marginal product of
labor over periods in which no worker of the same cohort has ever been sent back to the central
location. The second term is the expected discounted shadow value (net of any separation costs)
the first time that a worker of the same cohort is sent back to the central location. Formally, for
Tj > 0, ∂V (T, z) /∂Tj = Vj∗ (T, z) , where Vj∗ is defined as follows. Denote the current date by
0 and define the stopping time nj as the first date s at which the number of workers with current
∗
tenure j is reduced. We let Ei,s
be the optimal employment level s periods from now of workers

with tenure level i, and Ti,s be the beginning-of-period number of workers s periods from now with
tenure level i, so that
∗
nj = first date s at which Emin{J,

j+s},s

< Tmin{J,

j+s},s .

Now we are ready to define Vj∗ (T, z) as:
" Ã J
!
#
∞
X
X
∗
β s E0 f
Ei,s
, zs |nj > s + E0 [β nj θ] − E0 [β nj τ |nj ≥ J]
Vj∗ (T, z) =
s=0

i=0

13

(7)

This implies that if some workers of tenure j are sent back, i.e., if Ej = Gj (T, z) < Tj , then the
marginal value of all workers of this tenure level is Vj∗ (T, z) = θ for j ≤ J − 1 and is equal to
θ − τ for j = J.
It can be shown that the solution to the island planning problem has the following three
properties (see Appendix A for more details).
First, if Tj > 0, then ∂V (T, z) /∂Tj ≥ θ for j ≤ J and ≥ θ − τ for j = J. This must be
the case, since the planner always has the option of sending workers back to the central location
(Propositions 10 and 13).
Second, if some permanent workers are fired, i.e., if EJ = GJ (T, z) < TJ , then all the temporary
workers must have been fired, i.e., Ej = Gj (T, z) = 0 for all j = 0, ..., J − 1. A policy with
this property saves on the separation cost τ , which is incurred only by the permanent workers
(Proposition 11).
Third, the first workers to be fired are the temporary workers with the longest tenure (Proposition 5 and its Corollary). The intuition for this property is that, while all workers are perfect
substitutes in production, these workers are the closest to becoming subject to the separation cost
τ . Thus this policy saves on potential separation costs. In an economy where all island planners
have followed this policy in the past and a constant flow U of tenure j = 0 workers has arrived
to each island every period, the states T in the ergodic set take a particular form. Formally, the
ergodic set is a subset of E, which is given by

n
o
J−1
E = T ∈ [0, U]
× R+ : T = (U, ..., U, Tj , 0, ..., 0, TJ ) , for some j : 1 ≤ j ≤ J − 1

(8)

This property is extremely important: It allows us to reduce the dimensionality of the endogenous
state of the island planning problem from J to 2. The next section analyzes the resulting simplified
island planning problem.

5.2

Simplified Island Planning Problem

States for the island planning problem T that belong to E can be described by two numbers: t, the
total number of temporary workers (workers with tenure less or equal to J), and p, the number
of permanent workers (workers with tenure greater than J ). We use this feature to consider the
island planning problem with a simplified state (t, p, z). In this simplified problem, the choices are

14

employment of temporary workers et and employment of permanent workers ep . The law of motion
for the endogenous state is:
t0 = U + et − max {et − (J − 1) U, 0} and p0 = ep + max {et − (J − 1) U, 0} .

(9)

The number of temporary workers next period t0 is equal to the number of temporary workers
employed during the current period et plus the arrival of new workers U , minus the temporary
workers that will become permanent next period, max {et −(J − 1) U, 0}. Likewise, the number of

permanent workers next period p0 is equal to the number of permanent workers employed during
the current period ep plus the temporary workers that will become permanent next period. The
island planner’s value function v : [U, J · U]×R+ ×Z → R satisfies the following Bellman equation:
½
¾
Z
0
0 0
0
v (t, p, z) = max0 0 F (et + ep , z) + θ [t − et ] + (θ − τ ) [p − ep ] + β v (t , p , z ) Q (z, dz )
et ,ep ,t ,p

subject to
0 ≤ et ≤ t, 0 ≤ ep ≤ p,
and the law of motion (9).
Formally, v is related to V for states T ∈ E as follows:
v (T1 + T2 + ... + TJ−1 , TJ , z) = V (T1 , T2 , ..., TJ−1 , TJ , z) .
Since v and V are closely related and V is concave, then v is concave in (t, p), even though the
graph of the feasible set for this problem is not convex. From the definition of v and the properties
of V , we have that v is diﬀerentiable with respect to t for all t > 0 that are not integer multiples
of U, and diﬀerentiable with respect to p for all p > 0. Thus, for all (t, p, z) with p > 0
∂v (t, p, z)
∂V (T, z)
=
∂p
∂TJ
and for all t that can be written as t = (j − 1) U + Tj with Tj ∈ (0, U ),
∂v (t, p, z)
∂V (T, z)
=
.
∂t
∂Tj
At the points t given by t = j × U for some j = 1, ..., J − 2, the right derivative of v with respect
to t is ∂V /∂Tj , and its left derivative is ∂V /∂Tj+1 .
The main result of this section is a characterization of the optimal policy. The optimal
policy is defined by a two-dimensional set of inaction I(z). For each z, the optimal policy

15

(et (t, p, z) , ep (t, p, z)) is to stay in the set of inaction I (z) or otherwise move to its boundary,
as explained below. The boundary of the set of inaction is described by two continuous functions,
p̂ and t̂ defined in p̂ : Z → R+ and t̂ : R+ × Z → [0, J · U] . The function t̂ is decreasing in
p and hits zero at a value of p ≤ p̂ (z) . The function t̂ is the boundary of the set of inaction for
the values t that are strictly positive. Formally, these functions define the set of inaction I (z) as
follows:
Definition 2 For each z ∈ Z,
©
ª
I (z) = (t, p) ∈ [0, J · U ] × R+ : p ≤ p̂ (z) , and t ≤ t̂ (p, z)

(10)

The optimal policy is as follows: if p ≤ p̂ (z) and the state is outside the set of inaction
I (z), temporary workers are fired until the boundary of I (z) is hit, with no change in permanent
workers. If p > p̂ (z) , all temporary workers are fired, and permanent workers are fired to hit
p̂ (z) . Formally,
©
ª
et (t, p, z) = min t, t̂ (p, z) ,

and ep (t, p, z) = min {p, p̂ (z)} .

Figure 1 illustrates the typical shape of the set of Inaction (for a given value of z).

16

(11)

The threshold p̂ (z) solves
θ − τ = f (p̂ (z) , z) + β

Z

∂v
(U, p̂ (z)) Q (z, dz 0 )
∂p

That is, p̂ is the lowest number of permanent workers for which the marginal value of a permanent
worker is equal to θ − τ and, thus, any additional permanent worker would be returned to the
central location.
Given (p, z), the function t̂ (p, z) is defined as the lowest number of temporary workers t for
which the marginal value of a temporary worker is equal to θ and, thus, any additional temporary
worker would be returned to the central location. The function t̂ (p, z) solves
Z
¡
¢
¢
∂v ¡
θ = f t̂ (p, z) + p, z + β
t̂ (p, z) + U, p Q (z, dz 0 )
∂t
for t̂ (p, z) ≤ (J − 1) U and

¡
¢
θ = f t̂ (p, z) + p, z + β

Z

¢
∂v ¡
JU, p + t̂ (p, z) − (J − 1) U Q (z, dz 0 )
∂p

for t̂ (p, z) ∈ ((J − 1) U, JU ]. To simplify the exposition we have written these expressions assuming that v is diﬀerentiable. If v is evaluated at integers multiples of U (where v is not diﬀerentiable),
the expressions would have to be rewritten in terms of the subgradients of v.
The intuition for why the frontier of the set of inaction, given by t̂, is decreasing in p is that
temporary and permanent workers are perfect substitutes in production. Indeed, it can be shown
that t̂ is strictly decreasing for values of p such that t̂ (p, z) is not an integer multiple of U. At the
points on which t̂ is an integer multiple of U, this function can be flat: At these points the function
v may not be diﬀerentiable, as explained above. While all these properties are quite intuitive, the
proofs are involved because of the non-diﬀerentiability of v (Appendix B provides more details).
The optimal decision rule for the island planning problem generates considerable churning of
temporary workers. To see that this is the case, consider an island in a state (t, p, z) satisfying
that p ≤ p̂ (z) and t ≥ t̂ (p, z). From equation (11) we know that such an island employs t̂ (p, z)
temporary workers and p permanent workers. Since the island receives U new workers every
period it follows that, as long as its productivity level remains at z, its state will be given by
¡
¢
t̂ (p, z) + U, p, z and it will employ t̂ (p, z) temporary workers and p permanent workers. From

Section 5.1 we know that the first temporary workers to be sent back to the central location
are those with the longest tenure. Thus, as long as the productivity level remains at z, the

17

island’s planner keeps replacing U temporary workers with the longest tenure with the new arrivals.
Observe that the undirected search assumption is crucial for obtaining this result: If search was
directed all new arrivals would be at islands that expand their employment levels and, therefore,
no churning of temporary workers would take place.

6

Competitive Equilibrium

The representative household has a continuum of members that share their employment risks.
Given the perfect consumption pooling at the household level, each household member seeks to
maximize her own expected discounted earnings regardless of risk.4
In what follows it will be useful to think of each island as a separate economy and define
an “island-level equilibrium,” taking as given the flow of new workers to the island, U, and the
value to a worker of leaving the island, θ. The resulting equilibrium decision rules at the island
level define an invariant distribution across island states, which together with U and θ must
satisfy certain conditions to constitute an “economy-wide equilibrium.” These conditions are that
the consumption market clears, the labor market clears, and the marginal rate of substitution
between consumption and leisure equals the flow value of search.
In this section we describe two notions of island-level equilibrium: one with spot labor markets
(SLM) and one with multiperiod employment relations (MER). The SLM specification has two
advantages: 1) It makes a straightforward connection with the island planning problem, and 2) it
is closely related to the standard McCall search model (on the workers’ side) and to the Hopenhayn
and Rogerson’s firing costs model (on the firms’ side). The advantage of the MER specification is
that it captures the nature of fixed-term employment contracts in a much more realistic way.
Appendix C gives a formal definition of a SLM equilibrium, relates it to the island planning
problem of Section 4 and characterizes the behavior of equilibrium wages. Appendix D provides
a similar analysis for a MER equilibrium.
In this section and most of appendices C and D we assume that γ = 0 (so that consumption
and leisure are perfect substitutes) and that the separation cost τ is a feature of the technology
4

An equivalent specification would be to identify each household with one individual and introduce complete

markets and employment/search lotteries, as in Prescott and Rios-Rull (1992). However, this alternative would
require introducing additional notation.

18

(as opposed to a tax rebated lump-sum to households). The first assumption is used to simplify
the description of an equilibrium. The second is used to show that the first and second welfare
theorems hold.
When γ ≥ 0 and τ is a tax, the equilibrium allocation satisfies the same conditions described

in Theorem 1, except that L ∈ (0, N), ω is replaced by ω̃ = ω / u0 (c), and aggregate consumption
c is given by the integral of output under the invariant distribution μ (without subtracting the
separation taxes τ ). It turns out that for Cobb-Douglas F and CRRA u, an equilibrium allocation
can always be obtained by re-scaling the eﬃcient allocation (that satisfies conditions (i)-(iv) in
Theorem 1) by some appropriate factor.

6.1

Spot Labor Markets

In an SLM equilibrium, firms and workers participate in competitive labor markets on each island.
Wages are indexed by j, the workers’ tenure on the island and by (T, z), the island-wide state.
As in the previous sections, a permanent worker is defined as having tenure j ≥ J on the island.
Whenever a firm decreases its employment of permanent workers, it must pay a separation cost
τ per unit reduction. Notice that it is the tenure at the island level, as opposed to the tenure
at the firm level, that determines if a worker separation is subject to the separation cost τ . This
unrealistic assumption aﬀords tractability by allowing a decentralization with spot labor markets.
The reason is that, since the separation costs are at the island level, workers are not tied to the
firms that hire them.
In an SLM equilibrium, a worker located on an island at the beginning of the period solves a
very simple problem: whether to stay on the island, receive the wage rate corresponding to her
tenure level and start the following period with a higher tenure level, or to leave, in which case
she can either search or engage in home production. This problem also applies to workers who
have just arrived at an island (i.e., with zero-tenure level). Moreover, in equilibrium searchers
contact an island in proportion to its frequency in the invariant distribution. Hence, the problem
for searchers is the same as in the classical McCall search model, except that wages depend on
tenure levels and the wage distribution is endogenous.
The problem for a firm in an SLM is similar to the one studied by Hopenhayn and Rogerson
(1993): Firms take the stochastic process for wages as given, behave as if they could hire and fire

19

any number of workers at these wages, and are subject to a cost τ per reduction of employment.
One diﬀerence is that in our formulation the separation cost τ applies only to workers with tenure
j ≥ J on the island, as opposed to all workers. Another diﬀerence is that the process for wages
at the island level is endogenously determined: The process for the island-level equilibrium wages
must be such that the demand for labor equals its supply at each tenure level and island-wide
state.
Since workers and firms take competitive wages as given, the equilibrium pattern of wages
across tenure levels must induce firms and workers to follow the employment adjustments described
in Figure 2. Proposition 36 in Appendix C shows that there are three equilibrium levels of wages
in a given location: one level for temporary workers with tenures j = 0, ..., J − 2, a second level for
workers that are about to become permanent, i.e., those with tenure J − 1, and a third level for
permanent workers, i.e., those with tenure J or higher. Temporary workers with tenures j = 0 to
j = J − 2 are paid their marginal productivity. Wages of workers with tenure J − 1, i.e., those that
would become permanent if they were to work during the current period, are (weakly) smaller
than their marginal productivity. Wages of permanent workers are (weakly) higher than those
with tenure J − 1.

6.2

Multiperiod Employment Relations

In the previous sections the separation cost τ applied to workers with tenure j ≥ J at the island
level, which allowed for a simple competitive structure with spot labor markets. In this section
we introduce an alternative and more realistic definition of a competitive equilibrium, where
separation costs are determined by the tenure of workers at the firm level. This specification
ties workers with firms and, hence, requires long-term contracts to achieve eﬃciency. In fact, we
will argue that the competitive equilibrium with long-term contracts and tenure at the firm level
supports the same equilibrium allocation as the spot labor market concept of the previous section.
This is an important result: There is no loss of realism in specifying that the relevant tenure for
temporary contracts is at the island level rather than at the firm level.
To obtain this equivalence result certain restrictions on the type of temporary contracts allowed
for are needed. However, this is not a weakness of the model: These restrictions resemble those
observed in actual countries. Indeed, since temporary contracts are often introduced with the

20

purpose of increasing flows out of unemployment, their implementation typically includes eligibility
clauses. An example is the Spanish reform of 1984, which significantly broadened the scope of
fixed-term contracts but specified that workers had to be registered as unemployed to be eligible
for temporary employment contracts (see the Appendix in Cabrales and Hopenhayn, 1997). In
Portugal temporary contracts could only be used by new firms, or by firms hiring long-term
unemployed or first-time job seekers (see Table 1 in Dolado et al., 2001). Another example is the
recently approved and later withdrawn CPE (“first employment contract”) legislation in France.
This type of contract would have allowed an employer to dismiss a worker younger than 25 during
the first two years of the contract, provided that he had never been employed at the time of his
hiring
To incorporate this type of eligibility restriction we assume that only workers that searched
during the previous period (i.e., that were unemployed) can be hired under temporary contracts.
If a firm hires a worker that was employed somewhere else on the island during the previous
period, the worker immediately becomes subject to regular firing taxes. In this scenario, the
market structure would have to be changed to accommodate the fact that workers would try to
exploit the bargaining power that they would gain by staying in the same firm. To avoid this,
we assume that firms and workers participate in island-wide competitive markets for binding,
long-term, state-contingent, wage contracts at the time of the hiring. Below we oﬀer an informal
description of the equilibrium using long-term contracts. Appendix D provides a formal treatment.
In this decentralization, firms and workers trade state contingent contracts in competitive labor
markets, specifying the periods of time that the worker will supply labor to the firm as a function
of the sequence of productivity shocks z t . Since employment must be continuous over time, each
contingent contract is eﬀectively reduced to a stopping time specifying the time of separation.
When the realized sequence of productivity shocks triggers a separation, the worker can choose
to oﬀer a new stopping time to the market or to leave the island and receive the outside value θ.
Each stopping time has its own price, which is taken as given by firms and workers.
There are two types of workers on the island: “incumbent” workers and “newly arrived” workers.
An “incumbent” is a worker that has been previously employed by some firm on the island. A
“newly arrived” worker is a worker that has just arrived at the island for the first time. The
stopping times sold by diﬀerent types of workers diﬀer in terms of the separation costs involved.
In particular, the stopping times sold by “newly arrived” workers are subject to the separation

21

cost τ only if the separation occurs after J periods (the length of the trial periods in the fixedterm contracts). On the contrary, the stopping times sold by “incumbents” are always subject
to the separation cost τ . Since the stopping times sold by the diﬀerent types of workers are
diﬀerent commodities, they have, in general, diﬀerent prices. Intuitively, a stopping time sold by
an “incumbent” worker will have a lower price than the same stopping time sold by a “newly
arrived” worker to compensate firms for the potentially higher separation costs.
Taking prices as given, firms decide how many stopping times of each type to purchase from
the diﬀerent types of workers. Their objective is to maximize the expected present value of their
profits, net of separation costs.
Despite the unusual commodities traded and the indivisibility in the supply of contracts, the
competitive equilibrium considered is standard and, hence, the welfare theorems hold. The equilibrium allocation can then be characterized as the solution to a social planner’s problem. In this
problem, the planner chooses stopping times for “incumbents” and “newly arrived” workers taking
into account that the separation cost τ applies to “incumbent” workers in every separation, but
that it applies to “newly arrived” workers only in separations that take place after J periods of
employment.
A brief analysis of the planner’s problem will help us to understand the equivalence between
this type of equilibrium and the SLM equilibrium of the previous section. To start with, note
that the social planner will never want to separate a “newly arrived” worker and rehire him as
an “incumbent” before the trial period for the fixed-term contracts is over. The reason is that
being rehired as an “incumbent” makes the worker liable to separation costs, while maintaining his
“newly arrived” status saves on separation costs during the trial period. Also, the social planner
will never want to separate a “newly arrived” worker after the trial period is over and rehire him
under an “incumbent” contract because this entails incurring the separation cost τ without any
benefit. As a consequence, the planner will choose the stopping times for “newly arrived” workers
in such a way that they separate only to leave the island (and receive the value θ). This means
that the social planner will never use “incumbent” workers. Being left with only “newly arrived”
workers, the planner’s problem is formally identical to the island planning problem described in
Section 4. This has an important implication: The allocation obtained in the MER equilibrium
(with tenure at the firm level) is identical to the one obtained in the SLM equilibrium (with tenure
at the island level). Moreover, the price of a stopping time sold by a “newly arrived” worker in

22

the MER equilibrium must be equal to the expected discounted value of the spot wages obtained
by a “newly arrived” worker in the SLM equilibrium.

7

Computational Experiments

In this section we evaluate to what extent the introduction of temporary contracts adds flexibility
to the labor market. To this end we consider as a benchmark the case where J = 1 and τ > 0
and calibrate it to an economy with high separation taxes and no temporary contracts.5 Once
the benchmark economy (hereafter referred to as the “firing-tax” case) is parameterized, we compute competitive equilibria under temporary employment contracts of diﬀerent lengths (i.e., with
diﬀerent values for J) and evaluate their eﬀects.
For comparison purposes we also compute the equilibrium allocation under zero separation
taxes, which we refer to as the “laissez-faire” case. This is an interesting case to consider because
the equilibrium allocation with temporary employment contracts of long duration coincides with
the equilibrium allocation under laissez-faire. The reason is quite simple: With a large enough J,
firms can perfectly replicate their laissez-faire employment levels by using only temporary workers.
Given this property, we address the question of how much flexibility the temporary contracts
generate by computing what fraction of the gap between the firing-tax and laissez-faire cases is
closed when temporary contracts of diﬀerent length J are introduced.
We note that in the laissez-faire case, which is obtained by setting τ = 0, the value of J and
the tenure levels of diﬀerent workers are immaterial because temporary and permanent workers
become perfect substitutes. This implies that, while total employment is uniquely determined, the
hiring and firing rates across the diﬀerent tenure levels are undetermined. Despite this, we choose
to focus on the employment adjustments obtained as the limit when τ → 0 (or equivalently, when
τ is arbitrarily small). This is useful because it helps emphasize the types of adjustments that
temporary contracts lead to even in the case in which they are totally unimportant.
The section is divided into three parts: The first part motivates the computational exercise
with empirical observations, the second part calibrates the model, and the third part reports the
5

When J = 1, the dismissal of anyone that has worked, even for one period, triggers the separation tax

τ > 0. Thus, there are no temporary workers in this case.

23

results.
Some empirical background
Since the introduction of fixed-term contracts during the 1980s, the fraction of workers hired
under this modality has expanded steadily in Europe, reaching more than 13 percent in 2000.
However, there are large cross-country diﬀerences in the scope and duration of fixed-term contracts.
For instance, some countries restrict these contracts to certain occupations and type of workers,
while others give them broad applicability. In what follows we focus on the case of Spain, because
in 1984 Spain substantially liberalized the applicability of temporary contracts at a time when
the country had one of the highest employment protection levels in Europe (see Cabrales and
Hopenhayn, 1997, and Heckman and Pages-Serra, 2000). From 1984 to 1991, the fraction of
workers with fixed-term contracts in Spain went from 11 percent to more than 30 percent, and
almost all the hiring in the economy was done under this form of contract (see Hopenhayn and
Garcia-Fontes, 1996).6
Figure 2, which is taken from Cabrales and Hopenhayn (1997), displays estimates for the onequarter transition probabilities from employment to unemployment during the six years before and
after the 1984 reform, as a function of the length of the employment spells. It shows that the firing
rates increased significantly after the reform and that a spike formed at an employment duration
of three years, which (not surprisingly) corresponds to the maximum fixed-term contract length
allowed by the reform. Thus, the introduction of fixed-term contracts appears to have significant
eﬀects on worker reallocation. In fact, there is considerable agreement in the empirical literature
that the main eﬀects of introducing fixed-term contracts are a substantial increase in the flows
from unemployment to employment (i.e., a decrease in the average duration of unemployment),
and a significant increase in the flows from employment to unemployment (i.e., an increase in the
firing rate) as can be seen, for example, in the literature survey by Dolado et al. (2001). The net
eﬀect of these two opposing forces on the unemployment rate is not clear, but the evidence seems
to indicate a small increase.
6

These reforms were partially undone during the 1990s, when the maximum length of the fixed-term contracts

was reduced from three years to one year, and the severance payments for ordinary indefinite-length contracts were
substantially reduced. However, even after this partial reversal, the fraction of workers under fixed-term contracts
stabilized at about 33 percent.

24

FIGURE 2: Firing Rates in Spain
Hazard Rates for Transition from Employment into Nonemployment

Percentage fired over employment, by tenure in the firm

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

After 1984

Before 1984

0.05

0

2

4

6

8

10
12
14
16
18
20
Quarters of tenure
From Table 9, Cabrales and Hopenhayn 1997

Calibration
We calibrate our model to the Spanish economy prior to the 1984 reform, which (as was
mentioned above) was characterized by high separation costs and no temporary contracts (i.e.,
high τ and J = 1). The value for τ is selected to reproduce the expected discounted dismissal
cost when a worker is hired for the first time, a measure proposed by Heckman and Pages-Serra
(2000). It turns out that a value of τ equal to one year of average wages is needed to reproduce
this measure under the pre-1984 Spanish regime (see Appendix E for details).
We use α = 0.64 for the curvature parameter in the production function F (E, z) = zE α , which
roughly corresponds to the labor share. This choice implicitly assumes that all other factors, such
as capital, are fixed across locations. Since we use a quarterly time period, we choose β = 0.96 to
generate an annual interest rate of 4 percent.
For the idiosyncratic shocks z, we use a discrete Markov chain approximation to the following
AR(1) process: log z 0 = ρ log z + σε, where ε is a standard normal. We choose the values of ρ and
σ so that the unemployment rate is just above 6.75 percent and the duration of unemployment is
just above one year. The exact values that we use are ρ = 0.955 and σ 2 = 0.075, which correspond
to a discrete approximation that uses six truncated values for z, so that the absolute value of
ε never exceeds two standard deviations. Under these parameter values, the quarterly firing rate

25

(total separations divided by employment) in the benchmark case is 1.77 percent. By contrast,
Garcia-Fontes and Hopenhayn (1996) estimate a firing rate of 1.84 percent per quarter for the
years 1978-1984. Observe that our choices are meant to capture the situation in Spain before
the 1984 reform. The reason why we choose a lower unemployment rate and a lower duration of
unemployment than those observed in Spain is that we are abstracting from its unemployment
insurance system.7
We consider diﬀerent values of γ. In each case we pick the value of ω so that labor force
participation equals 65 percent in the benchmark case.8 The rest of the parameters are the same
for each pair (γ, ω).
Experiments
We compute equilibria under diﬀerent values of J, the length of the temporary contracts, and
compare them with the benchmark and laissez-faire cases. Since these two cases correspond to
J = 1 and J = ∞, respectively, these comparisons allow us to determine what fraction of the total
potential gains in labor market flexibility is realized by diﬀerent temporary contracts lengths.
As we vary the value of J we set τ to the same proportion of economy-wide wages. For
reasons outlined at the beginning of Section 5, if F is Cobb-Douglass and τ is proportional to
economy-wide wages, a number of statistics become independent of the intertemporal substitution
parameter 1/γ. In particular, the unemployment rate, the average duration of unemployment,
and the firing rates are the same in all cases. For this reason, we start by describing the eﬀects of
temporary contracts on this set of statistics. Without loss of generality we set γ = 0. This is the
simplest case to interpret because consumption and leisure become perfect substitutes and, as a
consequence, the equilibrium value of θ must be equal to ω/ (1 − β), a parameter independent of
policy.
7

In Alvarez and Veracierto (1999) we analyzed the eﬀects of introducing unemployment insurance benefits into

the model with firing taxes. Introducing UI benefits of the magnitude of those in Spain increases the unemployment
rate by more than 10% and more than doubles its average duration (see section “UI benefits, firing subsidies, firing
taxes and severance payments” and Table 5 of Alvarez and Veracierto, 1999).
8

The diﬀerent combinations of (γ, ω) are: (0, 1.3047) , (1/2, 1.0739) , (1, 0.883) and (8, 0.058) . With γ =

0, there are no income eﬀects, since preferences are linear. With γ = 1, income and substitution eﬀects of a
permanent increase in wages cancel. With γ = 8, the income eﬀect is much higher, so that the uncompensated
labor supply elasticity is lower, similar to the values estimated by Nickell (1997).

26

In Figures 3-5, equilibrium values are reported as a function of the length of the temporary
contracts J and depicted under the “general equilibrium” label. Observe that the “general equilibrium” values for J = 1 correspond to the benchmark case with firing taxes and no temporary
contracts. Laissez-faire values are reported under the “laissez-faire” label. In addition, to illustrate the role of general equilibrium eﬀects in generating diﬀerences between the benchmark J = 1
and the laissez-faire cases, a third set of values is reported under the “partial equilibrium” label.
For each J > 1, these are the values associated with the solution to the island planner’s problem
when the U and θ that the planner takes as given are the ones from the benchmark case. Observe
that any diﬀerences between the “partial” and “general” equilibrium schedules must be due to
equilibrium eﬀects on U, since θ is fixed when γ = 0. Also observe that U will always be higher
in the “general equilibrium” case than in the “partial equilibrium” case. The reason for this is
that with J > 1 there are fewer restrictions to labor mobility. This increases the shadow value
of an additional worker at every island and induces a larger fraction of the population to search.9
For similar reasons, the equilibrium value of U will always be increasing with J. A consequence
of this is that for 1 < J < ∞, the equilibrium value of U will always lie between the benchmark
and laissez-faire cases.
Figure 3 shows the eﬀects on the unemployment rate ur = U/(U + E). We see that the
unemployment rate increases with the length of the temporary contracts J and is almost 2.5
percent higher in the laissez-faire case than in the benchmark J = 1 case. With temporary
contracts of three years duration (J = 12), the unemployment rate is 1.3 percent points higher
than in the benchmark case. Temporary contracts of this length, which are similar to those
introduced by the 1984 Spanish reform, are thus able to close about half of the gap with the
laissez-faire case.10 Figure 3 also shows that the equilibrium eﬀects on U are crucial for generating
the higher unemployment rates: The eﬀects on the unemployment rate are non-monotonic and
small in the partial equilibrium case.11
9

Because of the decreasing returns to scale at the island level, the higher value for U reduces the shadow value

of an additional worker at every island and restores the general equilibrium.
10

In the data the relationship between unemployment and temporary contracts is not as clear. However, Dolado

et al. (2001) survey the literature and conclude that the introduction of temporary contracts in Spain had a
“neutral or slightly positive eﬀect on unemployment.”
11

These partial equilibrium eﬀects are consistent with previous findings in the literature. The island planner

27

To better understand the eﬀects on the unemployment rate (Figure 3) it is helpful to decompose
them into firing rate eﬀects (Figure 4) and average duration of unemployment eﬀects (Figure 5).
Figure 4 shows the eﬀects on the firing rate f r, defined as total firing over total employment.
Recall that for the laissez-faire and the partial equilibrium cases, the values of U and θ are the
same across all J. As it should be expected, the firing rates for laissez-faire are higher than the ones
for the partial equilibrium case for all values of J. Notice that the firing rates in these two cases
are increasing in J, with a large jump at J = 2. To understand this pattern we concentrate on the
laissez-faire case where the employment on each island stays constant. Recall that we compute
employment by tenure in the laissez-faire case as the limit for an equilibrium with τ → 0. The
increase in the firing rate helps to avoid the (arbitrarily small) separation tax. The firing rate
jumps between J = 1 and J = 2 because, with J = 2, the temporary workers with longest tenure
are fired and replaced by newly arrived workers. This reshuﬄing cannot be done with J = 1. The
smooth increase in the firing rate with J is due to the fact that with higher J, firms can accumulate
a larger proportion of their work force as temporary workers. With this larger proportion, if they
need to decrease total employment they can do so at the same time that they hire newly arrived
workers. Notice that the pattern of firing rates as a function of J for the partial equilibrium
case where the separation costs are substantial (one year of average wages) is the same as in the
laissez-faire case, with essentially zero firing taxes.
problem is similar to the standard problem of a firm facing firing costs (except that its hiring is bounded above
by the arrival of new workers U ) and we know at least since Bentolila and Bertola (1990) that the eﬀects of firing
costs on average employment are ambiguous in that setting.

28

FIGURE 3: Unemployment Rate
9.5
Partial Eq. τ = 1 year w
General Eq. τ = 1 year w
Laissez Faire, τ −> 0

G.E. τ −> 0

Unemployment Rate, in %

9

8.5

8

7.5
G.E. τ = 1 year w

7
P.E. τ = 1 year w
* J = 1 : Firing Taxes
6.5

0

2

4
6
8
Length of the contract J, in quarters

10

12

FIGURE 4: Firing Rate
6
Partial Eq. τ = 1 year w
General Eq. τ = 1 year w
Laissez Faire, τ −> 0

5.5
G.E. τ −> 0

Firing as % of employment

5

4.5
P.E. τ = 1 year w

G.E. τ = 1 year w

4

3.5

3

2.5

2
* J = 1 : Firing Taxes
1.5

0

2

4
6
8
Length of the contract J, in quarters

10

12

The value for the firing rate in the general equilibrium case lies in between the value for the
partial equilibrium case and the one for the laissez-faire case, and it gets closer to the one for the
laissez-faire case as J increases. Since in general equilibrium firms receive a higher flow of newly
arrived workers (i.e., a higher U), they can engage more in the replacement of temporary workers
with high tenure for newly arrived workers to save on separation costs.
The quarterly firing rate for the general equilibrium case goes from 1.77 percent for J = 1 to

29

5.1 percent for J = 12, roughly similar to the values for Spain before and after 1984: Garcia-Fontes
and Hopenhayn (1996) estimate quarterly firing rates of 1.84 percent during the six years prior to
the extension of temporary contracts and 4.8 percent for the six years after. The model slightly
overestimate these eﬀects, since comparing the eﬀect in the model for J = 1 with J = 12 does not
correspond exactly to Spain before and after 1984 – before 1984 some temporary contracts were
allowed, as we explain below.
Figure 5 shows the average duration of unemployment d, defined as (1/f r) ur / (1 − ur). The
three cases display similar values. There is a large drop in the average duration between the
benchmark case and J = 2. This is the result of the increase in hiring of newly arrived workers, as
explained in the case of Figure 4. Since d is similar for the three cases, the eﬀects on unemployment
are accounted by the behavior of firing rates discussed above. Notice that, as opposed to the
jumps at J = 2 for the firing rate and average duration of unemployment, the increase in the
unemployment rate for the general equilibrium is smooth (compare Figure 3 with Figures 4 and
5). This is because for J = 2, the sharp decrease in the average duration of unemployment
coincides with a sharp increase in the firing rate.
FIGURE 5: Average Duration of Unemployment
4.5
Partial Eq. τ = 1 year w
General Eq. τ = 1 year w
Laissez Faire, τ −> 0

* J = 1 : Firing Taxes

Average Duration, in quarters

4

3.5

3

2.5

G.E. τ = 1 year w

2

G.E. τ −> 0
P.E. τ = 1 year w

1.5

0

2

4
6
8
Length of the contract J, in quarters

30

10

12

FIGURE 6: Share of Permanent Workers in Total Employment for differentg contract length J
1
τ = 1 year of wages
limit as τ −> 0

τ = 1 year of wages

.

Permament Workers Employment / Total Employment

0.95

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75

0.7
limit as τ −> 0
0.65

0

2

4
6
8
Length of the contract J, in quarters

10

12

Figure 6 displays the fraction of permanent workers in total employment for the general equilibrium and laissez-faire cases. The fraction of permanent workers is higher for the general equilibrium case than for the laissez-faire case, since in the general equilibrium case firms retain more
permanent workers to avoid the high separation cost. Nevertheless, the fraction of permanent
workers is very similar in the two cases. Notice also that as J increases, the fraction of permanent
workers decreases steadily. For J = 12, which corresponds to temporary contracts of three years,
33 percent of workers are in temporary contracts. In Europe in the 1990s, the fraction of workers
with temporary contracts increased steadily over time to about 12 percent, reaching its highest
value in Spain; there this fraction went from 11 percent before 1984 to an average of 33 percent
during the 1990s.
Notice that the patterns displayed in Figures 5 and 6 for the average duration of unemployment
and the share of permanent workers in total employment are similar to the ones found in Spain
after the mid-1980s and have typically being interpreted as evidence that temporary contracts
play an important role. However, in our model similar patterns are obtained for τ equal to one
year of average wages as well as for τ arbitrarily small, which shows that by itself, large changes
in turnover do not necessarily entail large changes in welfare and other relevant variables, such
as employment, unemployment, aggregate consumption and productivity. We obtain this result
under the extreme assumption that workers with diﬀerent tenure are perfect substitutes. Under a

31

diﬀerent specification, such as on-the-job learning, this result will not be obtained. In particular,
if the eﬀect of on-the-job learning is large enough, a small separation cost may have a very small
eﬀect on turnover rates. Nevertheless, we interpret the spike in Figure 1 for tenure of about three
years, as evidence that the eﬀects of separation taxes are not completely outweighed by learning.12
We leave the examination of a model that incorporates both features for future work.
Figure 7 shows the behavior of employment for the general equilibrium case for diﬀerent values
of γ. As J increases, there are both income and substitution eﬀects. The substitution eﬀect is
due to the fact that as J increases, firms have more flexibility and thus working in the market
is more attractive, i.e., the equilibrium value of θ increases. The income eﬀect is due to the fact
that the economy is more productive. For low values of γ, the substitution eﬀect dominates and
thus aggregate employment increases with J. For high values of γ, the income eﬀect dominates
and thus aggregate employment decreases with J.
Figure 8 displays the welfare cost of temporary contracts of diﬀerent lengths. This figure plots
the extra perpetual consumption flow needed to make the representative household indiﬀerent
between living in the economy with temporary contracts of length J and living in the laissez-faire
economy. This calculation compares the stationary equilibrium of the two economies and hence
does not take into account the transition after a change in policy. For the same J, the welfare
cost is higher for smaller γ, since in this case there is more substitution between consumption and
leisure. For J = 1, Figure 8 shows the welfare cost of firing taxes, which are about 2.5 percent.
This number is similar to the one found by Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) and Veracierto (2001).
As J increases the welfare cost decreases: It goes from about 2.5 percent for a contract length of
one quarter and decreases smoothly with J until a value of 1 percent for a contract length of three
years, or J = 12. Thus, even if some characteristics of the allocation (such as employment in Figure
7) do not converge monotonically to their laissez-faire values as J increases, the welfare cost, which
in a sense takes all the relevant features into consideration, does converges monotonically.
12

With on-the-job learning and firing costs, if the eﬀect of learning is strong enough, it will not be optimal for

the firm to fire first the temporary workers with higher tenure. In this case, the spike at the end of the fixed-term
contracts shown for Spain in Figure 1 will not obtain.

32

FIGURE 7: Equilibrium Employment for different values of γ
For τ = 1 year of wages
0.66

0.65

Employemnt/Population

0.64

0.63

0.62
γ=0

γ = 1/2
γ=1

0.61

0.6
γ=8
0.59

0

2

4
6
8
Length of the contract J, in quarters

10

12

Figure 8: Welfare Cost of Contracts
Consumption equivalent relative to Laissez−Faire
3
J=1 is the Firing Tax case

2.5
γ=0

In percentage

2

γ = 0.5

1.5

γ=1
γ=8
1

0.5

0

0

2

4
6
8
Length of the Contract J, in quarters

10

12

An important quantitative finding of this paper is that introducing temporary employment
contracts of three-year length provides 50 percent as much flexibility as moving to laissez-faire.
We focus on two statistics: the unemployment rate, which summarizes labor reallocation, and
welfare, which summarizes overall eﬀects. The diﬀerences in these statistics between the laissezfaire case (τ = 0) and the benchmark case (J = 1, τ > 0) measure the flexibility that can be

33

gained by a labor market reform that achieves the first-best allocation. We found that a labor
market reform that replaces the benchmark firing taxes with temporary contracts of three-year
length (J = 12, τ > 0) closes about 50 percent of those diﬀerences.
This result holds for two diﬀerent parametrizations of the economy, in addition to the baseline
calibration. The first one has low separation taxes, with τ of half the value used so far (τ = 1/2
year of average wages). This case is interesting because, as explained in Alvarez and Veracierto
(1986), we set the model firing taxes to the value of separation taxes that include transfers from
firms to workers (severance payments), but a fraction of these transfers could potentially be undone
by private contracting between firms and workers. The second parameterization has a linear
production function (α = 1, so F (E, z) = z E). This case is interesting because we use a
production function where labor is the only mobile factor, and hence the labor share and its
returns to scale cannot be separately identified. If there were other factors besides labor that were
mobile across locations (such as capital), the degree of decreasing returns would be much lower.
For each of the two additional cases, we recalibrate the economy with firing taxes (J = 1) to the
same observations as before, introduce temporary contracts of three-year length (J = 12 ), and
evaluate the eﬀects on the unemployment rate and welfare. Rows 1—3 and 5-6 of Table 1 report
the values for the unemployment rate and welfare for each of the cases. Rows 4 and 7 report the
fraction of the gap (i.e., the diﬀerence in the statistics between the benchmark and laissez-faire
cases) that the introduction of the temporary contracts closes. Rows 4 and 7 show that, in all
cases, a labor market reform that replaces firing taxes with temporary contracts of three-year
length achieves more than 40 percent of the potential welfare gains of labor market reform and
more than 50 percent of the increase in the unemployment rate.13
13

The finding that the welfare costs of firing taxes are larger in the “linear case” than in the “baseline case”

(i.e. 8.4% vs. 2.28%) merits some explanation. Calibrating the “linear case” to the same average duration of
unemployment and unemployment rate as the “baseline case” requires a lower variance and a lower persistence
for the idiosyncratic shocks, which reduces the potential costs of misallocating resources across the islands (since
the islands become more similar). However, under a linear production function, the employment decision rules
become much more responsive to the introduction of firing taxes, magnifying their distortionary eﬀects. Under the
calibration considered, this last eﬀect dominates the welfare results.

34

Table 1
Baseline

Low firing tax

Linear F

τ = 1, α = .64 τ = .5 , α = .64 τ = 1, α = 1
(1) Unempl. rate F.T.

6.75%

6.76 %

6.72%

(2) Unempl. rate T.C.

8.02%

7.30%

9.54%

(3) Unempl. rate L.F.

9.10%

7.79%

12.16%

(4) % Gap Unempl. rate

54 %

52 %

52 %

(5) Welfare cost F.T.

2.28%

0.70%

8.4%

(6) Welfare cost T.C.

1.0%

0.28%

3.7%

(7) % Gap Welfare

44 %

40 %

44 %

F.T. stands for firing taxes (τ > 0, J = 1); T.C. stands for temporary contracts (τ > 0, J = 12); and
L.F. stands for “laissez-faire” (τ = 0). Welfare cost is the consumption equivalent relative to laissez-faire
for γ = 1. Row (4) = [(2)-(1)] /[ (3)-(1)] and (7) = (6)/(5). τ is measured in years of economy-wide,
average wages.

8

References

Alonso-Borrego, Cesar, Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, and Jose E. Galdon-Sanchez, (2004) “Evaluating Labor Market Reforms: A General Equilibrium Approach”, U. of Pennsylvania mimeo.
Alvarez, Fernando and Veracierto, Marcelo, (1999) “Labor-Market Policies in an Equilibrium
Search Model”, NBER, Macroeconomic Annual, 1999, pp. 265-303.
Alvarez, Fernando and Veracierto, Marcelo, (2001) “Severance Payments in an Economy with
Frictions”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, pp. 477-498.
Bentolila, Samuel, and Bertola Giuseppe, (1990) “Firing costs and labour demand: how bad
is Euroesclerosis?”, Review of Economic Studies, 57, pp. 381-402.
Bentolila, Samuel, and Saint-Paul, Gilles, (1992) “The macroeconomic impact of flexible labor
contracts, with an application to Spain”, European Economic Review, 36, pp. 1013-1053.

35

Bertola, Giuseppe, Boeri, Tito, and Cazes, Sandrine (2000) “Employment protection in industrialized countries: The case for new indicators, International Labour Review, 139, 57-72.
Blanchard, Olivier and Landier, Augustin, (2002) “The Perverse Eﬀects of Partial Labor Market Reform: Fixed-Term Contracts in France”, Economic Journal, 112, pp. F214-F244..
Cabrales, A. and Hopenhayn, Hugo, (1997) “Labor Market Flexibility and Aggregate Employment Volatility”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 46, pp. 189-228.
Dolado, Juan, Garcia-Serrano, Carlos, and Jimeno, Juan F., (2001) “Drawing Lessons from
the Boom of Temporary Jobs in Spain”, Documento de Trabajo 2001-11, FEDEA.
Garcia-Fontes, Walter and Hopenhayn, Hugo, (1996) “Flexibilización y volatilidad del empleo”,
Moneda y Credito, No. 202.
Heckman, James, and Pages-Serra, Carmen, (2000) “The cost of Job Security Regulations:
Evidence from Latin American Labor Markets”, NBER Working Paper 7773.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, (1992) “Entry, Exit and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium”, Econometrica, 60, pp. 1127-1150.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, and Rogerson, Richard, (1993) “Job turnover and policy evaluation: a
general equilibrium analysis”. Journal of Political Economy, 101, pp. 915-938.
Jovanovic, Boyan, (1987) “Work, Rest, and Search: Unemployment, Turnover, and the Cycle”,
Journal of Labor Economics 5, pp. 131-148.
Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Manovskii, Iourii, (2007) “Occupational Mobility and Wage Inequality”, University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Lucas, Robert, and Prescott, Edward, (1974) “Equilibrium search and unemployment”. Journal of Economic Theory 106, pp. 514-550.
McCall, John (1970) “Economics of Information and Job Search”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, pp. 113-26.
Millard, Stephen, and Mortensen, Dale, (1997) “The unemployment and welfare eﬀects of
labour market policy: A comparison of the U.S. and the U.K”. In Unemployment Policy: How
Should Governments Respond to Unemployment? D. Snower and G. de la Dehesa (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mortensen, Dale and Pissarides, Christopher, (1994) “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment”, Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), pp. 397-415.
Nagypal, Eva, (2002) “The Cost of Employment Protection in the Presence of Match-Specific

36

Learning”. University of Northwestern manuscript.
Nickell, S., (1997) “Unemployment and labor Market Rigidities: Europe vs. North America”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3), pp. 55-74.
Prescott, Edward, and Mehra, Rajnish, (1980) “Recursive competitive Equilibrium: the case
of homogeneous households”. Econometrica, 48, pp. 1365-1379.
Prescott, Edward and Rios-Rull, Victor, (1992) “Classical Competitive Analysis of Economies
with Island”, Journal of Economic Theory, 57, 73-98
Rogerson, Richard, (1988). “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, 3-16.
Stole, Lars and Zwiebel, Jeﬀrey, (1996) “Organizational Design and Technology Choice under
Intrafirm Bargaining”. American Economic Review, v.86, n1, pp. 195-222
Rockafellar, Tyrrell, (1997) “Convex Analysis”, Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics.
Veracierto, Marcelo, (2001) “Employment Flows, Capital Mobility, and Policy Analysis”, International Economic Review, v23, n3, pp. 571-595.
Veracierto, Marcelo, (2007) “On the short-run eﬀects of labor market reforms”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, v54, n4, May 2007, pp. 1213-1229.
Veracierto, Marcelo, (2008) “On the Cyclical Behavior of Employment, Unemployment, and
Labor Force Participation”, Journal of Monetary Economics, v55, pp. 1143-1157.

37

Technical appendix to:

Fixed Term Employment Contracts
in an Equilibrium Search Model

Fernando Alvarez
University of Chicago and NBER
Marcelo Veracierto
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago

This document contains 7 appendices:
Appendix A: Analysis of the Island Planning Problem.
Appendix B: Analysis of the Simplified Island Planning Problem.
Appendix C: Analysis of Spot Labor Market (“SLM”).
Appendix D: Analysis of Multiperiod Employment Relations (“MER”): Binding
contracts and tenure at the firm level (a formal description).
Appendix E: Calibration of τ .
Appendix F: Proofs.
Appendix G: Definition of Auxiliary Competitive Equilibrium (“ACE”).

i

Appendix A: Analysis of the Island Planning Problem
Consider the problem of the planner of an island that receives U workers per period and that starts with workers
(T1 , T2 , ..., TJ−1 , TJ ) where Ti is the number of workers with tenure i = 1, 2, ..., J. Define E as the set of possible
J−1
× R+ . The planners value function V : E × Z solves
workers tenure profiles, E = [0, U ]
H [V ] (T1 , T2 , ..., TJ−1 , TJ , z)
( Ã J
! J−1
X
X
Ei , z +
θ [Ti − Ei ] + (θ − τ ) [TJ − EJ ]
=
max F
{Ei }J
i=0

+β

Z

i=0

i=0

V (E0 , E1 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 )

(12)

¾

subject to
0 ≤ E0 ≤ U,
0 ≤ Ei ≤ Ti for i = 1, 2, ..., J.
The fixed point of H gives the stationary version of the island planning problem stated in Definition 38.
Proposition 3 H maps concave functions into concave ones.
We use the following notation for subgradients. Let G : X → R be a concave function. We use ∂G (x) to denote
its subgradient at x (if it is clear the value of x from the context we simply use ∂G ). In our case X ⊂ Rn , we use
∂Gxi (x) for i = 1, 2, ..., n (and ∂Gxi when it is clear) to denote the projection of ∂G (x) into the subspace of the
x0i s. Abusing notation, we use Gxi (x) (and Gi when it is clear) to denote a generic element of ∂Gxi (x) , so that
Gxi (x) ∈ ∂Gxi (x) .
The next proposition gives a useful result, ordering the subgradients of V
Proposition 4 Consider a function V satisfying
VT1
VT1
for all z and T > 0, where
Then,

≥ VT2 ≥ · · · ≥ VTJ−1 ≥ VTJ ,
≤ VTJ + τ

(13)
(14)

¡
¢
VT1 , VT2 , . . . , VTJ−1 , VTJ ∈ ∂V (T, z) .
H [V ]T1
H [V ]T1

≥ H [V ]T2 ≥ · · · ≥ H [V ]TJ−1 ≥ H [V ]TJ ,
≤ H [V ]TJ + τ

(15)
(16)

for all z and T > 0, where
³
´
H [V ]T1 , H [V ]T2 , . . . , H [V ]TJ−1 , H [V ]TJ ∈ ∂H [V ] (T, z) .

Intuitively it follows from the assumption that workers are perfect substitutes and from the fact that τ > 0.
The following proposition and corollaries are important to characterize the solution of the problem and reduce
its dimensionality.
Proposition 5 Let V satisfy (13). Then the policies for H [V ] satisfy
the following. ´
Let E = (E0 , E1 , ..., EJ−1, EJ ) ∈
³
J
[0, U ] × R+ be feasible given T . Consider an alternative Ẽ = Ẽ0 , Ẽ1 , ..., ẼJ−1, ẼJ such that: i) it is feasible for
T , ii)
J−1
J−1
X
X
Ẽj and EJ = ẼJ ,
Ej =
j=0

j=0

0

and iii) there is a j such that Ẽj ≥ Ej for all j ≤ j 0 ≤ J − 1 and that Ẽj = 0 for all j, j 0 < j ≤ J − 1. Then Ẽ is
weakly preferred to E.

ii

Corollary 6 The optimal policy can be chosen with the following property:
(*) If Ej < Tj for some j, 1 ≤ j ≤ J − 1, then Ej 0 = 0 for all j 0 : j < j 0 ≤ J − 1.
The following corollary states that the ergodic set is a subset of E, which is given by equation (8).
Corollary 7 If T ∈ E and T 0 is given by the optimal policy
T 0 = (T10 , T20 , ..., TJ0 ) = (E0 , E1 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ )
then T 0 ∈ E.
The next set of results establish that the fixed point V = H [V ] is diﬀerentiable and its derivatives are indeed
given by Vj∗ in equation (7). The results in the next three lemmas and two propositions are analogous to standard
manipulations of first order conditions, except for the fact that V may not be diﬀerentiable.
J+1
Let define the function R̂ (E, z) , as follows: R̂ : R+
×Z →R
R̂ (E, z) = F

Ã J
X

Ei , z

i=0

+β

Z

!

−θ

J−1
X
i=0

Ei − (θ − τ ) EJ

V (E0 , E1 , . . . , EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) .

The first lemma shows a standard saddle-type result for the problem defining H [V ] .
Lemma 8 Let V be concave. Fix T, z and let
n
o
H [V ] (T, z) = max R̂ (E, z) + θ̂T : 0 ≤ E ≤ T ,
E
n
o
E (T, z) = arg max R̂ (E, z) : 0 ≤ E ≤ T .

(17)

E

Then

θ̂ + λ∗ = (H [V ]0 , H [V ]1 , ..., H [V ]J ) ∈ ∂H [V ] (T, z)

if and only if λ∗ is a Lagrange multiplier, i.e.

R̂ (E ∗ , z) + λ (T − E ∗ ) ≥ R̂ (E ∗ , z) + λ∗ (T − E ∗ )
≥ R̂ (E, z) + λ∗ (T − E)

(18)

for all non-negative E, λ, where θ̂ = (θ, ..., θ, θ − τ ) , E ∗ = E (T, z) and U = T0 .
Notice that since R̂ is concave and the restrictions are linear, E (T, z) solves problem (17) if and only if there
is a saddle (E ∗ , λ∗ ) as in equation (18) -see, for example, “Analytical Method in Economics”, Takayama, Theorem
2.9-.
The next lemma shows the Kuhn-Tucker conditions for this problem.
Lemma 9 Let V be concave. A necessary and suﬃcient condition for E ∗ = {Ei∗ }Ji=0 to solve
E ∗ ∈ arg max R̂ (E, z) s.t. 0 ≤ E ≤ T
E

n oJ
given T, z, and there exists a R̂i

i=0

∈ ∂ R̂ (E ∗ , z) such that (E ∗ , λ∗ ) is a saddle where
λ∗i = R̂i∗ .

Given our previous results we can now write the analogous to the Euler equations.

iii

(19)

Proposition 10 Let V be concave. Fix T, z. Then, 0 ≤ E ∗ ≤ T is an optimal choice given T, z if and only if for
n oJ
J
∈ ∂ R̂ (E ∗ , z) such that
all {H [V ]i (T, z)}i=0 ∈ ∂H [V ] (T, z) , there is a R̂i
i=0

H [V ]i (T, z) = R̂i (E ∗ , z) + θ for i = 0, . . . , J − 1
Ã J
!
X
Ei∗ , z − θ
R̂i (E ∗ , z) ≥ f

Zi=0
¡
¢
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )
+β Vi+1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2

with = if Ei∗ > 0
R̂i (E ∗ , z) ≥ 0,
0 = (H [V ]i (T, z) − θ) (Ti − Ei∗ ) , and

H [V ]J (T, z) = R̂J (E ∗ , z) + θ − τ ,
0 = (H [V ]J (T, z) − (θ − τ )) (TJ − EJ∗ ) ,
Ã J
!
X
∗
Ei , z − (θ − τ )
R̂J (E, z) ≥ f

Zi=0
¡
¢
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )
+β VJ E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2

with = if EJ∗ > 0
R̂J (E ∗ , z) ≥ 0

where we let U = T0 .
The following proposition shows that if some permanent workers are fired then all temporary workers must have
been fired.
Proposition 11 EJ∗ < TJ ⇒ Ei∗ = 0 for every i 6= J.
The next lemma shows that employment is bounded below, and hence marginal productivity is bounded above.
Lemma 12 There is an e > 0 such that for all T, z
J
X
i=0

Ei (T, z) ≥ e > 0.

By this lemma, the solution for Vj∗ in equation (7) is well defined because f
bounded.

³P

J
i=0

∗
Ei,s
, zs

´

is uniformly

Proposition 13 Let V be the fixed point of H. Assume that U > 0. Then V is diﬀerentiable with respect to Ti when
Ti > 0.

iv

Appendix B: Analysis of the Simplified Island Planning Problem
The planner’s value function v : [0, J · U ] × R+ × Z has to satisfy the functional equation h:
h [v] (t, p, z)
= max {F (et + ep , z) + θ [t − et ] + (θ − τ ) [p − ep ]
et ,ep
¾
Z
+β v (t0 , p0 , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 )

(20)

subject to
0 ≤ et ≤ t,
0 ≤ ep ≤ p,
and where the law of motion is given by
t0
p0

= min {U + et , JU }
= ep + max {U + et − JU, 0}

Proposition 14 Consider V and v such that
v (T1 + T2 + ... + TJ−1 , TJ , z) = V (T1 , T2 , ..., TJ−1 , TJ , z)

(21)

for all (T1 , T2 , ..., TJ−1 , TJ ) ∈ E. Then
h [v] (T1 + T2 + ... + TJ−1 , TJ , z) = H [V ] (T1 , T2 , ..., TJ−1 , TJ , z)

(22)

for all (T1 , T2 , ..., TJ−1 , TJ ) ∈ E.
Lemma 15 Assume that V satisfies (13). Consider T and T̂ and V such that
T1 + T2 + ... + TJ−1 = T̂1 + T̂2 + ... + T̂J−1 and TJ = T̂J .
for any T̂ ∈ E and T ∈ E then

(23)

³
´
H [V ] (T, z) ≤ H [V ] T̂ , z .

Proposition 16 Let v be the function corresponding to V as in (21) defined for T ∈ E. Assume that V (·, z) is
concave, and V satisfies (13). Then h [v] (·, z) is concave in t, p.
Remark 17 The previous proposition is not obvious since the feasible set of the problem defined by the right hand
side of h [v] in (20) is not convex.
We now introduce the R, which is the objective function being maximized in h [v] . The “derivatives” of R are
used to define the functions t̂ and p̂.
Definition 18 Given v, define R (et , ep , z) as

+β

Z

R (et , ep , z) = F (et + ep , z) − θet − (θ − τ ) ep
v (U + min {et , (J − 1) U } , et + ep − min {et , (J − 1) U } , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 )

Consider an island planner with no temporary workers (t = 0) and a given z. The quantity p̂ (z) is the number of
permanent workers that leaves the island’s planner indiﬀerent between firing “one” permanent worker and keeping
all p̂ (z) of them.

v

Definition 19 Let R be defined as in definition (18). For each z define p̂ (z) , such that
0 ∈ ∂Rep (0, p̂ (z) , z) .
Consider an island planner with 0 < p < p̂ (z) , so it does it not want to fire any permanent worker for that
z. The quantity t̂ (p, z) is the number of temporary workers that leaves the island’s planner indiﬀerent between
firing “one" transitory worker and keeping all t̂ (p, z) of them. Formally:
Definition 20 Let R be defined as in definition (18). For each p, z define t̂ (p, z) as follows:
(i) if Ret > 0 for all Ret ∈ ∂Ret (U · J, p, z), then t̂ (p, z) = J · U,
(ii) if Ret < 0 for all Ret ∈ ∂Ret (0, p,¡z) , then t̂ (p,
¢ z) = 0,
(iii) otherwise t̂ (p, z) solves 0 ∈ ∂Ret t̂ (p, z) , p, z .

The remaining of this appendix shows that p̂, t̂ exist, they are unique, and t̂ is decreasing in p. The proofs are
complicated by the fact that R is not diﬀerentiable.

Proposition 21 Let v be given by V as in (21). Assume that V is concave and satisfies (13). The function R (·, z)
is strictly concave.
Define M : [0, U · J] → R+ as

M (et ) ≡ min {et , (J − 1) U }

notice that
ep + max {et − (J − 1) U, 0}
= ep + et − min {et , (J − 1) U }
= ep + et − M (et ) .

Remark 22 It is standard to show that h [v] is increasing in t, p and z if v has these properties.
Remark 23 Assume that V satisfies (13) and (14). Let v be defined as in (21). Denote by ∂h [v] the subgradient
of h [v] (t, p, z) when v is considered as a function of t and p. A corollary of Proposition (14) and Proposition (4)
is that
h [v]p ≤ h [v]t ≤ h [v]p + τ ,
³
´
for all h [v]t , h [v]p ∈ ∂h [v] (t, p, z) .

Proposition´24 Fix t, p, z. Assume that V satisfies (13), (14), and is concave. Define v as in (21). Let
³
h [v]t , h [v]p ∈ ∂h [v] (t, p, z). Then h [v]p ≥ θ − τ . Moreover, there exists a p̄ (z) such that for all p ≥ p̄ (z)
and t, h [v]p = θ − τ for any h [v]p ∈ ∂h [v]p (t, p, z) .
Given v define
b (et , ep , z) ≡

Z

v (U + M (et ) , et + ep − M (et ) , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 )

as a function of et and ep and z. Let ∂B be its subgradient with respect to (et , ep ) .
Lemma 25 Define v as in (21). Assume that v is concave and satisfies
vp ≤ vt ≤ vp + τ ,

¡
¢
for all t, p, z. Fix any z, et , ep . Let bet , bep ∈ ∂b (et , ep , z) . Then

bep ≤ bet ≤ bep + τ .

Let ∂R (et , ep , z) be the subgradient of R when considered as a function of (et , ep ).

vi

Lemma 26 Assume that v is concave and satisfies
vp ≤ vt ≤ vp + τ ,
¡
¢
for all t, p, z. Fix any z, et , et . For all Rep , Ret ∈ ∂R (et , ep , z)

Rep ≥ Ret + τ (1 − β) .

Corollary 27 Let ep , et be the optimal choice of employment for Problem (20). If ep < p and t > 0, then et = 0. If
this were not true, i.e. if ep < p and et > 0, then Rep = Ret = 0, which contradicts Lemma 26.
Lemma 28 Let v be given by V as in (21), assume that V is concave and satisfies (13). Let R be defined as in
definition (18).
For each z there is a unique p̂ satisfying (19). Moreover, 0 < p̂ (z) < p̄ (z) < +∞.
Using the concavity of R and strict concavity of F we define t̂ as follows.
Lemma 29 Let v be given by V as in (21), assume that V is concave and satisfies (13). Let R be defined as in
definition (18).
Then for each (p, z) , 0 < p < p̂ (z) , there exists a unique t̂ that satisfies (20).
Proposition 30 Assume that V is concave and satisfies (13) and (14). Let v be given by V as in (21). Assume,
without loss of generality that v is concave in (t, p). Then,
i) The optimal decision rules of h [v] are described by the set of Inaction for R as
©
ª
et (t, p, z) = min t, t̂ (p, z) ,
ep (t, p, z) = min {p, p̂ (z)}
for all t, p, z.
ii) H [V ] is concave, and satisfies (13) and (14).
iii) h [v] and H [V ] satisfy (21), and h [v] is concave.
Lemma 31 Let V be concave, and satisfy (13) and (14). Let v be defined as in (21). Let p̂, t̂ and I be defined as
in (18), (19), and equation (10), respectively. Then, the subgradients of h [v] are as follows:
If t 6= iU for i = 1, 2, .., J − 1, then h [v] (t, p, z) is diﬀerentiable with respect to t.
If (t, p) ∈ Int (I (z)):
Z
h [v]t (t, p, z) = f (t + p, z) + β

bet (t, p, z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) > θ,

´
³
If (t, p) ∈ Int I (z)C :

h [v]t (t, p, z) = θ > f (t + p, z) + β

Z

bet (t, p, z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) ,

If (t, p): t = t̂ (p, z) < JU :
£
¤ £
¤
h [v]t (t, p, z) , h̄ [v]t (t, p, z) = θ, f (t + p, z) + β b̄et (t, p, z)

Definition 32 We say that ∂vt (t, p, z) is decreasing in p if it satisfies the following property. If p < p0 , define
vt0 , v̄t0 , vt and v̄t satisfying
h
i
vt0 , v̄t0 = ∂vt (t, p0 , z) ,

and

Then

£
¤
vt , v̄t = ∂vt (t, p, z) .
v 0t ≤ v t and v̄t0 ≤ v̄t

Notice that if v is diﬀerentiable at (t, p, z), this property simply says that ∂v (t, p, z) /∂t is decreasing in p.

vii

Lemma 33 . Let V be concave, and satisfy (13) and (14). Let v be defined as in (21). Assume that the subgradient
of vt is decreasing in p, i.e. it satisfies definition (32). Let t̂ (p, z) be defined as in (19) for the optimal rule that
attains the right hand side of h [v] . Then, the subgradient of h [v]t is decreasing in p too, i.e. it satisfies definition
(32) and t̂ (p, z) is weakly decreasing in p.
Finally
Proposition 34 Let v be the fixed point of h. Let t̂ be defined as in definition (18). Then t̂ (p, z) is decreasing in
p. Moreover, if t̂ is not a multiple of U, then t̂ is strictly decreasing in p.

viii

Appendix C: Analysis of Spot Labor Markets (“SLM”)
Current wages across tenure levels are given by
w (T, z) = (w0 (T, z) , w1 (T, z) , ..., wJ−1 (T, z) , wJ (T, z)) ,
a function of the island-wide state (T, z). The law of motion for wages can then be obtained from the islandwide equilibrium employment rule and the associated law of motion for the island-wide state. The equilibrium
employment rule is denoted by
G (T, z) ≡ (G0 (T, z) , G1 (T, z) , ..., GJ−1 (T, z) , GJ (T, z)) .
The law of motion for the endogenous state T 0 = A (T, z) is then given by
A (T, z) = (G0 (T, z) , G1 (T, z) , ..., GJ−2 (T, z) , GJ−1 (T, z) + GJ (T, z)) .
The problem for a worker with tenure j on an island of state (T, z) is to decide whether to become non-employed
or stay and work. Becoming non-employed entails a value given by θ. By staying, the worker receives a wage rate
wj during the current period and gains tenure min {j + 1, J} for the following period. We denote the value function
for a j-tenure worker in a (T, z)-island as Wj (T, z). This value function must solve
½
¾
Z
0
0
Wj (T, z) = max θ, wj (T, z) + β Wmin{j+1,J} (A (T, z) , z ) Q (z, dz )
for all (T, z) and j = 0, ..., J.
The value function B (p; T, z) of a firm that employed p permanent workers during the previous period on an
island with state (T, z) solves:
B (p; T, z)
⎧ ⎛
⎞
J
J
⎨
X
X
=
max
F⎝
gj , z ⎠ −
wj (T, z) gj − τ max {p − gJ , 0}
⎩
{gj ≥0}J
j=0
j=0
i=0
)
X
0
0
B (gJ + gJ−1 ; A (T, z) , z ) Q (z|z )
+β
z0

The optimal decision rule is denoted by
gj = mj (p; T, z) ,
for 0 ≤ j ≤ J, describing the optimal employment level at each tenure j. For future reference, notice that
B (p; T, z) is decreasing in p, since having employed more permanent workers in the previous period makes the
firm subject to higher potential separation costs. Thus, provided that B is diﬀerentiable, −τ ≤ ∂B/∂p ≤ 0, and
∂B/∂p = −τ if some permanent workers are fired, i.e. if gJ = mJ (p; T, z) < p.
A spot labor market equilibrium (SLM) is given by numbers {θ, U, σ} and functions {w, G, B, m, W } that
satisfy the following conditions:
i) Given wages w (·) , employment G (·) , and the law of motion A (·), the representative firm is representative
mj (TJ ; T, z) = Gj (T, z) ,
for all (T, z) and all 0 ≤ j ≤ J;
ii) Given wages w (·) , employment G (·) and law of motion A (·) , the decision of the representative worker is
representative
Wj (T, z) > θ ⇒ Gj (T, z) = Tj ,
W0 (T, z) > θ ⇒ G0 (T, z) = U,

for j > 0 and

and if Gj (T, z) > 0, then
Wj (T, z) = wj (T, z) + β

Z

Wmin{J,j+1} (A (T, z) , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) ;

ix

iii) The law of motion A defines an invariant distribution μ across states (T, z) as follows
#
"
X Z
0
μ (D, z ) =
μ (dT × z) Q (z 0 |z) ;
z∈Z

{T,z: A(T,z)∈D}

iv) Feasibility in the labor market is satisfied
Z
N − U − G (T, z) μ (dT × dz) ≥ 0, U ≥ 0,
v) The value of search σ and the value of becoming non-employed θ satisfy
Z
σ = β W0 (T, z) μ (dT × dz) , θ = max {ω + βθ, σ} ; and
vi) The labor force participation decision is optimal
∙
¸
Z
0 =
N − U − G (T, z) μ (dT × dz) [θ − ω − βθ]
0 = U [θ − σ] .

The next theorem establishes the first and second welfare theorems for this economy and provides a partial
characterization of the SLM equilibrium.
Theorem 35 Welfare Theorems and equilibrium characterization:
i) Let {U, θ, w, G, B, m, W, μ} be a spot labor market equilibrium (SLM). Then, there is an island planner value
function V, for which {V, G, U, θ, μ} is an stationary eﬃcient allocation.
ii) Conversely, let {V, G, U, θ, μ} be a stationary eﬃcient allocation. Then, there are wages and value functions {w,
B, m, W } for which {U, θ, w, E, B, m, W, μ} is a spot labor market equilibrium (SLM).
iii) The functions B, W and V related as in i) and ii) satisfy
Wj (T, z) = ∂V (T, z) /∂Tj for j = 0, ..., J − 1
∂B (TJ , T, z) /∂p + WJ (T, z) = ∂V (T, z) /∂TJ

(24)

The reasons for the equivalence in i) and ii) are the same as in the Prescott and Mehra (1980) result about
equivalence between SLM equilibrium and eﬃcient allocations. Our set up does not directly maps into theirs, so
in Appendix F we oﬀer a constructive proof of i) and ii).
Condition iii) is obtained by comparing the first order conditions for the planning problem with the optimality
conditions for the workers and firms in the spot labor market equilibrium (SLM). These conditions give some
intuition on how prices decentralize the eﬃcient allocation. Recall that ∂V /∂Tj is the shadow value of a tenure j
worker in the island planning problem. Condition iii) says that the shadow value of an extra temporary worker for
the planner is the same as the equilibrium value function Wj . Instead the shadow value of a permanent worker for
the planer, ∂V /∂Tj , is lower than the equilibrium value function for a worker WJ . This diﬀerence is exactly the
shadow value of an extra permanent worker for the firm, ∂B/∂p, which, due to the separation cost, is a number
between −τ and 0.
The next proposition gives a partial characterization of equilibrium wages.
Proposition 36 Let {U, θ, w, G, B, m, W, μ} be a spot labor market equilibrium (SLM). Without loss of generality,
the equilibrium wage w can be chosen to satisfy
a) for all j = 0, 1, ..., J − 2
Ã J
!
X
wj (T, z) = f
Gi (T, z) , z ,
i=0

x

b) for all j = 0, 1, ..., J − 2
wj (T, z) − βτ ≤ wJ−1 (T, z) ≤ wj (T, z)
wj (T, z) − βτ ≤ wJ (T, z) ≤ wj (T, z) + τ
wJ−1 (T, z) ≤ wJ (T, z) ≤ wJ−1 (T, z) + τ
and if EJ (T, z) < TJ :
wJ−1 (T, z) ≤ wj (T, z) < wJ (T, z) ,
c) and the equilibrium value function W for workers can be chosen so that they satisfy:
W0 (T, z) ≥ W1 (T, z) ≥ · · · ≥ WJ−1 (T, z)
WJ (T, z) ≥ WJ−1 (T, z) .
The proof of Proposition 36 follows, essentially, from the analysis of the first order conditions of the firm problem.
Appendix F contains a joint proof of Theorem 35 and Proposition 36.
Stationary Equilibrium with separation taxes and γ > 0, and computational algorithm
In an equilibrium when the separation cost τ is a tax rebated lump-sum to households and γ > 0, aggregate
consumption is given by
⎛
⎞
Z
J
X
c=
F⎝
Gj (T, p) , z ⎠ μ (dT × dz)
(25)
j=0

Given this change, the equilibrium allocation can be described by {V, G, U, θ, μ} , where V is the value function
and G the optimal policy for the island planning problem for (U, θ) , and where μ is the invariant distribution for
{(T, z)} generated by (G, Q) such that:
a) The value of search is generated by V̂ , μ
³
´
⎡
⎤
Z
∂ V̂ T, z; Û , θ
⎣
σ=β
|Û =U ⎦ μ (dT × dz ; U, θ)
∂ Û

where V̂ is defined in terms of V as in (4); and
b) The marginal condition (6) holds with aggregate consumption given by (25).
We define the equilibrium in terms of the objects of an stationary eﬃcien allocations because it provides an
algorithm for its computation: a) and b) can be regarded as two equations in two unknowns, (U, θ) . Alternatively
we could have define the equilibrium
using
the objects in the firms and workers problems, so that W0 (T, z) would
³
´
have taken the place of ∂ V̂ T, z; Û , θ /∂ Û in a). Using the arguments in Theorem 35, it is easy to show that the
two definitions would have been equivalent.

xi

Appendix D: Analysis of Multiperiod Employment Relations (“MER”): Binding contracts and
tenure at the firm level (a formal description)
There are competitive markets on the island. At each date t, history z t , the set of commodities traded is S (z t ).
A commodity s ∈ S(z t ) is a stopping time indicating the time at which a worker will be dismissed under each
∞
possible continuation sequence zt+1
= {zt+1 , zt+2 , ...} following the history z t . Formally, S(z t ) is the set of all
functions
¡
¢
∞
s z t ; zt+1
: Z ∞ → {t + 1, t + 2, ..., ∞}

satisfying

∞
for all ẑt+1

¡
¢
¡
¢
∞
∞
s z t ; zt+1
= k ⇒ s z t ; ẑt+1
= k,
such that:
{zt+1 , zt+2 , ..., zk } = {ẑt+1 , ẑt+2 , ..., ẑk } .

When a worker arrives for the first time to the island at date t, history z t , he is a “newly arrived” worker
and can supply only one stopping time in the set S (z t ). The worker cannot supply a new stopping time before
the previous stopping time is actually executed, i.e. before the worker is separated from his previous employer.
The first time that the worker separates he becomes an “incumbent” worker for the rest of his stay on the island.
An “incumbent” worker at date t, history z t , can also supply one stopping time in the set S(z t ) as long as he
has no outstanding stopping time from a previous sale. “Newly arrived” workers and “incumbent” workers sell
diﬀerent commodities,
though.
The stopping time sold by an “incumbent” worker at date t, history z t , entails a
¡
¢
∞
∞
cost τ at date s z t ; zt+1
. On¡ the contrary,
the stopping time sold by a “newly
, for every possible realization zt+1
¢
t
t ∞
∞
arrived”
at date t, history z , entails a cost τ at date s z ; zt+1 , only if the realization zt+1
is such that
¡ t ∞ worker
¢
s z ; zt+1 ≥ t + J .
Each stopping time, being a diﬀerent commodity, has a diﬀerent price associated with it. We express the
price of the stopping times traded at date t, history z t , in terms of the final consumption good at that time and
event, and denote them for each s ∈ S (z t ) by P A (z t , s) and P I (z t , s) for the “newly arrived” and “incumbent”
stopping times, respectively. Workers and firms take the prices P A (z t , s) and P I (z t , s) for all t ≥ 0, z t ∈ Z t , and
s ∈ S (z t ) as given.
The problem of an “incumbent” worker at date t, history z t , if she has no outstanding stopping times, is the
following:
¾
½
¡ ¢
¢
£
¤ª
© ¡
I z t = max θ, maxt P I z t , s + E β s−t I (z s )
(26)
s∈S(z )

∞
where the expectation is taken with respect to all possible realizations zt+1
= {zt+1 , zt+2 , ...}, conditional on z t .
This equation states that an incumbent worker can choose to leave the island, obtaining θ, or sell the stopping time
s ∈ S (z t ) that provides the highest value. A stopping time s ∈ S (z t ) provides P I (z t , s) units of the consumption
good during the current period and the value I (z s ) of being an incumbent worker at the (random) stopping time
s. Observe that, since the worker maximizes the present expected value of his earnings, equation (26) implicitly
assumes linear preferences.14
The problem of a “newly arrived” worker at time t state z t is given by
¾
½
¢
£
¤ª
©
¡
¡ ¢
.
A z t = max θ, maxt P A z t , s + E β s−t I (z s )
s∈S(z )

This problem is analogous to the “incumbent” worker problem, except that the “newly arrived” worker faces a
diﬀerent price for the stopping time that she sells and becomes an “incumbent” worker at the end of the stopping
time (i.e. she changes its type).
We let N A (z t , s) be the quantity of newly arrived workers hired with contract s ∈ S (z t ) at date t, history
t
z . Likewise, we let N I (z t , s) be the quantities of incumbent workers hired with contract s ∈ S (z t ) at date t,
history z t . The firm chooses N A (z t , s) and N I (z t , s) for every z t and s ∈ S (z t ) to maximize expected discounted
profits, taking as given the prices P A (z t , s) and P I (z t , s), and the fact that the stopping times of the diﬀerent
types of workers entail potentially diﬀerent separation costs at termination. Without loss of generality, we assume
1 4 The linear preferences assumption in this ”island-economy” is justified by the existence of perfect insurance markets in the original
economy.

xii

that the firm never employed any worker previous to t = 0. This will have no consequence in the analysis given
our focus on steady state equilibria.
The problem of the representative firm is the following:
⎤
⎡
X X
X ¡
¡
¢
¡
¡
¡
¡
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¢
¢
¢
¢¢
P A z t , s N A z t , s + P I z t , s N I z t , s − Tt z t ⎦ μt z t
β t ⎣F (nt z t , zt ) −
max
N A ,N I

t=0 z t ∈Z t

s∈S(z t )

subject to:

¡ ¢
nt z t =

⎧

t ⎪
⎨
X
i=0

⎪
⎩s∈S

¡ ¢
= τ
Tt z t

X

( ): s[ (
z0i

z0i ;

t
∞
zi+1
,zt+1

⎧
t−1 ⎪
⎨
X

> t, for every

X

⎪
⎩s∈S zi : s z i ; zt ,z∞ =
( 0 ) [ 0 ( i+1 t+1 )]
⎧
t−J ⎪
⎨
X
X

i=0

+τ

)]

i=0

⎪
⎩s∈S

t
∞
,zt+1
(z0i ): s[z0i ;(zi+1
)]

∞
zt+1

⎫
⎪
¢¤⎬
£ A¡ i ¢
¡
N z , s + N I zi, s
⎪
⎭

∞
t, for every zt+1

⎫
⎪
¡ i ¢⎬
I
N z ,s
⎪
⎭

∞
= t, for every zt+1

(27)

(28)

⎫
⎪
¢⎬
¡
N A zi, s
⎪
⎭

where zji in equations (27) and (28) denotes the partial history {zj , zj+1 , ..., zi−1 , zi } embodied in z t . The firm
maximizes the expected discounted value of profits, which are given by output minus the purchase of the stopping
times supplied both by “newly arrived” and “incumbent” workers, minus separation costs. The employment of the
firm at date t, history z t , is given by equation (27). This equation says that total employment is the sum of all
the workers, both “newly arrived” and “incumbents”, that were hired between periods zero and t and have been
never fired along the history z t . Equation (28) describes the separation costs at time and event z t as the sum of
two terms. The first term is the sum of all “incumbent” workers that have been hired between periods 0 and t − 1,
which have been contracted to separate at date t if event z t took place. The second term is the sum of all “newly
arrived” workers that have been hired between periods 0 and t − J, which have been contracted to separate at date
t if event z t took place. Observe that those “newly arrived” workers that have been hired between periods t − J + 1
and t − 1 and separate at date t and event z t are not included in equation (28) because they separate during the
trial period stipulated by the fixed term contracts and, thus, are not subject to separation costs.
The market clearing conditions are as follows. If N A (z t , s) > 0 at some time t and event z t and some s ∈ S(z t ),
then
¡ ¢
¢
£
¤
¡
A z t = P A z t , s + E β s−t I (z s )
Also,

X

s∈S(z t )

¢
¡ ¢
¡
N A z t , s < U ⇒ A z t = θ.

The conditions for “incumbent” workers are similar. If N I (z t , s) > 0 at some time t and event z t and some
s ∈ S(z t ), then
¡ ¢
¢
£
¤
¡
I z t = P I z t , s + E β s−t I (z s ) .
Also,

X

s∈S(z t )

¡
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¢
N I z t , s < X I z t ⇒ I z t = θ,

where X I (z t ) is the number of “incumbent” workers available for hiring at the beginning of time t and event z t ,
which is given by:
⎧
⎫
⎪
t−1 ⎪
⎨
⎬
X
X
¢
¢¤
¡
¢
£
¡
¡
(29)
N I zi , s + N A zi , s
X I zt =
⎪
⎪
⎭
i=0 ⎩s∈S (z i ): s[z i ;(z t ,z ∞ )] = t, for every z ∞
0
0
i+1 t+1
t+1
xiii

Finally, the hiring of each type of workers cannot exceed the amount initially available:
X
¢
¡
N A zt, s ≤ U

(30)

s∈S(z t )

X

s∈S(z t )

¢
¡
¡ ¢
N I zt, s ≤ X I zt

(31)

Observe that the supply of stopping time is indivisible: Workers can only supply one stopping time s ∈ S(z t ),
only in the case that the worker has no previous outstanding stopping time. However, the linear preferences
assumed, together with the convex production possibility set of the firm, guarantee that the welfare theorems hold.
The competitive allocation is then obtained as the solution to the social planner’s problem, which is to maximize
⎡
⎛
⎞
X X t
X
¢
¡ t¢
¡
β ⎣F (nt z , zt ) + θ ⎝U −
N A zt , s ⎠
t=0 z t ∈Z t

⎛

s∈S(z t )

⎞
⎤
X
¢
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢
¡ ¢
+ θ ⎝X I z t −
N I z t , s ⎠ − Tt z t ⎦ μt z t
s∈S(z t )

subject to equations (27), (28), (29), (30) and (31).
A few remarks are in order. Clearly, the social planner will never want to separate a “newly arrived” worker
and rehire him as a an “incumbent” before the trial period for the fixed-term contracts is over. The reason is that
being rehired as “incumbent” makes the worker liable to separation costs, while maintaining his “newly arrived”
status saves on separation costs during the trial period. Also, the social planner will never want to separate a
“newly arrived” worker after the trial period is over and rehire him under an “incumbent” contract because this
entails incurring the separation cost τ without any benefit. As a consequence, the planner will choose the stopping
times for “newly arrived” workers in such a way that they separate only when they are to leave the island (and
receive the value θ). This means that N I (z t , s) = 0 for every z t and every s ∈ S (z t ).
Being left with only “newly arrived” workers, the planner’s problem is formally identical to the island planning
problem described in Section 4.1.15 This has an important implication: The competitive equilibrium with long-term
contracts and tenure at the firm level described in this appendix is equivalent to the competitive equilibrium with
spot labor contracts and tenure at the island level described in Appendix C. Moreover, for every z t and s ∈ S(z t )
such that N A (z t , s) > 0, the price P A (z t , s) must be equal to the expected discounted value of the spot wages
obtained (in the equilibrium with spot labor contracts and tenure at the island level) by a worker that arrives
to the island at time t and event z t , and follows the employment plan described by the stopping time s. Hence,
A (z t ) = W0 (T (z t , X) , zt ) , where T is defined by equations (1)-(3) and the Pareto optimal employment process
{Et }. Given this property, an economy-wide equilibrium can be constructed from the island-level competitive
equilibrium described thus far in the same way as it is done in the “spot labor market” competitive equilibrium
described in Appendix C.
1 5 In

particular, it is identical to the problem of an island’s planner endowed with no worker of positive tenure at t = 0.

xiv

Appendix E: Calibration of τ .
Heckman and Pages-Serra (2000) propose to summarize employment protection policies into a single statistic.
The measure they use is the expected discounted cost at the time that a worker is hired of dismissing that worker
in the future. Their index I is given by
I=

T
X
t=1

n
o
β t δ t−1 (1 − δ) bt + aStj + (1 − a) Stu

where T is the maximum tenure consider in the index, β a time discount factor, δ is the survival rate (probability
of remaining employed next period if employed during the current period), bt is wage earned during the advance
notice period for a worker of tenure t, Stj is the severance payment to a worker of tenure t if the dismissal is classified
as “justified” (i.e. “fair” or “objective”), and Stu is the severance payment to a worker of tenure t if the dismissal
is “not justified”.
Heckman and Pages-Serra (2000) use a year as the time period, and the following values: β = 0.92 (an 8 percent
interest rate), δ = 0.88 (a turnover rate of 12 percent, based on data for the US), a value of T of 20 years, and
for Spain they advocate to use a = 0.2 for the period before 1997, based instead on the information on Bertola,
Boeri and Cazes (2000), ”Employment protection, the case of Industrialized countries: the case for new indicators”,
International Labor Review, 139(1):2000. Heckman and Pages-Serra (2000) compute their job security index for
Spain in the late nineties. Since we calibrate our model to the period before the broadening in the applicability
of temporary contracts, we recompute their index for the policies in place before the 1984 reform. We use the
following values:
- bt : one month of wages for tenure 1 and 2 and 3 months for higher tenure (from Chapter 2 of OECD Labor
Outlook, 1999, Table 2.2 )
- a : 0.2 (since their argument applies prior to 1984)
- Stj : 2/3 months per year up to a maximum of 12 months (from Chapter 2 of OECD Labor Outlook, 1999,
page 96)
- Stu : 1 1/2 months per year up to a maximum of 42 months (from Chapter 2 of OECD Labor Outlook, 1999,
page 101).
We consider two cases. Case 1: With these choices for bt , a, Stu and Stj , and using the values for β and δ used
by Heckman and Pages-Serra (2000), we obtain that prior to 1984 I equals to 0.42 as a fraction of annual average
wages. Case 2: if instead we use β = 0.96, which is the value we use in our paper, and δ = 0.93, which is closer to
the one for Spain prior to 1984 according to Hopenhayn and Cabrales (1997), we obtain a value of I prior to 1984
of 0.56 as a fraction of annual wages.
Finally, since in our benchmark case the firing taxes do not depend on the tenure of the workers, we select the
value of τ so that the value of the index above will give the value we calibrate for Spain prior to the reform. This
value solves the equation:
T
T
X
1 − (βδ)
I=
β t δ t−1 (1 − δ) τ = τ (1 − δ) β
1 − βδ
t=1
or

τ =I

1 − βδ
³
´
(1 − δ) β 1 − (βδ)T

The value of τ that corresponds to the first case is 0.74, and to the second case is 0.98 of annual wages. We think
that for our purposes the choices of the second case better reflect the situation prior to 1984 in Spain and hence
we calibrate the model to τ equivalent to one year of average wages.

xv

Appendix F: Proofs
Proof of Theorem 1. To show this theorem we characterize the competitive equilibrium of a particular
decentralization of the economy. Since the first welfare theorem holds, characterizing this equilibrium gives us a
characterization of the eﬃcient allocations. We call this equilibrium “auxiliary competitive equilibrium” or “ACE”
for short. See Appendix G below for a definition of the ACE. The characterization of a stationary ACE coincides
with conditions i) to iv) of Theorem 1.
We start by providing some of the necessary conditions that an ACE must satisfy.
Lemma 37 Let {θt , λt (z t , X) , Ej,t (z t , X) , Tj,t (z t , X) , Sj,t (z t , X) , Ut , Lt ; all t, z t , j, X} be an ACE. Then, there
is sequence {σ t } where σ t is the value of search at t, for which:
i) without loss of generality, θt (z t , X) = θt ,
ii)
XX
¢
¡
¡ ¢
λt+1 z t+1 , X η (X|z0 ) qt z t
σt = β
X z t+1

θt = max {ω + βθt+1 , σ t }
0 = Lt [θt − ω − βθt+1 ]

and
iii) for all z t , X,
¢
¡
≤ λt z t , X ,
£ ¡
¢
¢
¢¤
¤£
¡
¡
0 = λt z t , X − θt T0,t z t , X − E0,t z t , X .

θt

The proof of this Lemma follows directly from the linearity of the problem of firms type II.
This Lemma shows, among other things, that the value to a firm type I of reallocating (firing) a worker does
not depend on the characteristic of the island, so that θt does not depend on (z t , X) and the value of search σ t is
related to the value of “selling” (assigning) a worker to a diﬀerent island randomly, i.e. in proportion to the number
of islands of each type.
We will show that the ACE allocation can be obtained by solving a particular dynamic programing problem given
two numbers (θ, U ) , and by checking two appropriate equilibrium conditions. We develop this characterization in
a sequence of results.
The solution of the dynamic programing problem will give the equilibrium quantities chosen by firms type I
and the equilibrium prices λt (z t , X). This problem has the interpretation of the maximization problem solved for
∞
a coalition of firms type I that are endowed with a flow U = {Ut }t=0 of newly arrived workers. We refer to this
problem as the “island planning problem”, i.e. the problem of a planner in charge of the island employment decision
by tenure. The planner chooses how many workers to employ at each tenure level and how many to send back,
obtaining θt for each of them, net of the cost τ .
J
∞
× Z × R+
→R
Definition 38 Let Vt : R+

Vt (T1 , ...TJ ; zt , U)
⎞
⎛
J
X
=
max { F ⎝
Ej , zt ⎠
Ej ,j=0,...J

+

J
X
j=0

β

j=0

[Tj − Ej ] θt − τ [TJ − EJ ]

X

zt+1 ∈Z

Vt+1 (E0 , ..., EJ−1 + EJ ; zt+1 , U) }Q (zt+1 |zt ) }

subject to
T0
Ej

= Ut
≤ Tj j = 0, 1, ..., J.

∞
.
where U = {Ut ; all t ≥ 0} ∈ R+

xvi

The next Lemma links the island planning problem with the equilibrium quantities chosen by firms type I and
the prices {λt } .
©
ª
∗
∗
∗
Lemma 39 Let θ∗t , λ∗t (z t , X) , Ej,t
(z t , X) , Tj,t
(z t , X) , Sj,t
(z t , X) , Ut∗ , L∗t ; all t, z t , j, X be an auxiliary com∗
petitive equilibrium
initial
conditions U−1
, η ∗ (X|z0 ). Define V̂t for {Ut∗ , θ∗t }, and let Êj,t (T, z) be its optimal
© ∗ given
ª
policy. Then, Ej,t (z t , X) solves Vt for all the initial conditions X, i.e.
and

¢ ¢
¡ ¡
¡ t ¢
∗
Êj,t Tt∗ z t , X , zt = Ej,t
z , X for all t, z t , X

¢
¢
¡
¡ ¡
¢
λ∗t z t , X = ∂Vt Tt∗ z t , X , zt ; U∗ for all t, z t , X
©
ª¢
¡
∗
∗
where ∂Vt (T, zt ; U∗ ) is and element of the subgradient of Vt T, zt ; U0∗ , ..., Ut−1
, ·, Ut+1
, ... with respect to Ut∗ .

The proof of this Lemma follows from comparing the island planning problem with the problem of firms type I
in a competitive equilibrium, and from the definition of a subgradient.
The next Lemma gives the characterization of an ACE.

Lemma 40 . Let some arbitrary initial distribution η ∗ (X|z0 ) be given. Let also some arbitrary sequence {Ut∗ , θ∗t :all
t} be given. Let©Êj,t (T,
ª z) be the optimal policy of the island planning problem in condition (38) defined for
∗
{Ut∗ , θ∗t } . Define Ej,t
as
¢ ¢
¡ t ¢
¡ ¡
∗
Ej,t
z , X = Êj Tt∗ z t , X , zt
n o
∗
where Tt,j
has been generated by Ê and the initial condition X, i.e.
∗
= Xj
T0,j
¢
¡
¡ ∗ ¡ t−1 ¢
¢
∗
t
Tt,j z , X
= Êj−1 Tt−1
z , X , zt−1 for j = 1, ..., J − 1
¡ t ¢
¡ ∗ ¡ t−1 ¢
¢
¡ ∗ ¡ t−1 ¢
¢
∗
Tt,J
= ÊJ−1 Tt−1
z ,X
z , X , zt−1 + ÊJ Tt−1
z , X , zt−1

©
ª¢
¡
∗
∗
, ·, Ut+1
, ... with respect to Ut∗ .
and let ∂V©t (T, zªt ; U ∗ ) be an element of the subgradient of Vt T, zt ; U0∗ , ..., Ut−1
i) Define λ∗t+1 as
¢
¢
¡
¡ ¡
¢
λ∗t z t , X = ∂Vt Tt∗ z t , X , zt ; U ∗ .

ii) Define the value of search {σ t } as
XX ∗ ¡
¢
¡
¢
σt = β
λt+1 z t+1 , X qt+1 z t+1 η ∗ (X|z0 ) for all t.
z t+1 X

iii) Define {L∗t } as

L∗t = N − Ut∗ −

XX
zt

X

¡ t ¢ ¡ t¢ ∗
∗
Ej,t
z , X qt z η (X|z0 ) ≥ 0 for all t.

iv) Suppose that the following optimal labor force participation conditions are satisfied
©
ª
θ∗t = max σ t , ω + βθ∗t+1 ,

L∗t [θt − ω + βθt+1 ] = 0
© ∗ ∗ t
ª
∗
∗
∗
for all t. Then θt , λt (z , X) , Ej,t
(z t , X) , Tj,t
(z t , X) , Sj,t
(z t , X) , Ut∗ , L∗t ; all t, z t , j, X is an auxiliary compet∗
itive equilibrium (ACE) given the initial conditions U−1
and η ∗ .
The proof of this Lemma follows by construction, the definition of competitive equilibrium, and the properties
of the island planning problem defined in (38).
Since the first welfare theorem holds for this economy, the characterization of the allocation for an ACE in the
previous Lemma applies to the eﬃcient allocations.
Now we define a stationary ACE in terms of the objects used our previous characterization of the ACE.

xvii

Definition 41 We say that the ACE {θt , λt , Lt , Ut , Ejt , Sjt }, for an initial measure η, is a stationary equilibrium
J+1
J+1
if there are constants, θ, U, L, and functions, Ej∗ : R+
× Z → R, j = 0, ..., J, λ∗ : R+
× Z → R, for which
θt
Ut
Lt
¡ t ¢
Ei,t z , X
¢
¡
λt z t , X

J+1
and where defining Tj0 : R+
× Z → R as

=
=
=
=

θ, all t
U, all t
N, all t
¢ ¢
¡ ¡
Ej∗ Tt z t , X , zt , all t, z t
¢ ¢
¡ ¡
= λ∗ Tt z t , X , zt , all t, z t

T00 (T, z) = U,
∗
Tj0 (T, z) = Ej−1
(T, z) for j = 1, ..., J − 1,
0
∗
∗
TJ (T, z) = EJ (T, z) + EJ−1
(T, z)
and letting μ be an invariant distribution of the joint process (T, z) , with transition given by (T 0 , Q), we have
η (T |z) ζ (z) = μ (T, z)
where ζ (z) is the invariant distribution of z.
Finally, since a stationary ACE is a particular type of ACE, then by the previous application of the first welfare
theorem, the stationary version of conditions i) to iv) in Lemma 40 characterizes a stationary eﬃcient allocation.
Since the stationary version of conditions i) to iv) in Lemma 40 coincide with conditions i) to iv) of Theorem 1, we
have finished its proof.
Proof of Proposition 3 The proof is standard, so we omit it.
Proof of Proposition 4 We first show that (16) holds. Consider two states T > 0 and T 0 > 0, where T 0 is
obtained from T by increasing the number of workers with tenure J by δ and by decreasing the number of workers
with tenure 1 by δ:
Tj0
T10

= Tj for j = 2, ..., J − 1
= T1 − δ and TJ0 = TJ + δ

It suﬃces to show that there is a feasible policy for T 0 that produces a reduction in total payoﬀ at most by τ and
thus
H [V (T 0 , z)] − H [V (T, z)] ≥ −τ .
To establish this, consider two cases, depending on whether in the original plan more than δ workers with tenure
1 were fired or not. Let δ be a positive number smaller than T1 /2. In the case where more than δ workers with
tenure 1 were fired, reduce the firing of workers with tenure 1 by δ and increase the firing of workers with tenure
J by δ. Then there is a reduction in current payoﬀ of τ , and no change in the future state. In the second case, let
1
(H [V (T 0 , z)] − H [V (T, z)])
δ
´ i
h ³
1
≥
βE V Ẽ0 , ..., ẼJ−2 , ẼJ−1 + ẼJ , z 0 |z
δ
1
− βE [V (E0 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ) |z]
δ
where
Ẽj
Ẽ1
ẼJ

= Ej for j = 2, ..., J − 1
= E1 − δ
= EJ + δ

xviii

which is feasible given the stated assumptions. Thus using the properties of directional derivatives and subgradients
of concave functions
´
1 ³
lim V Ẽ0 , ..., ẼJ−2 , ẼJ−1 + ẼJ , z 0 − V (E0 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 )
δ→0 δ
=
min
{(VJ − V1 ) (E0 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 )}
(V1 ,...,VJ )∈∂V

= −τ +

(V1 ,...,VJ )∈∂V

min

= −τ +

(V1 ,...,VJ )∈∂V

min

= −τ + lim

min

{(VJ − V1 ) (E0 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ) + τ }
½
¾
0
lim (VJ − V1 ) (E0 + ε, ..., EJ−2 + ε, EJ−1 + EJ + ε, z ) + τ
ε↓0

ε↓0 (V1 ,...,VJ )∈∂V

{(VJ − V1 ) (E0 + ε, ..., EJ−2 + ε, EJ−1 + EJ + ε, z 0 ) + τ }

≥ −τ
where we use theorem 24.4, page 233, of Rockafellar (1997) which shows that the graph of ∂f is closed for a concave
function on Rn , the hypothesis that (14) holds for all subgradients with T > 0, and where we denote
(VJ − V1 ) (E0 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 )
≡ VJ (E0 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ) + τ − V1 (E0 , ..., EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ) .
Finally since for all subgradients
H [V ]J (T, z) − H [V ]1 (T, z) ≥ lim

δ→0

1
(H [V (T 0 , z)] − H [V (T, z)]) ,
δ

then
H [V ]J (T, z) − H [V ]1 (T, z) ≥ −τ .
The argument to show that (15) holds follows a similar argument, where we let
0
= Tj+1 − δ
Tj0 = Tj + δ and Tj+1

for j = 1, ..., J − 1.
Proof of Proposition 5 Replacing any policy by one with these properties can not decrease output but can
decrease the separation cost τ .
Proof of Lemma 8. Let λ∗ be a Lagrange multiplier, then λ∗ (T − E ∗ ) = 0. Consider T 0 , and E 0 = E (T 0 , z),
then
H [V ] (T, z) − θ̂T
= R̂ (E (T ) , z)
≥ R̂ (E (T 0 ) , z) + λ∗ (E (T ) − E (T 0 ))
≥ R̂ (E (T 0 ) , z) + λ∗ (T − T 0 )
= H [V ] (T 0 , z) − θ̂T 0 + λ∗ (T − T 0 )

thus θ̂ + λ∗ is a subgradient of H [V ] . Let θ̂ + λ∗ be a subgradient of H [V ] (T, z). Since workers can always be sent
back and get θ̂, then λ∗ ≥ 0. Also,
H [V ] (T, z) = H [V ] (E ∗ , z) + θ̂ [T − E ∗ ]
for E ∗ = E (T, z). Then, by definition of subgradient

or

³
´
θ̂ [T − E ∗ ] = H [V ] (T, z) − H [V ] (E ∗ , z) ≥ θ̂ + λ∗ (T − E ∗ )
0 = R̂ (T, z) − R̂ (E ∗ , z) ≥ λ∗ (T − E ∗ )
xix

but E ∗ ≤ T so λ∗ (T − E ∗ ) = 0. This equality, together with the definition of a subgradient, implies that λ∗ is a
Lagrange multiplier.
Proof of Lemma 9. Let (E ∗ , λ∗ ) be a saddle satisfying (19). Then, by Theorem 2.9 in Takayama, E ∗ is
optimal. Let E ∗ be optimal. Then, by Theorem 2.9 in Takayama there are λ∗ ≥ 0 such that (E ∗ , λ∗ ) is a saddle.
It remains to show that λ∗i = R̂i∗ for some subgradient. From the definition of a saddle,
R̂ (E ∗ , z) + λ∗ (T − E ∗ ) ≥ R̂ (E, z) + λ∗ (T − E)
or
R̂ (E ∗ , z) ≥ R̂ (E, z) + λ∗ (E ∗ − E) .
which is the definition of a subgradient.
J

Proof of Proposition 10. Let E ∗ be optimal. Take any {H [V ]i (T, z)}i=0
λ is a Lagrange multiplier, where
{H [V ]i (T, z)}Ji=0 = λ∗ + θ̂.
∗

∈ ∂H [V ] (T, z) . By Lemma 8

By Lemma (9), λ∗i = R̂i∗ for some subgradient. Then R̂i ≥ 0, and
0 = R̂i∗ (Ti − Ei∗ ) = (H [V ]i (T, z) − θ) (Ti − Ei∗ ) .
Let {H [V ]i (T, z)}Ji=0 ∈ ∂H [V ] (T, z), and let Ri∗ be a subgradient of R̂∗ evaluated at some 0 ≤ E ∗ ≤ T such
that the above conditions are satisfied. Define λ∗ as
J

J

λ∗ = {H [V ]i (T, z)}i=0 − θ̂ = {Ri∗ }i=0
where the last equality follows from the assumed properties. We will show that (E ∗ , λ∗ ) is a saddle. From the
above conditions,
0 = λ∗i (Ti − Ei∗ )
Hence,
R̂ (E ∗ , z) + λ (T − E ∗ ) ≥ R̂ (E ∗ , z) + λ∗ (T − E ∗ ) , for every λ ≥ 0

Since, by the above conditions, λ∗ is a subgradient of R̂∗ evaluated at 0 ≤ E ∗ ≤ T , it follows that
R̂ (E, z) ≤ R̂ (E ∗ , z) + λ∗ (E − E ∗ ) , for every E
Hence,
so that E ∗ is optimal.
If Ei∗ > 0,

R̂ (E ∗ , z) + λ∗ (T − E ∗ ) ≥ R̂ (E, z) + λ∗ (T − E) , for every E

∗

R̂i (E , z) = f

Ã J
X
i=0

+β

Z

Ei∗ , z

!

−θ

¡
¢
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )
Vi+1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2

follows since ∂ (g + h) (x) = ∂g (x) + ∂h (x) (see Rockafeller, Theorem 23.8), and F is diﬀerentiable with derivative
f . When Ei∗ = 0, the subgradient of F is any number greater than f, and hence the previous expression holds with
inequality.
Proof of Proposition 11. From Proposition 10 and EJ∗ < TJ we have that
Ã J
!
Z
X
¡
¢
∗
∗
∗
H [V ]J (T, z) = f
Ei , z + β VJ E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 ) = θ − τ .
i=0

xx

Suppose that Ei∗ > 0. Then,
H [V ]i (T, z) = f

Ã J
X

Ei∗ , z

i=0

!

+β

Z

¡
¢
∗
∗
Vi+1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )

Therefore,
Z

£

¡
¢
∗
∗
Vi+1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0
¡
¢¤
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )
− VJ E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2

H [V ]i (T, z) − H [V ]J (T, z) = β

If i = J − 1 it follows that H [V ]i (T, z) = H [V ]J (T, z) = θ − τ . But from Lemma 8, H [V ]i (T, z) ≥ θ.
If i < J − 1 it follows that
Z
£
¡
¢
∗
∗
Vi+1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0
H [V ]i (T, z) − θ + τ = β
¡
¢¤
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )
− VJ E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2
≤ βτ
where the inequality follows from equations (15) and (16).
Therefore,
H [V ]i (T, z) ≤ θ − (1 − β) τ
But from Lemma 8, H [V ]i (T, z) ≥ θ..
Proof of Lemma 12. By contradiction , for all e > 0, there is a T, z such that
J
X
i=0

Ei (T, z) ≤ e,

Take e < U such that
f (e, z) > θ.
where z = min {z : z ∈ Z} . Since T0 = U > 0, E0 (T, z) < T0 . From 10
0 = [H [V ]0 (T, z) − θ] [T0 − E0 ]
thus
H [V ]0 (T, z) = θ
but
H [V ]0 (T, z) = R̂0 (E ∗ , z) + θ
so R̂0 (E ∗ , z) = 0. Since
∗

0 = R̂0 (E , z) ≥ f
Z

Ã J
X

Ei∗ , z

i=0

!

−θ

¡
¢
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )
+β V1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2
Z
¡
¢
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 )
> β V1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2

≥ 0.

© ∗ ª
Proof of Proposition 13. Let T, z be such that Ti > 0. Assume that Ej,s
is optimal. Take a subgradient
Vi (T, z) = H [V ]i (T, z) .
xxi

∗
First consider the case where Ei,s
= 0. Then

£
¤
∗
[H [V ]i (T, z) − θi (s)] Ti,s − Ei,s
=0

∗
= 0, θi (0) is
and its unique solution is H [V ]i (T, z) = θi (s) , provided that Ti,s > 0. Thus, as an special case, if Ei,0
the derivative of V.
∗
Now consider the case where Ei,s
> 0. We use the formula in Proposition 10 and replace its value repeatedly,
solving it forward until τ̂ j = s, the first time that for this cohort, employment is smaller than the number of workers
∗
present at the location. Since Ei,s
> 0 at each iteration

H [V ]i (T, z) = f

Ã J
X

Ei∗ , z

!

Zi=0
¡
¢
∗
∗
, EJ−1
+ EJ∗ , z 0 Q (z, dz 0 ) .
+β Vi+1 E0∗ , . . . , EJ−2

Notice that in this case, we argue above that Vi = θi (s) . Thus, we find that the unique solution for H [V ]i (T, z) is
Vi∗ (T, z). Hence the subgradient is unique, and thus V (T, z) is diﬀerentiable.
Proof of Proposition 14 By Proposition 5 and its corollaries, h [v] = H [V ] in E.
Proof of Lemma 15 If follows directly from the definition of E and the assumed property (13).
Proof of Proposition 16. Take (t1 , p1 ) and (t2 , p2 ) and consider their convex combination (tλ , pλ ) = (λt1 +
(1 − λ) t2 , λp1 + (1 − λ) p2 ). Let the unique corresponding elements in E for (t1 , p1 ) and (t2 , p2 ) be T1 and T2 .
Consider Tλ = λT1 + (1 − λ) T2 , which is not necessarily on E. Let T̂λ be the unique element in E that corresponds
to Tλ . Note that (tλ , pλ ) satisfies
J−1
X
T̂λ and pλ = T̂J .
tλ =
j=1

Then,
λh [v] (t1 , p1 , z) + (1 − λ) h [v] (t2 , p2 , z)
= λH [V ] (T1 , z) + (1 − λ) H [V ] (T2 , z)
≤ H [V ] (Tλ , z)
³
´
≤ H [V ] T̂λ , z

= h [v] (tλ , pλ , z) ,

where the first equality follows from Proposition 14, the first inequality follows from concavity of V and Proposition
3 , the second inequality follows from Lemma 15, and the last equality follows from Proposition 14.
Proof of Proposition 21. First define
⎞
⎛
J
J−1
X
X
Ej , z ⎠ − θ
Ej − (θ − τ ) EJ
R̂ (E, z) = F ⎝
j=0

+β

Z

j=0

V (U, E0 , . . . , EJ−2 , EJ−1 + EJ , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) .

¡
¢
¡
¢
Since V and F are concave, then R̂ is concave. Now take eit , eip for i = 1, 2 and consider eλt , eλp = (λe1t +
¡
¢
(1 − λ) e2t , λe1p + (1 − λ) e2p ). Let the unique corresponding elements to eit , eip in [0, U ]J ×R+ that satisfies property
(*) in Corollary 6 be denoted by Ẽ i for i = 1, 2. Define E λ = λẼ 1 + (1 − λ) Ẽ 2 . Note that
J−1
X

Ejλ = eλt and EJ = eλp .

j=0

xxii

Define Ẽ λ as the unique element in [0, U ]J × R+ that satisfies property (*) and such that
J−1
X

Ejλ =

j=0

J−1
X

Ẽjλ and EJ = ẼJ .

j=0

Then

=
≤
≤
=

¢
¡
¢
¡
λR e1p , e1t , z + (1 − λ) R e2p , e2t , z
³
´
³
´
λR̂ Ẽ 1 , z + (1 − λ) R̂ Ẽ 2 , z
¡
¢
R̂ E λ , z
³
´
R̂ Ẽ λ , z
¡
¢
R eλp , eλt , z ,

where the first equality follows from construction of Ẽ i and since by assumption v and V satisfy (21), the first
inequality follows from the concavity of R̂, the second inequality follows by assumption (13) and Proposition 5 and
its corollaries, and the last equality follows from the same argument as the one in Proposition 14.
Proof of Proposition 24 Define the operator h̄ as
h̄ [v] (t, p, z) =

max {F (et + ep , z) + θ [t − et ] + (θ − τ ) [p − ep ] +
¾
Z
0
0
+β v (U + M (et ) , ep + et − M (et ) , z ) Q (z, dz )

0≤et ,0≤ep

Comparing this problem with (20) the constraints et ≤ t and ep ≤ p were removed, hence
h [v] (t, p, z) ≤ h̄ [v] (t, p, z) .
The optimal policies et , ep do not depend on t and p, thus the function h̄ [v] is linear with derivatives
h̄ [v]p (t, p, z) = θ − τ
h̄ [v]t (t, p, z) = θ

for all t, p, z. By concavity of h [v] ,
h [v] (t, 0, z) ≤ h [v] (t, p, z) + h [v]p (0 − p) or
h [v] (t, p, z) ≥ h [v]p p + h [v] (t, 0, z)

´
³
where h [v]t , h [v]p ∈ ∂h [v] (t, p, z) . Rearranging and using the linearity of h̄ [v] :

h [v]p p + h [v] (t, 0, z) ≤ h [v] (t, p, z) ≤ h̄ [v] (t, p, z) = h̄ [v] (t, 0, z) + [θ − τ ] p

for all p. Thus by monotonicity of h [v] and h̄ [v] on t :
h [v]p (t, p, z) p + h [v] (0, 0, z) ≤ h̄ [v] ((J − 1) U, 0, z) + [θ − τ ] p
sup
t∈[0,U (J−1)]

h [v]p (t, p, z) p + h [v] (0, 0, z) ≤ h̄ [v] ((J − 1) U, 0, z) + [θ − τ ] p

Hence
lim inf

p→∞

h [v] (0, 0, z) − h̄ [v] (U (J − 1) , 0, z)
p
Ã

= 0 ≤ lim inf

p→∞

[θ − τ ] −

xxiii

sup

t∈[0,U (J−1)]

h [v]p (p, t, z)

!

or
lim sup

p→∞

"

sup

t∈[0,U (J−1)]

#

h [v]p (p, t, z) ≤ θ − τ .

On the other hand, for the original problem (20), for (p0 , t, z), a feasible policy for p ≥ p0 is to set e0p =
ep (p0 , t, z) , in which case each additional unit of p yields θ − τ . Hence the right derivative of h [v] (t, p0 , z) is greater
or equal than θ − τ . Since h [v] is concave, then h [v]p (t, p0 , z) ≥ θ − τ for all (t, p0 , z).
Combining the two inequalities, for large enough p, h [v]p (p, t, z) = θ − τ for all t.
Proof of Lemma 25. Consider two cases. First et < (J − 1) U . In this case M (et ) = et , which implies that
Z
b (et , ep , z) = v (U + et , ep , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) ,
thus
bet
bep

=
=

Z
Z

vt dQ,
vp dQ

where
(vt , vp ) ∈ ∂v (U + et , ep , z 0 )
for the corresponding elements. Second, if et > (J − 1) U,
Z
b (et , ep , z) = v (JU, ep + et − (J − 1) U, z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) ,
thus
bet

=

bep

=

Z
Z

vp dQ,
vp dQ.

Since, by assumption,
vp ≤ vt ≤ vp + τ ,
we have shown the required result, except for the case where et = (J − 1) U. This case follows by continuity, since
the graph of the subgradient of a concave function is closed (Rockafellar, 1997, Theorem 24.4, page 233).
Proof of Lemma 26. By definition of R :
Rep
Ret
where
Then

= f (et , ep , z) − (θ − τ ) + βbep ,
= f (et , ep , z) − θ + βbet
¡
¢
bet , bep ∈ ∂b (et , ep , z) .

£
¤
Rep − Ret = τ + β bep − bet ≥ τ (1 − β)

where the inequality follows from the previous lemma.

Proof of Lemma 28. The existence of p̂ follows by the concavity of R with respect to p, the Inada conditions
on F , and from Proposition 24, which shows that vp = θ − τ for large p. The uniqueness of p follows by the strict
concavity of F . That p̂ < p̄ follows from concavity of R with respect of ep and Lemma 26.
Proof of Lemma 29 The existence and uniqueness of t̂ follows from the strict concavity of R.

xxiv

Proof of Proposition 30 It follows from the definition of t̂, p̂ and various of the previous results.
Proof of Lemma 31. The first statement follows by considering the case where T ∈ E so that there is a
i ∈ {1, 2, ..., J − 1} and Ti such that
T1 , ..., TJ = (U, .., U, Ti , 0, ..., 0, TJ )
for Ti ∈ (0, U )

V (U, ..., U, Ti , ..., 0, TJ ) = v ((i − 1) U + Ti , TJ ) for all Ti ∈ (0, U )

Thus
Vi (U, ..., U, Ti , ..., 0, TJ ) = vt ((i − 1) U + Ti , TJ ) for i = 1, 2, ..., J − 1.
The second and third claim follows from the form of the optimal decision rules, i.e. the definition of the range
of inaction and the strict concavity of R. The third follows since, for t ≥ t̂ (p, z) it is feasible to fire any extra
temporary workers, so that we know the right derivative of h [v] with respect to t.
Proof of Lemma 33. First we establish that t̂ (p, z) is decreasing in p. Then we use this result, to show that
h [v]t is decreasing in p.
By definition of t̂,
¡
¢
0 ∈ Ret t̂ (p, z) , p, z
for the case where 0 < t̂ < JU. The main idea is to show that Ret (t, p, z) is decreasing in p, and then use that, by
concavity, Ret (t, p, z) is decreasing in t.
The subgradient Ret is given by
Ret (t, p, z) = f (t + p, z) − θ + βbet (t, p, z)
where b (t, p, z) is given by
b (t, p, z) =

Z

v (U + min {t, U (J − 1)} , t + p − min {t, U (J − 1)} , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 )

We can then write b by cases as
b (t, p, z) =
b (t, p, z) =

Z

Z

v (U + t, p, z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) if t ≤ U (J − 1)
v (U J, t + p − U (J − 1) , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) for t ≥ U (J − 1)

and hence its subgradients are
Z

vt (U + t, p, z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) if t < U (J − 1)
∙Z
¸
Z
v p (U J, p, z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) , v̄t (U J, p, z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) if t = U (J − 1)
bet (t, p, z) =
Z
bet (t, p, z) =
vp (U J, t + p − U (J − 1) , z 0 ) Q (z, dz 0 ) for t > U (J − 1)

bet (t, p, z) =

Now we are ready to show that Ret (t, p, z) is strictly decreasing in p. Consider first the case where t < U (J − 1) . In
this case the result follows from the hypothesis that vt is decreasing in p and f strictly concave. Consider the case
where t > (J − 1) U. In this case the result follows from the concavity of v, so that vp is decreasing, and the strict
concavity of f. Finally, for the case where t = (J − 1) U, we combine the previous two arguments for the right and
left derivatives.
Having established that Ret (t, p, z) is strictly decreasing in p, then it follows that t̂ is decreasing in p since Ret
is decreasing in t by concavity of R.
The cases where t̂ = U J or t̂ = 0 are similar.

xxv

Now we turn to show that h [v]t is decreasing in p. We consider three cases. First, let (t, p) ∈ Int (I (z)) . In this
case,
h [v]t (t, p, z) = f (t + p, z) + βbet (t, p, z)
= Ret (t, p, z) + θ
and ³thus h ´[v]t is decreasing in p since, as shown above, Ret (t, p, z) is decreasing in p. In the case where (t, p) ∈
C
Int I (z) , then h [v]t = θ, and hence h [v] is diﬀerentiable, and its derivative constant, so that it is weakly

decreasing in p. Finally, consider the case where (t, p, z) is such that t = t̂ (p, z) . As shown above, t̂ is weakly
decreasing in p, thus for p0 > p, t ≥ t̂ (p0 , z) . Also, the subgradient of h [v]t is
£
¤ £
¤
h [v]t (t, p, z) , h̄ [v]t (t, p, z) = θ, f (t + p, z) + β b̄et (t, p, z)

If t̂ (p0 , z) = t̂ (p, z) , then, using the expression for the left derivative of h [v]t , it follows since
¡ f is concave
¢ and, as
shown above, bet is decreasing in p. If t̂ (p0 , z) < t̂ (p, z) , then, it must be that the point t̂ (p, z) , p0 , z is in the
¢
¡
interior of the complement of the range of inaction, and thus h [v]t t̂ (p, z) , p0 , z = θ. Thus h [v]t has decreased in
this case too, since the subgradient has collapsed to its right derivative.

Proof of Proposition 34. That t̂ is decreasing in p follows from using Lemma 33. Notice that starting with
V 0 = 0 and v 0 = 0 satisfies all the hypothesis of this lemma. Since all these properties are preserved in the limit,
they hold for the fixed point. To see that t̂ is strictly decreasing, consider first the case where t < U (J − 1) . In
this case it follows from the fact that in a neighborhood of those points v (t + U, p, z 0 ) is diﬀerentiable with respect
to t, satisfies
Z
¡
¢
¡
¢
θ = f t̂ (p, z) + p, z + β vt t̂ (p, z) + U, p, z 0 Q (z, dz 0 ) ,
is decreasing in p, and f is strictly decreasing. A similar argument holds when t > U (J − 1) , where
Z
¡
¢
¡
¢
θ = f t̂ (p, z) + p, z + β vp JU, p + t̂ (p, z) − JU, z 0 Q (z, dz 0 ) .

Proof of Theorem 35 and Proposition 36 (Appendix C).
To prove the theorem it is convenient to define a sequential economy that corresponds to the island planning
problem taking as given U, θ. This economy has a firm whose problem corresponds to the one of the firm with value
function B in the recursive competitive equilibrium (RCE) and a family whose problem has solution that gives the
workers value function W in the RCE.
I) We define this economy in a standard Arrow-Debreu sequential way. This definition allows to use the first and
second welfare theorems to link the allocation that solves the sequential island planning problem with an allocation
that solves the firms and workers problem in the island economy as well as with the equilibrium wages w.
The commodities for the sequential island economy with initial state (X, z0 ) is given by processes for employment
by tenure E and consumption C
© ¡ ¢
ª
¡ ¢
(E, C) = Ct z t , Ejt z t : j = 0, ..., J, z t ∈ Z .
We use gjt to denote the labor choice of the firms in a sequential island problem. We use the ht and st for hiring
and firing of permanent workers. The net output of firms is to produce the following date t history z t amount of
consumption good
⎛
⎞
J
X
¡ t¢
¡ ¢
F⎝
gjt z , zt ⎠ − τ st z t .
(32)
j=0

The choices of g for the firms are subject to the restrictions that gj,−1 (z−1 ) = Xj for j = 0, ..., J, the law of motion
for the permanent workers
¡ ¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
gJt z t = gJt−1 z t−1 + gJ−1t−1 z t−1 − st z t + ht z t ,
(33)
xxvi

and the non-negativity constraints for hiring and firing
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
st z t ≥ 0 , ht z t ≥ 0, gjt z t ≥ 0

for all j = 0, ..., J, z t , t ≥ 0.
We use e to denote the labor choice and c the consumption choice of the household in the sequential island
problem. This household “owns” as an endowment a stream of U unemployed workers per period, that arrives to
the island every period. The household is risk neutral in terms of consumption ct (z t ) . Its decision is to assign a
worker to work on the island or permanently work outside the island, which gives value θ per worker, in units of
the final good. The utility function of the household is
XX
¡
¢
β t Q z t |z0 ×
t=0 z t

⎛

⎞⎤
J−1
X£
¡ t¢
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t ¢¤ £
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t ¢¤
ej−1t−1 z
− ejt z + eJt−1 z
+ eJ−1t−1 z
− eJt z ⎠⎦ .
× ⎣ct z + θ ⎝
⎡

j=0

The household is subject to the following restrictions:

ej,−1 (z−1 ) = Xj for j = 0, ..., J
and for all t, z t , non-negative ejt is subject to:
¡ ¢
e0,t z t ≤ U,
¡ ¢
¡
¢
ejt z t ≤ ej−1t−1 z t−1 for j = 1, 2, ..., J − 1
¡ ¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
eJt z t ≤ eJt−1 z t−1 + eJ−1t−1 z t−1 .

(34)

Market clearing for the sequential economy is given by
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
= gjt z t
ejt z t
!
Ã J
X ¡ ¢
¡ t¢
¡ ¢
t
git z , zt − τ st z t
= F
ct z
i=0

for all j = 0, ...., J, and all t, z t . Prices in this sequential island economy are given by intertemporal consumption
prices, Pt (X, z t ) and wages by tenure wjt (X, z t ) in terms of date t, history z t consumption goods. Given the
household preferences for consumption we impose
¡
¡
¢
¢
Pt X, z t = β t Q z t |z0 .
With these prices the problem of the firm is to maximize profits, i.e.
B0 (xJ , X, z0 )
= max
{g}

subject to

X
t=0

β

X
t
zt

⎡

⎣F

³X

⎤
J
¡ t¢ ´ X
¡ t¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
gjt z , zt −
gjt z wjt X, z t − τ st z t ⎦ Q z t |z0
j=0

gJ−1 = xJ ,
t

and the laws of motion for s, h and g. Let β ξ t (z t ) Q (z t |z0 ) be the multiplier of the restriction (33). The first order
conditions for the firm’s problem are:
³X
¡ ¢ ´
¡
¢
f
gjt z t , zt − wjt X, z t ≤ 0
for j = 0, ..., J − 2 with equality if gjt (z t ) > 0. For j = J − 1
³X
X
¡ ¢ ´
¡
¢
¡
¢
f
gjt z t , zt − wJ−1t X, z t + β
ξ̂ t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ≤ 0
zt+1

xxvii

with equality if gJ−1t (z t ) > 0. For j = J
⎞
⎛
J
X
X
¡ t¢
¡ t¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
ξ̂ t z = f ⎝
gjt z , zt ⎠ − wJt X, z t + β
ξ̂ t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt )

(35)

zt+1

j=0

if gJt (z t ) > 0. The first order conditions for ht (z t ) is

¡ ¢
ξ̂ t z t ≤ 0

with equality if ht (z t ) > 0. The first order conditions for st (z t ) is
¡ ¢
−τ − ξ̂ t z t ≤ 0

with equality if st (z t ) > 0. Equation (33) thus gives:
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
gJ,t−1 z t−1 + gJ−1,t−t z t−1 > gJ,t z t then ξ̂ t z t = −τ
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
gJ,t−1 z t−1 + gJ−1,t−t z t−1 < gJ,t z t then ξ̂ t z t = 0.

Now we turn to the household problem in a sequential island economy. Letting β t Q (z t |z0 ) ν̂ j,t (z t ) be the
Lagrange multiplier for (34), the first order conditions for the household problem are equivalent to
⎫
⎧
⎬
⎨
X
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
Wjt X, z t = max θ, wjt X, z t + β
Wj+1t+1 X, z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ,
⎭
⎩
z
t+1

for j = 0, ..., J − 1 and

⎫
⎧
⎬
⎨
X
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
WJt X, z t = max θ, wJt X, z t + β
WJt+1 X, z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt )
⎭
⎩
z
t+1

where

¡
¢
¡
¢
Wjt X, z t = v̂jt X, z t + θ

with slackness

¡ ¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
ejt z t < ej−1t−1 z t−1 then Wjt X, z t = θ,

and ejt (z t ) > 0,

X
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
Wjt X, z t = wjt X, z t + β
Wj+1t+1 X, z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt )
zt+1

for j = 0, ..., J − 1 and analogously for j = J.
To see why this is the case, write the Lagrangian of the household problem as
X X ¡
¢
βt
Q z t |z0 ×
t=0

⎧
J
⎨X

¡ ¢
¡
¢
ejt z t wjt X, z t +

⎩
j=0
⎛
J−1
X£
¡
¢
¡ ¢¤ £
θ⎝
ej−1t−1 z t−1 − ejt z t + eJ
j=0

¡ ¢£
¡ ¢¤
+ν̂ 0t z t U − e0t z t +
+

J−1
X
j=1

zt

⎞
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t ¢¤
+ eJ−1t−1 z
− eJt z ⎠
t−1 z

⎫
¡ t¢ £
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t ¢¤
¡ t¢ £
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t ¢¤⎬
ν̂ jt z ej−1t−1 z
− ejt z + ν̂ jt z eJ−1t−1 z
+ eJt−1 z
− eJt z
⎭
xxviii

The first order conditions for this problem are as follows. For ejt (z t ) :
X¡
¡
¢ ¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¢¢
wjt X, z t − θ + ν̂ jt z t + β
θ + v̂j+1 t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ≤ 0
zt+1

with = if ejt (z t ) > 0 for j = 0, 1, ..., J − 1 and

X¡
¡
¢ ¡
¡ ¢¢
wJt X, z t − θ + ν̂ Jt z t + β
θ + v̂J
zt+1

t+1

¡ t
¢¢
z , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ≤ 0

with = if eJt (z t ) > 0.
¡
¢
The ¡slackness
conditions
are:
if ejt (z t ) < ej−1t−1 z t−1 then ν̂ jt (z t ) = 0 for j = 0, ..., J − 1, and if eJt (z t ) <
¢
¡
¢
eJ−1t−1 z t−1 + eJ−1t−1 z t−1 then ν̂ Jt (z t ) = 0.
To compare a competitive equilibrium with the planning problems it helps defining a sequential island planning
problem. In this problem the planner maximizes the expected discounted value of net output (32) subject to the
feasibility constraints (33) and (34). This is the sequential version of the recursive island planning problem. Let
V0 (X, z0 ) be the value attained by this planning problem.
Let β t ξ t (z t ) Q (z t |z0 ) be the multiplier of the constraint (33) and β t ν jt (z t ) Q (z t |z0 ) the multiplier of the
constraints (34). The first order conditions for the sequential island planning problem are equivalent to:
⎫
⎧
⎬
⎨
³X
X¡
¡ t¢
¡ t¢ ´
¡ t
¢¢
θ + ν jt z = max θ, f
Ejt z , zt + β
θ + vj+1 t+1 z , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt )
⎭
⎩
z
t+1

¡
¢
with ν jt (z t ) = 0 if Ejt (z t ) < Ej−1t−1 z t−1 and
³X
X¡
¡ ¢
¡ ¢ ´
θ + ν jt z t = f
Ejt z t , zt + β
θ + vj+1
zt+1

if Ejt (z t ) > 0 for j = 0, .., J − 2. For j = J − 1 we have
¡ ¢
θ + ν J−1t z t
⎧
⎨
³X
X¡
¡ ¢ ´
= max θ, f
Ejt z t , zt + β
θ + vJ
⎩
z
t+1

¡
¢
with vJ−1t (z t ) = 0 if EJ−1t (z t ) < EJ−1t−1 z t−1 , and
¡ ¢
θ + ν J−1t z t
³X
X¡
¡ ¢ ´
= f
Ejt z t , zt + β
θ + vJ

t+1

zt+1

if EJ−1t (z t ) > 0. For j = J we have
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
θ + ν Jt z t + ξ t z t
⎧
⎨
³X
X¡
¡ ¢ ´
= max θ, f
Ejt z t , zt + β
θ + vJ
⎩
z
t+1

t+1

¡ t
¢¢
z , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt )

⎫
⎬
¡ t
¢
¡ t
¢¢
Q (zt+1 |zt )
t+1 z , zt+1 + ξ t+1 z , zt+1
⎭
¡

¢
¡
¢¢
z t , zt+1 + ξ t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt )

⎫
⎬
¡ t
¢
¡ t
¢¢
,
z
,
z
|z
)
z
+
ξ
z
Q
(z
t+1
t+1
t+1
t+1 t
t+1
⎭

¡
¢
¡
¢
with vJt (z t ) = 0 if EJt (z t ) < EJt−1 z t−1 + EJ−1t−1 z t−1 , and
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
θ + ν Jt z t + ξ t z t
³X
X¡
¡ ¢ ´
¡
¢
¡
¢¢
= f
Ejt z t , zt + β
θ + vJ t+1 z t , zt+1 + ξ t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt )
zt+1

if EJt (z t ) > 0.

xxix

To see why this is the case, write the Lagrangian for the planning problem as:
X X ¡
¢
βt
Q z t |z0 ×
V0 (X, z0 ) = max
{E}

t=0

n ³X
¡ ¢ ´
¡ ¢
F
Ejt z t , zt − τ St z t
⎛
J−1
X£
¡
¢
¡ ¢¤ £
+θ ⎝
Ej−1t−1 z t−1 − Ejt z t + EJ
j=0

zt

⎞
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t−1 ¢
¡ t ¢¤
+ EJ−1t−1 z
− EJt z ⎠
t−1 z

X
¡ ¢£
¡ ¢¤ J−1
¡ ¢£
¡
¢
¡ ¢¤
ν jt z t Ej−1 z t−1 − Ejt z t
+ν 0t z t U − E0t z t +
j=1

¡ ¢£
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡ ¢¤
+ν Jt z t EJ−1t−1 z t−1 + EJt−1 z t−1 − EJt z t
¡ ¢£
¡ ¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢¤ª
ξ t z t −EJt z t + EJt−1 z t−1 + EJ−1t−1 z t−1 − St z t + Ht z t

The first order conditions are:
³X
X¡
¡ ¢ ´
¡ ¢
f
Ejt z t , zt − θ − ν jt z t + β
θ + vj+1
zt+1

with equality if Ejt (z t ) > 0,

t+1

¡ t
¢¢
z , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ≤ 0

³X

¡ ¢ ´
¡ ¢
Ejt z t , zt − θ − ν J−1t z t +
X¡
X
¡
¢¢
¡
¢
β
ξ t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ≤ 0
θ + vJ t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) + β
f

zt+1

zt+1

t

with equality if EJ−1t (z ) > 0,

f
β

X¡
θ + vJ

zt+1
t

t+1

³X

¡ ¢ ´
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
Ejt z t , zt − θ − ξ t z t − ν Jt z t +

X
¡ t
¢¢
¡
¢
ξ t+1 z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ≤ 0
z , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) + β
zt+1

with equality if EJt (z ) > 0.
The first order condition for Ht (z t ) is

¡ ¢
ξt zt ≤ 0

with equality if Ht (z t ) = 0. The first order condition for St (z t ) is
¡ ¢
−τ − ξ t z t ≤ 0

with equality if St (z t ) > 0.

(II) We now show i), the first welfare theorem, and iii). We start with an island RCE {w, W, B, G} . Pick
an arbitrary state (T, z) = (X, z0 ) in the support of μ. We construct the sequential competitive equilibrium with
(X, z0 ) as initial condition as follows. Let wages be:
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢ ¢
wjt X, z t = wj Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt .
and let multipliers and employment be

¡
¢
¡
¡
¢ ¢
θ + v̂jt X, z t
= Wj Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢ ¢
= Gj Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt
ejt X, z t

where

¡
¢
Dt X, z t
= G (T, zt ) for
¡
¢
¡
¢ t−1 ¡
¢
¡
¢¢
¡
t−1
X, z t−1 , DJ−1
X, z t−1 + DJt−1 X, z t−1 and
T = U, D0t−1 X, z t−1 , ..., DJ−2

D−1 (X, z0 ) = X

xxx

(36)

It is immediate to verify that {e, ν̂} solves the first order conditions for the household problem in a sequential island
equilibrium, and hence it solves the household problem. For future reference we define
Wj0 (X, z0 ) = ν̂ j0 (z0 , X) + θ.
Define the Lagrange multiplier and employment for the firms problem as:
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢
¡
¢ ¢
ξ̂ t X, z t = Bp DJt−1 X, z t−1 , Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢ ¢
gjt X, z t = Gj Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt
n o
It is immediate to verify that g, ξ̂ solves the first order conditions for the firm’s problem in an sequential island
competitive equilibrium, and hence it solves the firm’s problem. Let B0 be the value of the firm in the sequential
island CE. For future reference, from the envelope theorem, we have
∂B0 (xJ , X, z0 ) /∂xJ = ξ̂ 0 (X, z0 )
evaluated at xJ = XJ .
By the first welfare theorem applied to the sequential island economy, {e} = {g} is a Pareto optimal allocation,
and hence solves the sequential island planning problem. By inspection, the Lagrange multipliers {ξ t , ν jt } that
satisfy the first order
n o conditions for the sequential planning problem are identical to the Lagrange multipliers for the
firm’s problem ξ̂ t and the Lagrange multipliers {ν̂ jt } for the households problem in the sequential competitive
equilibrium. >From these first order conditions:
∗
Wj0
(X, z0 ) = ν̂ j0 (z0 , X) + θ = ν j0 (z0 , X) + θ = ∂V0 (X, z0 ) /∂Xj

for j = 0, ..., J − 1 and
WJ0 (X, z0 ) + ∂B0 (xJ , X, z0 ) /∂xJ

= ν̂ J0 (X, z0 ) + θ + ξ̂ 0 (X, z0 )
= ν J0 (X, z0 ) + θ + ξ 0 (X, z0 ) = ∂V0 (X, z0 ) /∂XJ

evaluated at xJ = XJ . The allocation described by G is, by hypothesis, recursive, so it solves the recursive island
planning problem with initial condition (X, z0 ). Repeating this argument for each initial condition (X, z0 ) we show
that
V0 (T, z) = V (T, z) ,
B0 (TJ , T, z) = B (TJ , T, z) ,
Wj0 (T, z) = Wj (T, z)
for all (T, z.) Hence we have shown the first welfare theorem for the recursive representation of the island problem,
and that (24), condition iii) of the theorem, holds.
(III). We now show ii), the second welfare theorem, and condition iii) of Theorem 35. We start with a solution
of the recursive planning problem, ν (T, z) and ξ (T, z) which, by the envelope theorem, satisfy
∂V (T, z)
= θ + ν j (T, z) .
∂Tj
for j = 0, ..., J − 1, and

∂V (T, z)
= θ + ν J (T, z) + ξ (T, z)
∂TJ
If there were more than one pair ν J , ξ for a given T, z, select the one that only depends on (T, z). From the principle
of optimality, the solution to the recursive island problem V is the same as the value function for the sequential
island problem V0 , so that V (T, z) = V0 (T, z).
Choose any initial state (X, z0 ) to be used as initial condition to the sequential island problem. Define
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢ ¢
= ν j Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt
ν jt X, z t
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢ ¢
= ξ Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt
ξ t X, z t
¡
¢
¡
¡
¢ ¢
= G Dt−1 X, z t−1 , zt
Ejt X, z t
xxxi

where Dt−1 is defined as in (36) using the optimal decision rule from the recursive planning problem. By comparing
the first order conditions for the recursive island planing problem with the first order conditions for the sequential
island planning problem, it can be seen that {Et , ν jt , ξ t } so defined solve the first order conditions for the sequenctial
island planning problem. Next define wages as follows:
⎞
⎛
J
X
¡
¢
¡
¢
(37)
wjt X, z t = f ⎝
Ejt z t , X , zt ⎠
j=0

for j = 0, 1, 2, ..., J − 2; for j = J − 1 let
⎞
⎛
J
X
X
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
Ejt X, z t , zt ⎠ + β
ξ t+1 X, z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) ;
wJ−1t X, z t = f ⎝
j=0

(38)

z t+1

finally, for j = J

⎞
⎛
J
X
X
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
Ejt X, z t , zt ⎠ − ξ t X, z t + β
ξ t+1 X, z t , zt+1 Q (zt+1 |zt ) .
wJt X, z t = f ⎝
j=0

(39)

z t+1

The function B0 (xJ , X, z0 ) is defined as the solution to the firm’s problem for wages wjt in the sequential island
equilibrium. Given wages wjt , the functions Wjt are defined as:
¡
¢
¡
¢
(40)
Wjt X, z t = ν jt X, z t + θ

for j = 0, ..., J.
Define the candidate multipliers for the sequential firm problem as ξ̂ t = ξ t . Given wages wjt , and multipliers
ξ̂ t , it is easy to verify that the allocation gjt = Ejt , and its implied {st , ht } solve the first order conditions for the
firms in the sequential island economy. To verify this, one uses the first order conditions for the island planning
problem in the island sequential economy. From the envelope condition it is immediate that
∂B0 (xJ , X, z0 ) /∂xJ = ξ̂ 0 (X, z0 )
where xJ = XJ .
Define the candidate multipliers for the sequential household problem v̂jt = vjt . Given wages wjt and multipliers
v̂jt , it is easy to verify that the allocation ejt = Ejt solves the first order conditions for the household’s problem in
the sequential island economy. To verify this, use the first order conditions for the island planner problem in the
sequential island economy.
Thus we have established that the sequential allocation constructed out of the solution of the recursive island
planning problem from an initial state (X, z0 ) can be decentralized as a sequential island competitive equilibrium.
Finally, we define the elements of the recursive island competitive equilibrium as follows:
wj (X, z0 ) = wj0 (X, z0 ) ,
Wj (X, z0 ) = Wj0 (X, z0 ) ,
B (XJ , X, z0 ) = B0 (XJ , X, z0 )
By repeating this construction for all (X, z0 ) in the support of μ, we construct the functions w, W and B. These
functions constitute a RCE since they are constructed from the sequential island competitive equilibrium.
>From the previous arguments we have:
∂V (T, z)
∂Tj

= θ + ν j (T, z) = θ + vj0 (z, T )

(41)

= θ + ν̂ j0 (z, T ) = Wj0 (T, z) .
for j = 0, ..., J − 1 and
∂V (T, z)
∂TJ

= θ + ν J (T, z) + ξ (T, z) = θ + ν J0 (, z) + ξ 0 (z, T )
= θ + ν̂ J0 (z, T ) + ξ̂ 0 (z, T ) = WJ0 (T, z) +

xxxii

∂
B0 (TJ , T, z) ,
∂xJ

(42)

and thus condition iii) is satisfied.
(IV) We establish condition (b) of Proposition 36. Since in (II) and (III) we have shown the first and second
welfare theorems, we can, without loss of generality, start with an eﬃcient allocation and examine the equilibrium
wages w that we constructed in (III), equations (37), (38) and (39). The multiplier ξ ∈ [−τ , 0] and ξ t (X, z t ) = −τ if
St (z t ) > 0, i.e. if permanent workers are being fired. Thus, the inequalities in (b) follow from these definitions and
the properties of ξ.
(V). We establish condition c) of Proposition 36. Since in (II) and (III) we have shown the first and second
welfare theorems, we can, without loss of generality, start with an eﬃcient allocation and examine the equilibrium
value function for workers W that we constructed in (III), equation (40). Using equations (41), (42) we have that
∂V (T, z)
∂Tj
∂V (T, z)
∂TJ

= Wj (T, z) , for j = 0, ..., J − 1
= WJ (T, z) + ξ (T, z) .

In Proposition (4) we have shown that
VT1 ≥ VT2 ≥ · · · ≥ VTJ−1 ,
Thus
W1 ≥ W2 ≥ · · · ≥ WJ−1 .
Finally since W is part of an equilibrium, it satisfies
WJ−1 (T, z) = wJ−1 (T, z) + βE [WJ (A (T, z) , z 0 ) |z]
WJ (T, z) = wJ (T, z) + βE [WJ (A (T, z) , z 0 ) |z]
and since we have already established (c), wJ ≥ wJ−1 , and thus we have WJ−1 ≤ WJ . This finishes the proof of V.

xxxiii

Appendix G: Definition of Auxiliary Competitive Equilibrium (“ACE”)
This appendix defines the auxiliary competitive equilibrium (ACE) used in the proof of Theorem 1. There are
two types of firms, type I and II, and families. There are as many markets to “buy” and “sell” workers as islands
of type (X, z t ).
Preferences of the family.
The families own all firms of both type and consume final consumption goods. They are risk neutral, and
discount future at rate β.
X tX ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢
β
Ct z t qt z t
t

zt

“Labor” is allocated initially to the two types of firms.
To simplify the notation we anticipate that, given the risk neutrality of households, the price for final goods
sold at date t, state z t , is β t qt (z t ) .
Problem of firms type I.
There is a continuum of firms type I on each island of type X that “buys” workers from a central location
at price λt (z t , Z) . They start at period t = 0 with a profile of workers given by their type X. Workers that are
“bought” in this period are given tenure j = 0. They operate the technology F . If they sale workers to the central
location, they obtain a price θt (z t , X) . If they “sale” workers with tenure J or higher at the island level, they loose
τ per worker.
The sequence problem for firms type I who “buy” workers at price λt , sell them at price θt , and also pay the
separation cost τ , is the following:
For each (X, z0 ), they maximize:
⎧ ⎛
⎫
⎞
J
X t X⎨
X
¡ t ¢
¡ t ¢ ¡ t ¢⎬ ¡ t ¢
F⎝
β
Ej,t z , X , zt ⎠ − T0,t z , X λt z , X
q z
(43)
⎩
⎭ t
t=0
j=1
zt
⎧
⎫
J
⎬ ¡ ¢
X X ⎨X
¢
¢¤
¢
£
¢
¢¤
£
¡
¡
¡
¡
¡
+
βt
Tj,t z t , X − Ej,t z t , X θt z t , X − TJ,t z t , X − EJ,t z t , X τ qt z t
⎩
⎭
t
t=0

z

j=0

by choice of {Ejt , Tjt }t≥0 subject to to the technological constraints in hiring and firing:
¢
¢
¡
¡
Ej,t z t , X ≤ Tj,t z t , X for j = 0, 1, .., J
¢
¢
¡
¡
Tj,t z t , X = Ej−1,t−1 z t−1 , X for j = 1, 2, ..., J − 1
¢
¢
¢
¡
¡
¡
TJ,t z t , X = EJ−1,t−1 z t−1 , X + EJ,t−1 z t−1 , X ,
given initial conditions

¢
¡
Tj,0 z 0 , X = Xj for j = 1, 2, ..., J.

Problem of firms type II.
There is a continuum of firms type II that sells workers to each island, subject to the undirected search technology, and buys them back from islands. Firms also operate the home production technology. “Purchases” are
denoted by Sjt (z t , X) with price θt (z t , X) and “sales” are denoted by Yt (z t , X) with price λt (z t , X).
The sequence problem for firms type II that produce home goods and reallocate workers is the following:
For each (X, z0 ), they maximize:
X
X XX ¡
¢ ¡
¢
¡ ¢
β t ωLt +
βt
Yt z t , X λt z t , X η (X|z0 ) qt z t
(44)
t

t

zt

X

⎡
⎤
J
X t XX X
¢
¡ t ¢
¡
¡ ¢
⎣
β
Sj,t z , X ⎦ θt z t , X η (X|z0 ) qt z t
−
t

zt

X

j=0

by choice of {Yt , Sjt , Ut }t≥0 subject to the undirected search technology, so that they cannot sell diﬀerent quantities
to diﬀerent islands, which is written as
¢
¡
Ut−1 = Yt z t , X for all t, z t , X,
xxxiv

and the flow constraint stating that workers ”bought” can be allocated to either increase the stock producing at
home or to search:
J
XXX
¢
¡
¡ ¢
Sjt z t , X η (X|z0 ) qt z t for all t,
Ut + Lt − Lt−1 ≤
x

z t j=0

where U−1 and L−1 are given.
Market clearing.
For final goods:

τ

XX£
¢
¢¤ ¡ ¢
¡
¡
TJ,t z t , X − EJ,t z t , X qt z t η (X|z0 ) + Ct
x

zt

= Lt ω +

XX
x

zt

⎞
⎛
J
X
¢
¡ t ¢
¡
F⎝
Ej,t z , X , zt ⎠ qt z t , X η (X|z0 ) ;
j=1

for the market of new (tenure j = 0) workers:

¢
¡
Ut−1 = T0,t z t , X for all t, z t , X;

for the market of incumbent (tenure j > 0) workers:
¢
¢
¢
¡
¡
¡
Sj,t z t , X = Ej,t z t , X − Tj,t z t , X for all j, t, z t , X.

xxxv

