                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    AN ECONOMIC HISTORY OF FERTILITY IN THE U.S.:
                                     1826-1960

                                             Larry E. Jones
                                             Michele Tertilt

                                         Working Paper 12796
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12796


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2006




We would like to thank Ran Abramitzky, George Alter, Maristella Botticini, Gregory Clark, Lisa Cook,
Marianne Hinds, Ellen McGrattan, and Petra Moser for helpful comments. We would also like to thank
seminar participants at Stanford University and Northwestern University for their comments. Several
research assistants have helped with this project at different stages: Alice Schoonbroodt, Todd Schoellman,
Soohyung Lee, Alejandrina Salcedo-Cisneros, and Adrienne Lin. Financial support from NSF grants
No. 0519324 and 0452473 is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2006 by Larry E. Jones and Michele Tertilt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
An Economic History of Fertility in the U.S.: 1826-1960
Larry E. Jones and Michele Tertilt
NBER Working Paper No. 12796
December 2006
JEL No. J1,J11,N30

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use data from the US census to document the history of the relationship between
fertility choice and key economic indicators at the individual level for women born between 1826
and 1960. We find that this data suggests several new facts that should be useful for researchers trying
to model fertility. (1) The reduction in fertility known as the Demographic Transition (or the Fertility
Transition) seems to be much sharper based on cohort fertility measures compared to usual measures
like Total Fertility Rate; (2) The baby boom was not quite as large as is suggested by some previous
work; (3) We find a strong negative relationship between income and fertility for all cohorts and estimate
an overall income elasticity of about -0.38 for the period; (4) We also find systematic deviations from
a time invariant, isoelastic, relationship between income and fertility. The most interesting of these
is an increase in the income elasticity of demand for children for the 1876-1880 to 1906-1910 birth
cohorts. This implies an increased spread in fertility by income which was followed by a dramatic
compression.

Larry E. Jones
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1035 Heller Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
lej@econ.umn.edu

Michele Tertilt
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
tertilt@stanford.edu
1    Introduction
If children were a normal good, one would expect richer people to have more children
than poorer people. This was precisely the concern expressed by Malthus (1798) who
argued that economic growth would lead people to reproduce at a faster rate, and hence
food supply per capita would eventually decline. However, while plausible theoretically,
empirically it is hard to find such a positive link. On a country level, most countries have
experienced a decline in fertility while incomes were rapidly growing. Cross-country data
also show a clear negative link between GDP and fertility. In this paper, we take a closer
look at this relationship in micro data from the United States. Using census data from nine
different censuses we analyze the time series and cross-section dimension simultaneously.
We explore the exact nature of the relationship between income and fertility for five-year
birth cohorts of women between 1826-30 and 1956-60 and find that it is negative for each
cohort. We document how ‘steep’ this relationship is, and find that overall it has been
fairly stable. We also conduct several accounting exercises and find that in an accounting
sense, increasing incomes can explain up to 90% of the decline in fertility over this time
horizon. We also identify systematic deviations from a stable, time-invariant relationship
between income and fertility. For example, fertility differentials across income levels first
widened and then compressed significantly: fertility was more sensitive to income for
women born between 1875 and 1915 – a period covering both the Fertility Transition and
the Baby Bust of the 1930s – than either before or after.
    Facts such as these are just some of the examples of demographic changes that have
been seen in the US and in other developed countries over the last 200 years that pose
a challenge to modern researchers to explain and understand. Other examples include
changes in the incidence and timing of marriage, the increase in female labor supply,
changes in the care of parents in old age, an increasing divorce rate, changes in the tim-
ing of births, and large increases in the investment in children through education for
example. Traditionally, attempts at understanding the causes of these changes and their
interrelationships have been conducted in Sociology, History and Demography. They have
increasingly become targets for researchers using the standard techniques of Economics,
however. Becker (1960), Becker and Lewis (1973), Schultz (1973) and Willis (1973) are
early examples with static models while Barro and Becker (1989), Becker and Barro
(1988), Galor and Weil (1996, 2000), Alvarez (1999), Fernandez-Villaverde (2001), Green-
wood and Seshadri (2002), Boldrin and Jones (2002), De la Croix and Doepke (2003),
Greenwood, Guner, and Knowles (2003), Doekpke (2004), Greenwood, Seshadri, and


                                             2
Yorukoglu (2004), Boldrin, DeNardi and Jones (2005), Doepke (2005), Falcao and Soares
(2005), Greenwood, Seshadri, and Vandenbroucke (2005), Tertilt (2005), and Boldrin,
Jones, and Schoonbroodt (2006) and are examples of more recent, explicitly dynamic
analyses. This is quite natural in that many of these decisions are intrinsically dynamic
and hence, the development over the last 25 years of the techniques of modern capital
theory are particularly useful in understanding the trends seen.
    With this recent theoretical literature in mind, our approach is based on trying to
identify and present facts that will be useful in the challenge of modelling fertility decisions
using economic techniques. Thus, we will, whenever possible, use variables that are closely
linked to individual decisions of optimizing households given the information that they
have. Our ability to do this is restricted, as always, by limitations in the data. For
example, only fertility outcomes are available, not planned fertility. Similarly, for most
years, only gross fertility is available not surviving fertility (i.e., net of infant and child
mortality). Despite these limitations, the data are of considerable interest.
    Beginning in 1900 the U.S. Census contains a question asking women how many chil-
dren they had over their life - Children Ever Born (CEB).1 This data was collected until
1990 with the exception of 1920 and 1930. Since the 1900 census data has information
on the age of a woman, we can use this data to go back to the 1826 birth cohort (by
focusing on 74 year old women) to form a long time series of estimated fertility for sur-
viving women. Since the Census data is individual record data, it also contains detailed
information on the characteristics of women, their husbands, and other family members
that are of use in disentangling fertility patterns over the last 150 years. In particular, the
Census contains data on occupation, education, race, and geography. Using Occupation
and Education as proxies for income or wealth,2 we construct a cross-section of the rela-
tionship between wealth and fertility for five-year birth cohorts beginning with 1826-30
and ending in 1956-60.3 This allows us both to identify separately the cross-sectional and
   1
      All data presented in this paper is based on a 1% sample of the U.S. Census data, made publicly
available at www.ipums.org by Ruggles et. al. (2004). Our analysis is based on data from the IPUMS
webpage available as of 10/20/2004. This data set is updated regularly, the revision history, is available
at: http://www.ipums.org/usa/revisions.html
    2
      Indeed, these may be better measures of the relevant variables determining decisions than, for exam-
ple, income in a single year.
    3
      Our analysis is based on women born between 1826 and 1960, grouped together in cohorts spanning
five birth years each. Data for earlier birth cohorts is also available from the 1900 Census, but since it
requires information from women that are in their 80’s, sample sizes are correspondingly smaller. Hence,
we focus on the period since the 1826 to 1830 birth cohort, which we identify with the mid-point of the
period and call the 1828 cohort.


                                                    3
time series properties of the relationship between income and fertility and, as a result,
document how the time series of fertility has differed for women in different parts of the
income distribution.
    Some of the facts we describe in this paper are commonly known: the overall decline
in fertility and the baby bust and boom of the 1930s through 1960s. To paint a complete
picture of the U.S. fertility experience, we include a description of these well-known facts
in addition to the many novel insights based on the long time series of cross-sectional
fertility data that are provided.
    Much of the focus of the paper is on the relationship between measures of wealth and
fertility. Our main findings regarding the relationship between fertility and occupational
income (OI) – a proxy for life time income – are as follows.4
    First, we find a strong negative relationship between OI and fertility for each cross-
section. Our estimate of the overall income elasticity of fertility is -0.38. Evaluated at the
mean income for the entire time period, $15,000, this means that a doubling of income
implies a fertility fall from 3.2 to 2.5 children per woman.
    Second, we find that the observed fertility pattern is surprisingly consistent with the
hypothesis that all of the observed fertility decline is the result of a single stable rela-
tionship between income and fertility in conjunction with an outward shift in the income
distribution over time. We fit an iso-elastic regression between OI by decile of the pop-
ulation and average CEB within that decile for each birth cohort. Using the estimate
obtained in this way, we can decompose the observed changes in fertility into movements
along the curve due to the growth of income over time and shifts of the curve itself.
Between the 1828 birth cohort and the 1958 one, average income increased by a factor
of about 13, and our estimated elasticity of fertility is -0.38. Thus, one would expect
fertility to fall by 63%, from 5.6 to 2.1 children, whereas the actual fall was to 1.8. Hence,
in this sense, 94% of the observed drop in fertility would have been predicted based on
the relationship between income and fertility fitted from the 1828 birth cohort.5
    Third, we document systematic deviations from such a stable relationship. These
include a pattern of fertility that is too low for women born during the 1875 to 1910
period and too high for women born between 1925 and 1940. Not only did the level of
the relationship between fertility and income change, but also its slope. We find that the
income elasticity of children changed significantly over time, rising from about -0.33 in
   4
    We postpone the precise definition of OI until Section 4.
   5
    Of course the results of this calculation depend on which cohorts are used. We give more details in
Section 4.



                                                  4
the early years up to a peak of about -0.50 for cohorts born in the late 1800’s and down to
about -0.20 in more recent times. We document that the initial widening of fertility across
income groups is related to a difference in timing of the fertility transition: The fertility
decline between the 1828 and 1898 birth cohorts started early and was very gradual for
the upper part of the income distribution, while it began later and was very fast for the
lower part of the income distribution.6 The compression during the twentieth century, on
the other hand, was due to a difference in magnitudes of the baby bust and boom: The
baby bust was largest in magnitudes for people at the bottom of the income distribution,
while the baby boom was most pronounced for the upper tail of the income distribution,
leading to a convergence in fertility across the income distribution.
   We conduct several other analyses to put these results into a broader perspective and
check for their robustness:

       • For the early part of the period that we study, some information on surviving chil-
         dren is available.7 Using this, we can check to see if our findings are robust to
         possible income related infant and child mortality differences. We find that the re-
         lationship between income and surviving fertility is almost identical to that between
         income and births;

       • We also find a strong negative relationship between years of schooling of the husband
         and fertility. Moreover, this relationship seems to have a fairly stable ‘slope,’ at least
         in the data available from the Census. Even when controlling for wife’s education
         (and also including an interaction term), we find that an additional year of husband’s
         education decreases fertility on average by a tenth of a child;

       • We document the cross-sectional and time series pattern of fertility with respect to
         education, race, immigration status, and geography. For each of these dimensions
         of heterogeneity, we ask how much of the overall fertility decline can be accounted
         for by the observed change in the distribution of these characteristics.

       We believe that the facts we document are of particular interest for several reasons.

   1. We find an extremely robust negative relationship between fertility and income
      for 27 cohorts of women. This is contrary to what some authors have suggested
   6
     This mirrors very closely the differences in the patterns of the time series of fertility between rural
and urban areas. See Sections 4 and 5 for more discussion.
   7
     In both the 1900 and 1910 censuses data on both children born and children surviving were collected.


                                                     5
       that early on in the development process fertility and wealth used to be positively
       related (e.g. Wrigley (1988)). Rather, we find that even in the mid-1800’s wealth
       and fertility had a negative relationship.

   2. Since this negative relationship between fertility and wealth goes back so far in
      time, we think it should give one pause when considering the hypothesis that the
      reason for lower fertility at the upper end of the income distribution is the higher
      value of the mother’s time (e.g. Moffitt (1984) and Schultz (1985)). That is, this
      relationship was present in the data during a period in which most women did not
      work in the market at all – married female labor force participation before 1920 was
      less than 5% (Schoonbroodt 2003). Hence, the emphasis on the distinction between
      male and female earnings seems irrelevant here.

   3. Since our measure of lifetime income is based on husband’s income only, we argue
      that higher income of men is an important predictor for lower fertility. Moreover,
      using education as a measure of income, we find that controlling for wife’s education,
      the husband’s education is strongly negatively related to fertility. This is contrary to
      some authors who find a negative relationship between women’s income and fertility,
      but a weakly positive (or insignificant) relationship between husband’s income and
      fertility (e.g. Fleischer and Rhodes (1979), Hotz and Miller (1988), Borg (1989),
      Heckman and Walker (1990)).8

    A natural question of causation arises with respect to this exercise. Is it technological
improvements and the resultant income growth that caused fertility to change? Or, is it
something else that caused the reduction in fertility and at the same time made techno-
logical innovation and human capital formation more profitable? We have no definitive
answer to these questions. Thus, although we will be looking at patterns of correlations
between CEB and various other variables, it is important to remember that these are only
correlations.
    The main focus of this paper is how fertility relates to wealth or income. We describe
the existing literature on this topic in Section 2. In Section 3, we lay out the basic time
series pattern of fertility in the US over the last 150 years and discuss how the data from
the census gives new insights to even these data. In Section 4, we describe the relationships
between fertility and income, and fertility and education which emerge from the Census
   8
     The strong negative correlation between fertility and occupation of the husband could be because
husband’s time is also an important input into child-rearing, contrary to what is typically assumed in
this literature, or, because the hypothesis that children are normal goods is simply not true.

                                                  6
data. In Section 5, we look at four other dimensions that show interesting variation in
fertility patterns: race, immigration status, region, and urbanization. Conclusions are
offered in Section 6.


2         Previous Work on Fertility and Income
In this section, we briefly review the previous literature on the relationship between fer-
tility and measures of economic well-being. This literature is partly from Demography
and Sociology and partly from Economics. It is, by necessity, incomplete.
     Most of the papers in Demography and Sociology have dealt with parts of the history
of US fertility, and many of them have also used data from the Census. Most of these
papers deal with fertility decisions either for specific time periods or specific demographic
groups. Examples include the study of the sub-group of white women between 1886 and
1900 (Tolnay, S. E., S. N. Graham, and A. M. Guest, (1982)), the analysis of Norwe-
gian immigrants (Gjerde, J. and A. McCants, (1995)), coal miners (Haines (1978)) and
Mormons in Utah (Anderton, D. L. (1986)). They touch on a variety of relevant issues
– the role that religion and urbanization played in fertility reduction, etc. As is common
in that literature, they deal with fairly specific questions - what roles were played by the
spacing of births and delayed marriage play in the Fertility Transition in the US? And,
what exactly was the timing of the Fertility Transition in the US and how does it compare
to what has been found concerning Europe and earlier studies on the US (e.g., Hacker
(2003)). Thus, they are not concerned with the relationship between fertility and income
per se.
     A general finding in the empirical fertility literature is that income and fertility are
negatively correlated. This fact has been established both in time series and in cross
section.9 During development, most countries have experienced growing incomes and
declining fertility simultaneously, at least over the last couple of centuries. This ‘fertility
transition’ and the general coincidence of its timing with per capita income growth has
been often mentioned in both Demography and Economics. In Demography the early
origins are often traced to Notestein (1945), but others give even earlier attributions.
(See Chenais (1992) for a discussion of the history of these ideas). The comparative roles
of development and other changes, like improved health and in particular, improved public
health provisions have long been debated in that literature – McKeown (1979) offers a
useful summary as well as a detailed analysis of the causal interpretations of changes in the
    9
        See Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) for cross-country evidence.


                                                      7
understanding of disease and health. He concludes that changes in health are not enough,
leaving development and/or economic growth as a sort of residual. A causal interpretation
of this relationship has been controversial in the demography literature (see Livi-Bacci,
(1990) and others). An early, explicit description of a possible mechanism behind this
empirical link which is well known in Demography is Caldwell’s ‘wealth flows’ theory,
(see Caldwell (1982)). In this descriptive theory, he portrays the Demographic Transition
as resulting from the breakdown of the typical decision-making structure of the nuclear
family (wherein the family head makes most of the decisions for the group including
those concerning fertility). Caldwell argues that this breakdown leads to a reversal of
wealth flows within the family, originally from child to parent now from parent to child,
which makes children more costly and therefore leads to a decline in fertility. Caldwell
associates this family breakdown with the process of income growth, urbanization, and
industrialization, which have typically come together as a part of economic development,
but he does not give explicit reasons for why this breakdown in decision-making is a
necessary byproduct of development.
    These ideas also have a long history in Economics. For example, in his introduction to
an early collected volume on Fertility Choice and Economics, Schultz (1973) asks: “What
is the explanation of the demographic transition, that is, how do we explain the economic
and social processes and family behavior that accounts for the marked decline from very
high birth and death rates to modern very low birth and death rates?” Although most
of the papers in that volume are static in nature and it is understood that this is a
considerable weakness, Schulz is explicit in his view that using the models developed
therein to conduct comparative statics exercises with respect to changes over time in the
value of education, the cost of birth control and “the secular rise in family income” mark a
useful first step. (See also De Tray, Willis, and Becker and Lewis (and others) in that same
1973 volume.) More recent references include, but are not limited to, Becker (1992), Galor
and Weil (1999), Hansen and Prescott (2002), and Lucas (2002). Some of this discussion
has focused on the evolution of averages within a cohort over the development process
and the corresponding income growth while other parts have focused on cross-sectional
phenomena at a given point in time.
    The relationship between fertility and income has also been studied at business cycle
frequencies. Here the answers are less clear cut, however. Some authors find a positive
correlation between income and fertility over the business cycle (e.g. Simon (1969, 1977),
and Mikevska and Zak (2002) for Central and Eastern Europe). Butz and Ward (1979),
on the other hand, find that fertility has been counter-cyclical in recent U.S. data.


                                             8
    Most cross sectional studies find a negative correlation between income and fertility.
For example, Borg (1989) finds a negative relationship using panel data from South Korea
in 1976 and Docquier (2004) documents a similar relationship for the U.S. using data from
the PSID in 1994. Westoff (1954) finds a negative relationship between fertility and oc-
cupational status for the years 1900-1952 using U.S. Census data. It is sometimes argued
that early on in the development process, a positive relationship between income and
fertility existed. However, studies documenting such a positive relationship empirically
are rare.10 Weir (1995) finds a weakly positive relationship between economic status and
fertility in 18th century France, while Wrigley (1961) and Haines (1976) document higher
fertility in the coal mining areas of France and Prussia than in surrounding agricultural
areas during the end of the 19th century. Simon (1977, ch. 16) documents a positive rela-
tionship between farm size in hectors and the average numbers of children born for rural
areas in Poland in 1948 and Clark and Hamilton (2006) document a positive relationship
between occupational status and the number of surviving children in England in the late
16th and early 17th century (see also Clark (2005, 2007)).
    The negative relationship between income and fertility has been viewed as a puzzle by
many economists: If children are a normal good, then the quantity should go up as income
goes up. Indeed, this was one of the important motivations for Becker’s development of
the ‘quantity-quality’ model of fertility choice – should a parent have a large number of
children but give them little in way of economic advantage, or, have few children each
with a large bequest, or large educational expenditure? This has generated a number of
new theories (see Macunovich (1996) for a survey) as well as large number of empirical
studies testing these refined theories.
    One theory emphasizes the importance of wages as the shadow price of time. A
higher income typically also means a higher wage. If children are time intensive, then the
opportunity cost goes up with income, and consumers might demand fewer children in
response to rising income. An extensive empirical literature trying to verify this “price
of time theory” exists. There seems to be a broad consensus that the price of time
(typically measured as wages, in particular, female wages) is indeed negatively correlated
with fertility. This has been confirmed in many different empirical cross-sectional studies
(see Rosenzweig (1990) for an analysis of India, Indonesia and the Philippines, Schultz
(1986) for an analysis of U.S. data and Schultz (1997) for a recent survey).
  10
    A more recent version of such a positive relationship is that U.S. fertility is higher than most other
countries in the OECD even though U.S. income is higher. This does not hold for a larger set of countries
however. See Ahn and Mira (2002) for the discussion of a related point.



                                                    9
    A second theory is the “relative income hypothesis” first proposed by Easterlin, who
argues that income relative to parents’ income is important for fertility decisions.11 People
form habits about an “acceptable standard of living” during childhood, and then their
own income relative to this standard determines fertility decisions. Macunovich (1998)
provides a survey of the empirical literature on the Easterlin hypothesis. The evidence
is mixed, partly because there are at least four different interpretations of the Easterlin
hypothesis.
    Some studies make a distinction between husband’s vs. wife’s wage, and typically
find a strong negative correlation between women’s wages and fertility (supporting the
price of time theory) and a weakly positive, if any, relationship between male wages
and fertility. Freedman and Thornton (1982) find a small positive relationship between
husband’s income and fertility using data from Detroit between 1962 and 1977. Heckman
and Walker (1990) find a weakly positive effect of male income on fertility in Swedish data.
Merrigan and St. Pierre (1998) confirm this result for Canada. Fleischer and Rhodes
(1979) also find a positive effect using U.S. data. Cho (1968) identifies no relationship
between income and fertility for whites in 1960 U.S. census data. Using aggregate U.S.
data, Butz and Ward (1979) also argue that male earnings have a positive effect on the
total fertility rate. Finally, Schultz (1986) finds no evidence that non-employment income
or physical wealth is positively related to fertility using 1967 U.S. data.
    We conclude that despite the extensive empirical work, there is still no conclusive
evidence on the exact relationship between income and fertility. Quoting Heckman and
Walker (1990), “Most economists would agree with Ward and Butz (1980) that current
and future wages and income [. . . ] are likely determinants of fertility. There is little
agreement beyond this.”
    The literature on the relationship between Education and Fertility is similar to that
on Income and Fertility. There is general acceptance of the idea that there is a negative
correlation between them, based partly on time series observations for the developed
countries (i.e., education rose throughout the development process while fertility fell)
and partly on a widespread group of studies conducted on cross sections for individual
countries. Indeed, this is one of Caldwell’s central predictions about fertility, viz., that
as countries adopted universal primary schooling, fertility would naturally fall (Caldwell,
1982). An excellent survey of this prevailing view and its many manifestations can be
found in Cleland (2004). More recently, much of the work has focused on the relationship
between the education of the mother and fertility, and it has been argued that this has
 11
      See for example Easterlin (1966).


                                             10
stronger predictive power than many of the other typically used variables including socio-
economic status (e.g., income or occupation of the husband). This view began with the
study of the relationship between mother’s education and infant mortality in data from
Nigeria by Caldwell (1979) and has been extended to cover other demographic variates
since then. (See for example Breierova and Duflo (2004) on Indonesia, and Akmam (2002)
on Bangladesh.)
    Many of the comments above concerning past studies on the relationship between
income and fertility also apply to the relationship between education and fertility. For
example, since there is a lack of long panel data sets available, it is difficult to decompose
the changes seen in time series data on fertility at the aggregate level into two components,
one constituting movements of the education distribution along a given education/fertility
relationship, the other movements of the relationship itself.
    The empirical literature suffers from three main problems. First, many data sources
have information only on fertility or on wages (income), not both simultaneously. Many
studies use fertility micro data and match this with wage information from the census
by region. For example Heckman and Walker (1990) use age and sex specific wages from
tax return data. Because of this, most of the identification comes from cohort variation,
rather than cross-sectional variation. It seems that the question whether richer families
have more children cannot be addressed in a very satisfactory fashion with this data.
    Secondly, there is a lack of cross-sectional studies over time.12 The typical analysis is
either based on micro evidence for one year or on aggregate time series data. Hence, one
cannot address the question: How much of the observed drop in fertility over time comes
from following a time invariant relationship between income and fertility with income
simply increasing over time? This is an interesting accounting exercise, but it requires a
time series of cross sectional data sets. The closest in spirit to this is probably Strulik and
Sikandar (2002) who use a panel of countries to analyze the relationship between fertility
and GDP across countries and over time. They find an ‘income threshold’ below which
there is no relationship between income and fertility, and above which fertility declines
exponentially with income. Another comprehensive analysis is Haines (1979) who analyzes
the relationship between fertility and occupation in a variety of geographic locations in
the U.S. and Europe during the fifty year period between 1850 and 1900. Haines’ research
shows robust occupational fertility differential throughout this time period. However, the
emphasis of this work is on coal mining and metallurgy, and his work does not extend
  12
    One notable exception is Westoff (1954), who analyzes U.S. fertility for six different occupations from
1900 to 1952.


                                                    11
into the 20th century.
    Finally, there is disagreement on what the right measures are, i.e. income vs. earn-
ings, wages of men vs. women etc. Of course, the answer depends on the theory under
investigation and hence, this is not a discord that can be resolved empirically. Therefore,
while our analysis contributes to the first two points, we have little to say about this last
point.


3      Basic Trends in US Fertility
Economic models focus on the decisions made by individual households and hence, one
would like a measure of fertility decisions at the individual household level. A measure
close to this that is available is Children Ever Born (CEB) from the U.S. Census. For the
years 1900 to 1990 one of the questions asked on the census form was, for each woman, how
many children they had had during their lives. Like all data in the census, this measure
is a voluntary response and hence is probably measured with some error, even at the level
of the individual observation. However, even with its limitations, this is probably the
best source for actual fertility decisions made by women. Since the age of the respondent
is also available, this allows us to obtain estimates of actual realized fertility for women
by birth cohort. For the purposes of economic models, where it is total planned fertility
that is usually used as the decision variable, this data is most useful for women who
have completed their planned fertility. Of course, it is impossible to tell from the data
in the census if a woman has truly completed her planned fertility, but, as a proxy, by
conditioning on age a reliable estimate of completed fertility can be obtained. For most
cases, we focus on women 40-49 years old and we supplement this with other ages to get
a longer time series, details are given in Appendix A. Finally, since the first census data
available on CEB is from 1900, and because there is a wide variety of ages in that data set,
we go back as far as the 1826-30 birth cohort by focusing on up to 70-74 year old women.
The last cohort we consider is the 1956-60 cohort, consisting of women 30-34 years old in
the 1990 census.13 This methodology allows us to obtain, from a single source, a fairly
complete picture of the history of US fertility since the beginning of the 19th Century.
    Throughout this paper, we restrict our attention to ‘marital fertility,’ i.e., the com-
pleted fertility of those women who, when they answer the census, indicate that they are
  13
    Not all women in this cohort will have completed their life-time fertility, and hence the last two
cohorts in our time series should be interpreted with some caution.




                                                 12
married.14 Of course some women get divorced, while others bear children out of wedlock.
There are two reasons for focusing on CEB of currently married women. First, before
1970 the census recorded CEB only for women who had been married at some point.
Second, since the main focus of this paper is on fertility decisions as a function of income
and wealth, we do not want to mix single-parent households with two-parent households.
    To get a sense of non-marital fertility, we also computed CEB for women who were
not married when they answered the census (with the caveat that never married women
are included only from 1970 on). We find that, as expected, the level of CEB is lower
for unmarried women – on average by half a child – but that the time pattern looks
very similar.15 Certainly out of wedlock childbearing is an important and increasing
phenomenon in recent years. The fraction of all children born to women who are unmarried
at the time of giving birth has increased from less than 5% in 1920 to 10% in 1970 and
more than 30% by 2000 (Greenwood and Guner 2005). However, this does not mean that
our methodology necessarily misses a third of all births in the last cohorts because many
of these single mothers marry later on. Of course, given the striking increase in births
to unmarried women in recent years, it would be of considerable interest to extend our
analysis to single mothers as well.
    Figure 1 shows CEB over time for women born between 1826 and 1960. As can be
seen from the figure there are two noticeable features that really stand out. The first
is the long-term reduction in overall fertility that has occurred over the last 200 years.
Fertility was roughly constant at 5.5 children for the thirty years between the 1828 and
1853 cohorts. It fell slightly for the next decade, towards five CEB in 1863, while the
decline was very steep thereafter: a decline of 1.5 children between the 1863 and 1873
birth cohorts. Over the next 35 years, the decline slowed down again, with an additional
decrease of 1.2 children over the entire time period. The overall fertility decline was
substantial, starting with about 5.5 children per woman born in 1828 falling to about two
children for women born in our last cohort, 1958.
    The second feature that stands out is the baby bust and baby boom that occurred
  14
     By focusing on currently married women, we are on average including about 70% of all women.
However, this percentage differs considerably by cohorts, with a low of only 30% 1828 cohort, which is
based on 70-74 year old women, and thus many widows, and a high 82% in the 1918 cohort who we
include as 40-44 year olds.
  15
     The gap in CEB varies from cohort to cohort, ranging from a high of 1.3 in the 1858 birth cohort
to a low of -0.1 in the 1873 cohort. However, these numbers are difficult to interpret given that never
married women were not asked about their children until 1970 and the proportion of singles vs. widows
and divorced women varies considerably by age.



                                                  13
                                             Figure 1: CEB by Birth Cohort

                        6

                       5.5                                                          CEB
                                                                                    TRF
                        5
                                                                                    TFR27
                       4.5
  Number of Children




                        4

                       3.5

                        3

Data in2.5
        worksheet TFR

                        2

                       1.5

                        1
                        1800   1820   1840    1860 1880 1900 1920 1940       1960   1980    2000
                                                Birth Cohort / Actual Year



during the period from 1920 to 1960. Since the graph is by birth year, this is shown as a
dramatic reduction in CEB among women born around 1908 for whom CEB falls to 2.3
and the subsequent increase among women born between 1908 and 1933 where it increases
up to 3.3 for the 1933 cohort. The birth cohorts between 1898 to 1913 had exceptionally
low fertility given the time – it constitutes a group of women that had fewer children than
both their mothers, and their daughters. It is difficult to know, and it has been an issue
of some discussion in Demography if this drop is simply a continuation of the Fertility
Transition, or if, as some have hypothesized, fertility among those groups of women (the
1898, 1903, 1908 and 1913 birth cohorts) was lower than trend because so much of their
fertile lifetimes occurred during the Great Depression. Indeed, Richard Easterlin’s theory
of the Baby Boom is in part based on the idea that fertility was so high in the 1950’s
exactly because it was so low in the 1930’s. To ease exposition we will call this period of
low fertility ‘the baby bust of the 1930’s.’16
  16
   Note that the term “baby bust” is also often used to describe the period directly after the baby
boom, while we use it for the period right before the baby boom.


                                                          14
    One thing that is immediately obvious from data on CEB is that contrary to what
one might have expected, the baby boom and baby bust cycle is not merely a product of
delayed fertility. That is, one hypothesis is that fertility was temporarily delayed in the
1930s and 1940s due first to the Depression and then World War II. Subsequently, those
same women increased their fertility after these unique events had passed. This version
of the data shows that this is clearly not true, however. Those women born between 1906
and 1910 had lower lifetime fertility than those born later, despite the overall downward
trend. A second hypothesis one might have is that the baby bust was mostly ‘caused’ by a
larger fraction of women not marrying, while marital fertility has not changed. Since our
data are observations on marital fertility, and this shows a substantial decline, it is clear
that this is not the whole story. This clear distinction between changes in the number of
births per women and changes in the timing of births over the life-cycle is not possible
using most other measures of fertility.
    The most common other measure of fertility is the Total Fertility Rate (TFR). (See
Appendix D for definitions of CEB, TFR, etc., and a detailed discussion of their proper-
ties.) The TFR is defined as the sum of the age-specific birth rates over all women alive
in a given year. Since it is computed using data from a given year, it is a mixture of the
fertility decisions of all birth cohorts alive at the time. If all of these cohorts have the same
fertility decisions, the two measures of fertility are identical. If fertility rates are changing
from cohort to cohort, then CEB gives the more accurate picture of fertility decisions
since it does not mix the fertility decisions of different cohorts. Moreover, in periods of
declining fertility (as occurred during the Demographic Transition for example), TFR for
any year overestimates fertility for young cohorts and underestimates it for older ones.
    CEB does have weaknesses, however. For example, if calculated using a group of
women at a given age, it is an unbiased measure of expected fertility to that age, con-
ditional on surviving to that age. It will be an overestimate of unconditional expected
fertility to that age when maternal mortality risk is positive and fertility choice and
mortality risk are independent. This effect is present in the data to some degree since
mortality rates for women during child bearing years are significant during the earlier
parts of the period we consider.17 Another issue that arises is the choice of age, A, at
which the women are sampled. If A is chosen to be too low, CEB is a poor estimate of
completed fertility – it is too low. On the other hand, when fertility plans are systemati-
cally related to mortality risk (for example through income), this can lead to sensitivity of
CEB to A. Thus, when A is chosen to be too large, CEB can again be a poor estimate of
  17
       TFR suffers from similar, related difficulties, see the Appendix for more discussion.


                                                      15
completed fertility. By looking at successive censuses, we can compare fertility estimates
for women of a given birth year cohort but of different ages when answering the survey.
We have plotted all possible combinations in Figure A1 in Appendix E. The figure shows
that the estimates differ most for the earlier cohorts. It can also be seen that longevity is
negatively correlated with fertility – estimates of fertility for a given cohort in successive
censuses (and hence for older women) fall.18
    The differences between TFR and CEB can be seen in Figure 1 which shows both
TFR and CEB over the history of the US.19 To make the two time series comparable, we
shift TFR by 27 years as this aligns the peak of the baby boom in the two series.20 Note
that the decline in CEB during the Demographic Transition happened much faster than
is apparent from the TFR numbers. CEB fell by about one and a half children for women
born only 10 years apart: CEB for the 1861-1865 cohort was 5.0 and dropped to 3.4 for
the 1871-1875 cohort. In contrast, the same fall in TFR takes 4 decades: TFR in 1843
was 4.9 and fell to 3.5 in 1883. This difference is due to the way TFR mixes cohorts in a
given year. Also note that TFR increases the size of the baby boom over that displayed
in CEB. From trough to peak CEB displays a difference of 0.9 children, compared to 1.4
for TFR. This is because, although delayed fertility for a given woman was not the whole
story in the baby boom, it was part of it.21
    The average value of CEB (or TFR) is only one of many possible ways of summarizing
the history of fertility. It is a summary of the fertility experiences of many different women
and completely abstracts from the diversity in experiences. A drop in CEB (or TFR) from
four to two, for example, could be due to all women decreasing births from four to two
or half of all females decreasing fertility to zero, while the other half remains at four, or
any other convex combination. By looking at the average only, one completely abstracts
from changes in the distribution of children across women within a birth cohort. The
distribution, however, has also changed. Figure A2 in Appendix E shows the fractions
  18
     One reason for this finding is that longevity is positively related to income. As we show later, it is
also true that richer people have fewer children. It then follows naturally that average CEB for a given
cohort is negatively related to age. Another possible bias is selective memory: especially children that
die as infants might be remembered less as the mother ages.
  19
     We constructed TFR numbers by using Haines’ (1994) estimates for TFR for black and white women
assuming that the fraction of black women has remained constant at 10% over the time period, and
ignoring other ethnicities.
  20
     Note that the average age of first marriages ranges between 20 and 25 years for women over this
time period (US Census 2006). Hence, the implication that the “average birth” occurs at age 27 seems
reasonable.
  21
     The point that part of the baby boom was due to an overlap in timing is also made in Russell (1982).


                                                    16
of women having a given number of children. Overall, the fraction of women with 0 and
1 children does not show much trend, being on average 10% over the entire time period
considered. The percentage with 2 and 3 children has gone up significantly, from about
10% each over the cohorts born from 1818 to 1868 to 40% and 20%, respectively, for the
1958 cohort.22 The percentage of women with 4 or more children, on the other hand, has
dropped sharply from more than 60% for women born before 1860 down to about 10% for
the most recent cohorts. The baby bust and boom can also be clearly identified. During
the baby bust, 40% of married women had one child or no children, which is the highest
it has ever been. One might have thought that the distribution of CEB across women is
shifting to the left in a first order stochastic dominance sense, however, as Figure A3 in
Appendix E shows, this is clearly not true.

                                          Figure 2: CEB by Birth Cohort, by Sub-Groups

                            6
                                                                                          mean CEB
                                                                                          std. dev.
                            5
   Mean CEB/Std. Dev. CEB




                            4


                            3


                            2


                            1


                            0
                            1820   1840       1860    1880         1900     1920   1940         1960
                                                             Birth Cohort




    As another way of analyzing changes in the distribution of CEB over time, we com-
puted the standard deviation of the CEB distribution for all cohorts. Figure 2 shows that
the standard deviation has been monotonically falling over time. An interesting finding
is that there is no increase in the standard deviation during the baby boom even though
the mean increased a lot. In other words, the whole distribution just shifted out by about
 22
          See also David and Sanderson (1987) on the emergence of the “2-child norm.”


                                                                   17
one child without a corresponding increase in the spread during that period.
     Demographers have put forth many alternative hypotheses to explain why the Fer-
tility Transition seen in these data occurred how and when it did (see Alter (1992) for
a summary). Some of these hypotheses are based on simple compositional arguments –
suppose group A has lower fertility than group B and the relative sizes of group A and B
are changing. In the remainder of this section, we use the Census data on CEB to address
the most common of these hypotheses – differences by location (urban vs. rural, farm vs.
non-farm, and region), race, and immigrant status. We find that the main features of the
US fertility history are common across all of these groups and that, indeed, differences
between the groups have largely disappeared.

                                     Figure 3: CEB by Birth Cohort, by Sub-Groups


                         8

                                                                              Overall
                         7                                                    Rural
                                                                              Urban
    Children ever Born




                         6                                                    White
                                                                              Black

                         5


                         4


                         3


                         2


                         1
                             1828   1843   1858   1873     1888     1903   1918   1933   1948

                                                         Birth Cohort


    We begin with the difference between rural and urban populations. Over this time
horizon there were both large movements from rural to urban areas and large differences
between urban and rural fertility. Of the 1928 birth cohort, only 25% lived in urban
areas, whereas about 75% of the last birth cohort (1958) live in urban areas. Figure 3
includes a time series of CEB for women living in urban vs. rural areas. The figure shows
that women in rural areas had a substantially higher number of children than in urban

                                                              18
settings.23 The difference is fairly stable at about 1 Children per Woman (CPW) until
the 1923 birth cohort, after which the gap narrows to less than half a child, and by 1938,
fertility in urban and rural areas is nearly indistinguishable. Thus, although there has
always been some difference in the fertility behavior of these areas, and although this was
significant in the early years, it is clear that the Fertility Decline is not simply the product
of a movement from high and constant fertility rural areas to low and constant, fertility
urban areas.24 There are some other interesting differences in the fertility histories of
these two types of areas as well – for example the baby boom was much more pronounced
in urban areas, where CEB increased from 2 in 1908 to 3 CPW in 1928, compared to
an increase of only 0.4 children for rural women, etc. The distinction between farm and
non-farm families paints essentially the same picture as urban and rural (see Table A6).
    Another often discussed pattern in the history of fertility is differences by race. From
Figure 3 we see that although black fertility has always been, and still is, higher than
that of whites, the basic patterns of fertility history are similar. Not only are the overall
patterns of fertility similar – a long decline, a baby bust, a baby boom and the subsequent
decline – we also see that the difference in fertility by race has fallen dramatically. The
difference has at times been substantial, for example 5.5 vs. 7.1 in 1828, but, in the most
recent cohort we study, 1958, it is down to a difference of only 0.2 children.
    The overall pattern of gradual fertility decline, followed by a sharp baby bust and
a baby boom can also be found for women of different immigrant status. The level of
fertility, however, differs substantially by immigration status as Figure A4(a) in Appendix
E shows.25 Starting with the 1838 cohort, second generation Americans (i.e. women born
in the U.S. with at least one immigrant parent) had consistently lower fertility rates than
women born in the U.S. (see also King and Ruggles (1990) on this). Women born in foreign
countries, on the other hand, had about a half child more than the average throughout the
entire 19th century. This pattern reversed during the baby bust period – starting from the
1898 cohort – when women born abroad had fewer children than native born Americans.
That is, the decline in CEB during the baby bust period (1893-1908 cohorts) is steepest for
immigrants. This reversal may reflect the time period rather than a changing relationship
  23
     One hypothesis is that the costs of raising children are higher in urban areas than in rural settings.
  24
     Indeed, using actual CEB numbers for the 1828 cohort (5.9 for rural and 4.7 for urban) together
with the fact that by 1958 three quarters of the population lived in urban areas while only one quarter
remained in rural areas would imply that CEB should have decreased from 5.6 in 1828 to 5 in 1958, only
a small fraction of the actual observed decline.
  25
     The graph ends with the 1928 cohort, because information on immigration was collected only up
until the 1970 Census.



                                                    19
caused by the baby bust itself. In this period total immigration is falling: the fraction of
immigrants in our sample of married women declines from about 20% in the 1898 cohort
to roughly 10% in the 1908 cohort. One possibility is that immigrants moving to the
U.S. in the 1920’s and 1930’s may be atypical – i.e., a sample selection issue may arise
in immigrants during the Great Depression. In addition to this effect, this is a period
in which the fraction of European immigrants is steeply declining from 90% in 1893 to
70% by 1908, while Asian and South American immigration is starting to increase. If
European immigrants were, on average, richer than those from Asia and South America
this could cause a steep decline like this because of the fact that the Baby Bust was more
pronounced for the lower part of the income distribution
    Figure A4(b) in Appendix E shows the time series of CEB in four different regions
of the country.26 As can be seen although there are stark differences across the regions
early on the overall patterns are similar and the differences are small in the most recent
cohorts. The South Western regions have the highest fertility, with almost 7 children
per woman early on, compared to New England that had CEB rates as low as 4, even
for women born in the middle of the 19th century.27 These cross-regional differences are
larger than urban-rural differences (compare Figure A4(b) to Figure 3), and hence, these
differences are not due solely to differences in the urban-rural composition of the areas.
Note also that the proportion of women living in the low fertility regions (North England
and East North Central) is shrinking over time, while the proportion living in the high
fertility regions (South Atlantic and West South Central) is growing. Hence, an appeal to
westward migration as an explanation of the Fertility Transition actually goes the wrong
way.
  26
     These regions do not exhaust the U.S. but they are representative in that they show the entire
spectrum of regional differences. The regions that we use are: New England Division (Connecticut,
Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont), East North Central Division (Illinois,
Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin), South Atlantic Division (Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,
Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia), and West South Central
Division (Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma/Indian Territory, Texas).
  27
     Vandenbroucke (2004) argues that people move from East to West precisely because they know they
want large families and land is cheaper there. Alternatively, note that the Western states had the highest
ratios of males to females, and thus it is plausible that only those men with the highest desire to reproduce
married, driving up the average fertility for women (but not men).




                                                     20
4      Economic Determinants of Fertility in the U.S. Cen-
       sus Data
In this section we look at several refinements of the time series of fertility examined above.
In particular, we study how fertility is related to various measures of income and education
and how the relationship has changed over time.
     One of the hypotheses that demographers and economists both put forth is that the
reduction in fertility that occurred during the Demographic Transition was primarily due
to the increase in per capita income that occurred over the same period (see Alter (1992)
for a summary of theories of the Demographic Transition). The simplest implementation
of this idea is that for any given cohort, there is a negative relationship between fertility
and income, and that growth in GDP per capita simply pushes more and more people
into the low fertility range. Thus, this hypothesis can be succinctly summarized as: The
fertility decline is due to a move along a time independent relationship between fertility
and income. One of our goals is to document to what extent this holds for the U.S.
fertility history, and to what extent this transition was a shift of this relationship instead.
To do this, we will examine the link between CEB and those measures of economic well
being that exist in the Census.
     With perfect capital and income insurance markets, economic models say that fertility
decisions of a household (and all other decisions as well) are functions of the present
discounted value of the entire lifetime stream of income flows only– i.e., ‘wealth’ in the
economic sense.28 When capital and insurance markets are imperfect, other variables also
enter this picture – the degree of individual restrictions on borrowing, the history of ‘luck’
that the individual has had with respect to income and other shocks. Even if the perfect
capital and insurance market hypothesis were correct, no simple measure for the present
discounted value of the entire lifetime stream of income flows is available. Because of this,
it is necessary, both here and in other studies, to use proxies.
     Data on occupation are available over the entire period that we study, 1900 to 1990;
income measures were collected by the Census beginning with the 1950 Census; an es-
timated house value was collected in the 1940 census and from 1960 to date; education
data has been collected since the 1940 Census. Each of these measures has pluses and
minuses as indicators of true economic wealth. Current income is a tight measure of one
term in the present discounted value calculation mentioned above, and would be a very
  28
    Throughout this paper, we use the terms “economic wealth” and “present discounted value of life-time
income” interchangeably.


                                                  21
good estimate if income did not change over time. However, it is well known that it
does change systematically over the life cycle, and also has a large ‘error term.’ This is
due in part to business cycle frequency movements, and in part due to individual specific
fluctuations. Also, it is only available for a subset of the time period we are interested
in. House value likely suffers greatly from reporting error and is also available only for a
small subset of the years, but it has the advantage that it is more stable over time than
income flows.29 Educational attainment is also more stable over time, at the individual
level, than income since it is not subject to business cycle frequency fluctuations nor idio-
syncratic shocks. However, it is also an imperfect measure of wealth (i.e., the conditional
variability of wealth given years of education is high), and it is only available for the
most recent censuses. Occupation is the economic variable that has the most coverage
since data has been collected on it over the entire period of study. Like education, it is
typically not subject to movements over time. It suffers from two difficulties however.
First, not all individuals of a given occupation have the same wealth. Second, occupation
itself does not easily translate into a dollar wealth equivalent. There is very little that
can be done about the first problem. For the second, a measure, Occupational Income,
has been created (see Ruggles et al (2004)) that we will use as the basis for a proxy.

               Table 1: Correlation between OI and current income of husbands

                             Cohort     Census Year      Age    Correlation
                                1913             1960      47            0.49
                                1918             1960      42            0.48
                                1923             1970      47            0.47
                                1928             1970      42            0.46
                                1933             1980      47            0.45
                                1938             1980      42            0.44
                                1943             1990      47            0.45
                                1948             1990      42            0.45
                                1953             1990      37            0.44
                                1958             1990      32            0.40


   In sum, various possible measures exist, but they are all imperfect. Our approach will
be to use Occupation as our baseline measure of economic wealth since it is available for
 29
      Moreover, house value is only reported for house owners, not renters.


                                                    22
a longer time period. The correlation coefficient between current income and occupation
are between 0.4 and 0.5 for the years in which both measures are available, see Table 1.
We also look at education, as education is a measure that allows us to look at husbands
and wives separately.


4.1     Occupational Income and Fertility
The Occupational Income Score (OIS) is a constructed variable that assigns each occu-
pation in all years a value representing the median total income (in hundreds of 1950
dollars) of all persons with that particular occupation in 1950.30 For example, the OIS
of a carpenter in 1850 is equal to that of a carpenter in 1980 and both are equal to the
median carpenter income in 1950. That is, if relative incomes of different occupations
were constant over time, and all individuals in a given occupation had the same income,
the OIS would perfectly rank people by current income. Of course, some occupations
have risen or fallen in the income ladder and not all individuals within a given occupation
have the same present discounted value of income. But, overall, it seems to be a good
approximation. Nevertheless, since it gives the same score to carpenters in 1850 and 1950
without adjusting for trend growth, it misses the fact that carpenters, and all other oc-
cupations, in 1950 are richer than carpenters in 1850. This can be partially corrected for
by adjusting for trend growth in income, which we will do below.
    Prior to 1960, occupations were only recorded for persons in the labor force. Hence,
the variable OIS is not available for persons not in the labor force in the early years.
Specifically this means that information on OIS is not available for many women, and
that the proportion of women with valid OIS is continuously increasing over the time
period considered. Because of these limitations, we examine the relationship between
CEB and OIS for women in households where the husband is present. The variability
of CEB at a given level of income is high and makes identifying systematic relationships
difficult. For this reason, and to counteract errors in variables induced by using OIS as
a proxy of wealth, we first divide the observations into deciles by OIS. Further, since
occupational income score assigns the dollar income of the relevant occupation in 1950
dollars, it will miss the effects of trend growth for all occupations. To account for this
effect, we adjusted income scores such that average income grows 2% annually.31 In
  30
    See http://www.ipums.org/usa/chapter4/chapter4.html for details.
  31
    We use a 2% trend because this is the average growth rate of output per working age person during
the 20th century in the United States (Prescott 2002). We prefer to use a general trend rather than
actual GDP growth over this period because we interpret OIS as a measure of life-time earnings rather


                                                 23
addition, we convert 1950 dollars into 2000 dollars using the CPI. We call this adjusted
occupational income score simply occupational income (OI).
    In Figure 4 we plot these decile by decile averages of CEB against OI for each birth
cohort. Thus, each point in Figure 4 represents the average CEB of wives of men in one
OI decile, for a particular birth cohort of women.32 (Table A4 in Appendix B includes the
actual numbers.) For each cohort, we find a strong negative relationship between OI and
CEB. For all cohorts, we find that CEB decreases monotonically across OI deciles, with
the occasional exception at the very bottom of the distributions. In the early cohorts
(until 1898) CEB actually increases from decile 1 to decile 2. We also find that the
relationship is very flat at the upper end of the income distribution, i.e. there is little
difference in CEB between the top two deciles, starting with the 1908 cohort.

                                Figure 4: CEB by Occupational Income in 2000 Dollars
                                Figure 3: CEB vs. Occupational Income in 2000 Dollars
                      6.5
                                                                            Birth Cohort
                      6.0
                                                                                1828          1838
                      5.5                                                       1848          1858
                      5.0                                                       1868          1878
 Children ever Born




                                                                                1888          1898
                      4.5                                                       1908          1918
                                                                                1928          1938
                      4.0
                                                                                1948          1958
                      3.5

                      3.0

                      2.5

                      2.0

                      1.5
                            0       20,000             40,000          60,000              80,000

                                             Occupational Income in 2000 Dollars



   One hypothesis is that the fertility decline was driven solely through the increase in
income. While our analysis has nothing to contribute on causality, we can investigate
than actual income in the year in which data was recorded.
  32
     As before, for each cohort, we compute average fertility for women in a five year age bracket, as
described in Appendix A.


                                                                24
to what extent the data is consistent with such a theory. Let Fit denote the number of
children ever born for person i in cohort t. The most extreme version of the hypothesis
that differences in fertility are completely driven by differences in income would be that
Fit is a time invariant function of present discounted lifetime income (LI). That is:

                                          Fit = G(LIit )

where LIit is the lifetime income of person i in cohort t and G is a time invariant function.
This version would have the implication that, although overall fertility could change over
time due to the movements in average LIit , conditional on lifetime income, fertility should
be unchanged over time.
    If this were true – and assuming that OI is a good measure for lifetime income –
all of the data in Figure 4 would then lie on the curve, F = G(LI). Since there has
been such a large increase in average income, the extent to which this is true is difficult
to discern in Figure 4, which plots CEB against OI. To more clearly illuminate this
relationship, we show the relationship between the natural logarithms of CEB and OI
in Figure 5. In addition to the data, this picture includes a fitted relationship (OLS
regression) based on data from all cohorts. The relationship between CEB and OI looks
surprisingly time invariant. The estimated relationship is log(CEB) = 4.82−0.38 log(OI)
with an extremely high R2 of 0.82. Therefore, much of the observed overall fertility change
seen between the 1828 and 1958 birth cohorts seems consistent with this view.
    However, the picture also shows systematic deviations from such a stable relationship.
As can be seen, while the 1828 and 1948 birth cohorts are approximately right on the
fitted curve, the baby bust cohorts are clearly below, and the baby boom cohorts are
clearly above. Thus, it seems that there are other, large effects that are missing from this
view, and we will come back to this later.
    Using the data underlying Figure 5, we can do a formal accounting decomposition of
the observed patterns from start to finish into movements along a curve relating income
to fertility and shifts of that curve over time.33 To do this, we now fit a log-log regression
between average OI by decile of the population and average CEB within that decile
for each birth cohort. The slope coefficient from this regression can be interpreted as
the income elasticity of the demand for children. The cohort-by-cohort elasticities are
given in Table A5 in Appendix B. Between the 1828 birth cohort and the 1958 one, OI
increased from $4,154 to $54,517, approximately a 13-fold increase. Based on the elasticity
  33
    Such an accounting decomposition had not been possible previously as past empirical work focused
either exclusively on a time series or on a cross-section.


                                                25
                                            Figure 5: Log (CEB) by Log(Occupational Income)

                              2.0

                                                                                                Birth Cohort
                              1.8                                                               1828           1838
                                                                                                1848           1858
                              1.6
                                                                                                1868           1878
  Log of Children ever Born




                                                                                                1888           1898
                                                                                                1908           1918
                              1.4
                                                                                                1928           1938
                                                                                                1948           1958
                              1.2                                                               Reg

                              1.0


                              0.8


                              0.6


                              0.4
                                    7.7   8.2      8.7         9.2           9.7      10.2        10.7         11.2

                                                   Log of Occupational Income in 2000 Dollars



estimate from the regression using 1828 data of -0.33, the predicted CEB in 1958 would
                ³        ´−0.33
be CEB1958 = OI     1958
                  OI1828
                                CEB1828 = 2.4, while the actual value for women born in 1958
was 1.8. In this sense, 84% of the overall reduction of 3.8 CPW between 1828 and 1958
would have been predicted given the relationship between income and fertility fitted from
the 1828 birth cohort. Figure 6 illustrates this accounting exercise graphically.34
    Of course, the results of calculations such as this depend on the details of how they are
done. For example, when using the elasticity that is estimated based on all data, -0.38,
we find that 92% of the overall fertility decline can be accounted for. Alternatively, if we
use the fitted relationship between OI and fertility based on the 1948 birth cohort, we find
that only 60% of the decline can be accounted for. To see this, not that average income
in 1898 was only 30% of the average income in 1948 and in 1828 it was only 9% of 1948
income. Based on this, the average fertility of 2.22 in 1948 and the estimated elasticity
of -0.20, we would predict that fertility should have been 3.54 in 1828 (it was actually
5.59 ) and 2.70 for the 1898 birth cohort (it was actually 2.82). Thus, this version of the
    34
    ¿From the figure, it appears that only 7 deciles are present in the 1828 birth cohort. This is because
several deciles have the same occupational income. These are deciles 2-5. See Table A.4 for the actual
values for all 10 deciles.

                                                                        26
                                        Figure 6: 1958 Predicted vs. Actual CEB (based on 1828 data)
                                                         Figure 9: log(CEB) vs log(OI)
                              2.2

                               2
                                                       1828 Cohort                Deciles 1828 Cohort
                              1.8
  Log of Childredn eve Born




                                                                                  Deciles 1958 cohort
                              1.6
                                                                                  Regression Line for 1828
                              1.4                                                 Cohort

                              1.2

                               1

                              0.8

                              0.6
                                                                                    1958 Cohort
                              0.4

                              0.2
                                 7.00    7.50   8.00     8.50    9.00   9.50     10.00   10.50    11.00   11.50   12.00

                                                  Log of Occupational Income in 2000 Dollars




calculations would say that the log linear relationship would account for about 60% of
the observed differences in fertility levels between the 1828 and 1948 cohorts.

4.1.1                               Decreasing Fertility Inequality

Some interesting deviations from a time invariant relationship exist. The most striking
pattern is the “compression of fertility” over time, i.e. that fertility became less income
sensitive over time. There are several ways to measure this. We look at two measures: the
change, over time, in the absolute difference in CEB from the bottom to the top halves of
the income distribution, and the change, over time, in the estimated income elasticity of
demand for children. The difference from the top to the bottom of the income distribution
of fertility has been falling, reaching an all-time low of a fifth of a child in 1953. This
can be clearly seen in Figure 7 which shows average CEB of women with husbands above
and below median occupational income over time. Note, however, that this decline did
not occur monotonically. Roughly, there was a difference of about 1 child in the early
cohorts, increasing to a high of 1.6 with the 1863 cohort, then rapidly falling to only half
a child by 1908 and further falling to a quarter of a child by the 1923 birth cohort, where
it stabilized. Overall then, there has been a significant decrease not only in fertility but


                                                                            27
                                  Figure 7: CEB by Top and Bottom Half of the Income Distribution

                       7




                       6                                                                             Bottom half
                                                                                                     Top half

                                             Gap
                       5
  Children ever Born




                       4




                       3




                       2




                       1
                           1828    1838   1848     1858   1868   1878    1888        1898   1908   1918   1928     1938   1948   1958
                                                                 Birth Cohort




also its top to bottom variation with respect to income – fertility has become ‘compressed’
with respect to income.
    Part of this compression is what would be expected with movements along an iso-
elastic demand curve for children with a negative slope, but there are other forces at work
as well. To see this, note that our estimated income elasticities of demand for children have
also decreased (see Table A5). Interestingly, it changed in a non-monotone way over time,
rising from about -0.33 in the early years up to a peak of about -0.45 or -0.50 for cohorts
born in the late 1800’s and down to about -0.20 in more recent times.35 The change in
the income elasticities is closely mirrored in overall changes in the fertility distribution.
Figure 8 plots the coefficient of variation (CV) of the OI distribution over time. In the
same picture we have included the absolute value of the income elasticity. The fall in the
CV shows that over the entire time period, the variance of fertility fell by more than it
would have if fertility had just fallen proportionally throughout the entire distribution.
This is particularly true during the baby boom where the variance of fertility increased
by less than as if fertility had increased proportionally for everybody. Thus, the widening
 35
                       See Westoff (1954) for an early account of the widening and compression of fertility.



                                                                                28
and then compression in the relationship between income and fertility is closely reflected
in changes of the overall fertility distribution.

                                   Figure 8: Measures of Fertility Inequality

                  1.2
                                                                      Coefficient of Variation

                   1                                                  Income Elasticity of Fertility
                                                                      (absolute value)


                  0.8
  CV/Elasticity




                  0.6


                  0.4


                  0.2


                   0
                   1820   1840   1860    1880      1900        1920           1940          1960
                                                Cohort




    Note that the decline in elasticities immediately implies that the fertility compression
was not solely the result of a compression in income, at least in its simplest form – viz.,
that the income elasticity was constant but income compressed. This conclusion depends
on both the assumption that OI is a good proxy for income and the assumption that the
income elasticity is constant over time. As Goldin and Katz (1999) document, there has
been a compression of income due to a fall in the skill premium during the 20th century.
Thus, some of fertility compression may be due to the income compression.36 However, it
is also well-documented that income inequality and the skill premium rose again during
the later parts of the 20th century, while fertility compresses over the entire time period.
    The reason for the overall widening of fertility during the 19th century is that the
timing of the Fertility Transition (1828-1898) did not occur evenly across the income
distribution. This can be most easily seen in Figure 7.37 Fertility for the bottom half was
roughly constant at about 6 between the 1828 and 1853 cohorts. After this, it fell steeply
to the 1898 cohort where it reached 3.3 children per woman (CPW), a reduction of 2.7
children overall. In contrast, for the upper half of the income distribution, the decline
  36
     Similarly, if the relationship between LI and CEB is non-linear, but with a different functional form,
the observed fertility compression could be due solely to income compression.
  37
     See also Figure A5 in Appendix E which shows a finer breakdown by income deciles.


                                                          29
was more or less steady between the 1828 and 1898 birth cohorts from about 5.0 to 2.4
children per woman. Thus, the overall drop between the 1828 and 1898 birth cohorts
was similar in magnitude for women in both halves of the income distribution: falling by
about two and a half children. It follows that over the 70 year period there was little
change in the absolute difference in the number of children. Because of the difference in
timing, however, the overall changes mask the observation that in the interceding period
the CEB difference rose, reaching a maximum of about 1.6 CPW with the 1863 birth
cohort. In sum then, the Fertility Transition began early and was gradual for the upper
part of the income distribution while it began later, and was much steeper for the lower
part. Overall, the decline was similar in magnitude, but, because of the difference in
timing, the spread grew in the interim. This pattern mirrors closely the pattern seen
when the data is divided between urban and rural components as can be seen in Figure
9. The Fertility Transition began early and was gradual for women living in urban areas
while it began later, and was much steeper for those living in rural areas. (See also the
discussion in Section 5.)

 Figure 9: CEB for Top/Bottom Half of Income Distribution and Urban/Rural Areas
                                                  for Rural and Urban Areas
                         7
                                                                           Overall Bottom half
                                                                           Overall Top half
                         6                                                 Rural
                                                                           Urban
    Children ever Born




                         5


                         4


                         3


                         2


                         1
                             1828   1843   1858     1873    1888    1903      1918   1933    1948
                                                     Birth Cohort



   The fertility compression during the 20th century is related to a difference in magni-

                                                               30
tudes of the baby bust and baby boom at different parts of the income distribution. From
Figure 7 it can be seen that the baby bust was more pronounced for poorer families. Be-
tween 1898 and 1908, fertility declined from 3.3 to 2.6 CPW for the bottom half, and from
2.36 to 2.02 for the top half. That is, there was a reduction of 0.70 CPW for the bottom
half, compared to a fall of only 0.35 CPW for the top half of the income distribution. A
similar asymmetry also occurred during the baby boom period (1908-1933), which was
most pronounced for richer women. Women in the upper half of the income distribution
increased their fertility from 2.0 CPW in 1908 to 3.1 CPW in 1933. Women in the lower
half, in contrast, increased their fertility from 2.6 in 1908 to 3.3 in 1933. Thus, fertility
increased by 1.1 CPW for the top half and only 0.7 CPW for the lower half. Together,
the relatively steeper fall in CPW for poorer families and the subsequent milder increase
has led to a compression in fertility across the income distribution. Indeed, most of that
compression had been completed by the 1923 birth cohort, when the difference in average
fertility between the bottom and top halves fell from 0.93 to 0.24, where it still is today.
    One might be concerned that the pattern of widening and then compression of fertility
with respect to income is an artifact of the data, driven by OI becoming an increasingly
worse estimate of lifetime income the further away one goes from the 1950 census. Recall
that OI was constructed as the median income of that occupation in 1950, and thus one
would expect OI to be a relatively good proxy for actual income in 1950. The further the
distance from the 1950 census, the larger one would expect the error to be, since some
occupations will have changed in relative status, etc. In principle, an increasing error
could be responsible for the fertility gap being largest in years where data is good and
decreasing in both directions from there. However, we strongly believe that this is not
the case. First, the peak is at the wrong time. The cohorts that are based on the 1950
census are the 1903 and 1908 cohorts, while we find the peak of the fertility gap between
bottom and top of the income distribution occurs in 1863, and we find the highest income
elasticity for the cohorts between 1883 and 1898. Secondly, actual income data is available
in four censuses (1960-1990). Using this data, we also find a substantial decline in the
fertility gap over this time period. Finally, the correlation between OIS and income falls
only by a small amount over this time period, as shown in Table 1, suggesting that the
error may have not increased by a large amount. Further details on this are included in
Appendix C.




                                             31
4.1.2          Surviving Children Ever Born

The difference between gross and net fertility was quite substantial in the earlier years
of the time period that we study. As many as one third of children born did not reach
working age. It is clear that both gross and net fertility are important from an economic
point of view. Data limitations force us to abstract from mortality considerations for
the most part.38 To our knowledge, no estimates of the relationship between wealth and
infant and/or child mortality are available for the period we study.

                              Figure
                          CEB and    10:
                                  SCEB          Time Series of SCEB vs. CEB
  6.0

  5.5
                                                CEB
  5.0
                                                SCEB
  4.5

  4.0

  3.5

  3.0

  2.5

  2.0

  1.5

  1.0
        1828    1843   1858   1873   1888    1903   1918   1933   1948
                              Birth Cohort



    The census data does, however, contain some limited information on the surviving
number of children. In both the 1900 and the 1910 Censuses, all women who had ever
been married were asked about how many living children they currently had. In the
following, we will label this variable surviving children ever born (SCEB). We can replicate
our previous analysis using SCEB for the cohorts between 1828 and 1868, i.e. 9 cohorts.
All other cohorts were based on data from a census other than 1900 and 1910, so that no
information on SCEB is available.39
    Not surprisingly, we find that a substantial number of children die before their mother.
The time series of SCEB together with CEB is plotted in Figure 10. The percentage of
  38
     See also Haines and Preston (1996) and Ferrie (2003) on constructing mortality estimates from Census
data.
  39
     The figures contain data for the 1873 and 1878 cohorts, which are based on 32 and 37 year old women
in the 1910 census, i.e., these are age/cohort combinations that we do not use elsewhere in this paper.


                                                           32
children that had died declines monotonically from 37% for the 1828 birth cohort to 21%
for the 1868 birth cohort. Note that this decline is not only due to declining mortality
rates because the age at which mortality is established changes in these measurements.
That is, for the 1828 birth cohort we measure the fraction of children that die before their
mother’s 72nd birthday, while for the 1868 cohort survival is measured at their mother’s
42nd birthday.40
    The relationship between SCEB and occupational income is essentially the same as
between CEB and OI. That is, all our findings from the previous section, that fertility and
income are negatively related, and that this relationship has changed non-monotonically
over time, are robust to controlling for mortality. We find that the relationship between
income and SCEB is negative for every single cohort for which data is available. Figure
12 plots our two measures of the relationship between fertility and income (elasticity and
top to bottom gap) for all cohorts between 1828 and 1878. The graphs show how the
estimates based on the two measures of fertility track each other very closely.

                              Figure 11: Percent not Surviving
                       various Cohorts
 45
                                                                   1828
                                                                   1838
 40
                                                                   1848
 35                                                                1858
                                                                   1868
 30

 25

 20

 15
        1     2    3    4    5     6    7     8    9   10
                    OIS Deciles

    It is sometimes argued that mortality was higher among poor people because of the
different hygienic circumstances. We cannot confirm this hypothesis in the Census data.
In fact, mortality (measured as a fraction of children that does not survive) is somewhat
higher among richer people. This might reflect the fact that both incomes as well as
mortality were higher in urban areas.
  40
   More precisely, for the 1828 cohort, we measure survival of children of women aged 70-74 at census
enumeration day, while for the 1868 it is measured for women aged 40-44 etc.

                                                  33
                                    Figure 12: Surviving Children Ever Born

                                    CEB and SCEB Gaps
                    2.0
                                    CEB gap

                    1.5             SCEB gap



                    1.0
Gap




                    0.5



                    0.0
                      1828 1833 1838 1843 1848 1853 1858 1863 1868 1873 1878

                    -0.5



                    -1.0
                                            Birth Cohort


                                     Income elasticity (OIS)
                     0.50

                     0.40

                     0.30
                                                            CEB
                     0.20
                                                            SCEB
Income Elasticity




                     0.10

                     0.00

                    -0.10

                    -0.20

                    -0.30

                    -0.40

                    -0.50
                        1828 1833 1838 1843 1848 1853 1858 1863 1868 1873 1878
                                          Birth Cohort


                                                           34
4.2                         Education and Fertility

                                       Figure 13: CEB by Education of Husband
                                              Figure 6: CEB by Education of Husband
                      5.4
                                                        Birth Cohort

                      4.9                              1878              1898
                                                       1908              1918
                                                       1933              1958
                      4.4                              Regression line
 Children ever Born




                      3.9


                      3.4


                      2.9


                      2.4


                      1.9


                      1.4
                            0     2       4           6            8            10    12   14       16
                                                 Years of education



    Next, we turn to the relationship between fertility and education for those years in
which education data is available – the censuses from 1940 to date. Education provides
another measure of economic well-being. The advantage of using information on education
is that this data is available both for men and women for 100 years of birth cohorts (1868-
1958). This allows us to investigate husband’s and wife’s contribution to the fertility
decline separately.
    To facilitate comparisons to the previous subsection we first focus on the education
of the husband. Figure 13 shows mean CEB by cohort and husband’s years of schooling.
The figure also includes a fitted line based on data from all cohorts.41 As with OI, we find
a substantial negative relationship between CEB and husband’s education throughout
the entire time period. As with OI, there has been a considerable increase in the overall
level of education over the 100 years (see Table 2). Because of this, we can do the same
          41
    As before, this regression is based on the cohort- and education-specific mean CEB as shown in the
picture, not on the underlying individual level data.


                                                                 35
decomposition we did in the previous section, and ask whether the decline in CEB over
time is consistent with a movement along a stable time-invariant relationship between
education and fertility, or whether the relationship itself is changing. From the Figure,
it is clear that some of each is going on. Clearly, the later cohorts are characterized by
both higher education as well as lower CEB. However, for any given number of years of
schooling, CEB varies by about 1 child across cohorts. For example, wives of men with
12 years of education born in 1868 had 2.8 children, and this fell to about 1.9 children
per woman in the 1958 birth cohort. More generally, we can see a substantial downward
shift of the curve during the fertility transition (comparing the 1878 cohort with the the
1908 cohort), followed by an upward shift until the 1933 cohort (baby boom), followed by
a sharp collapse for the 1958 cohort.
    To better quantify the relationship between education and fertility, and how this has
changed over time, we ran the following OLS regression for each cohort, t:

                             CEBit = β 0t + β 1t ∗ EdHit + εit

where each CEBit is the average CEB for women in cohort t with husbands who have i
years of schooling. As a measure of how sensitive fertility is to education, we report the
slope coefficient in Table 2.
    As in the relationship between CEB and OI, we find a substantial compression of
fertility across years of education between the 1868 and 1958 cohorts. Note that the
coefficient in 1958 is about half the one in 1868. In contrast to the relationship between
CEB and OI, however, there is no widening at first. To some extent this is because we
have a shorter time series for the education variables.
    The one exception to the general rule that higher education is associated with lower
fertility within a cohort can be found in the baby boom generations. That is, in both the
1918 and 1928 birth cohorts, wives of college educated men had slightly higher fertility
than those of high school educated men. Indeed, even in the birth cohorts from 1878 to
1908, there is very little difference in the fertility behavior of the wives of high school
and college educated men. This is consistent with our earlier finding that the relationship
between OI and CEB flattens out for high levels of OI.
    The baby bust and boom is a phenomenon that affected all schooling levels, as can be
seen in Figure A6 in Appendix E. Similarly to our income analysis, we find that the baby
bust was most pronounced for wives of little educated husbands while the baby boom was
most pronounced for wives of the highly educated husbands. Between the 1868 and the
1908 cohorts, wives of husbands with little education decreased their fertility from 4.8 to

                                            36
                 Table 2: Relationship between CEB and Husband’s Education

                       Cohort    Age      β 1t   average years of education
                        1868       72   -0.17                             6.51
                        1873       67   -0.19                             6.62
                        1878       62   -0.14                             6.86
                        1883       57   -0.16                             7.05
                        1888       52   -0.14                             7.12
                        1893       47   -0.15                             7.49
                        1898       42   -0.13                             7.78
                        1903       57   -0.14                             8.27
                        1908       52   -0.14                             8.83
                        1913       47   -0.13                             9.35
                        1918       42   -0.12                             9.94
                        1923       47   -0.12                            10.73
                        1928       42   -0.12                            11.05
                        1933       47   -0.12                            11.63
                        1938       42   -0.15                            12.03
                        1943       47   -0.11                            12.87
                        1948       42   -0.11                            13.31
                        1953       37   -0.09                            13.46
                        1958       32   -0.08                            13.31

Note: Cohorts comprise five years each (labelled by the mid-point). The variable Age refers to the age
of the woman at the moment the census took place. Source: Authors’ calculations based on US Census,
several years.




                                                 37
3.5 CPW (a fall of 1.3 CPW) while wives of college-educated husbands decreased fertility
from 2.6 to 1.7 CPW (a reducation of 0.9 CPW). Between the 1908 and the 1933 cohort,
women married to a husband with little schooling increased CEB from 3.5 to 4.4, while if
married to a man with some college, CEB increased from 1.7 to 3.0. It is also interesting
that the baby boom was not completely synchronized across education levels. While for
most education levels the peak occurred in the 1933 cohort, this is not true for very low
levels of education: the highest CEB for wives of men with no schooling was the 1938
cohort and for the 1-4 years of schooling group, this peak was in the 1928 cohort.
    In terms of accounting for the overall fertility decline, the fitted linear relationship
between CEB and husband’s education in years based on the 1868 birth cohort is CEB =
5.08 − 0.17 ∗ EdH. Between the 1868 and 1958 birth cohorts, mean education of husbands
increased from 6.7 years to 13.2. Based on this, using the regression, we would expect
mean CEB to fall by 1.1 CPW. In fact, it fell by 1.9, so that about 60% of the observed
change can be accounted for by the increase in mean education of husbands.
    In sum then, the CEB/Education data paints a similar picture to that seen with CEB
vs. OIS. The relationship is typically downward sloping and significantly so. A large
fraction of the time series variation in fertility is consistent with the view that there is
a constant (linear), time invariant relationship between fertility and years of schooling
and that the observed time patterns of fertility correspond to a movement outward (i.e.,
an increase in the level of schooling for everyone) along this fixed relationship. There
are also significant deviations from this however. It is clear from Figure 13 that there is
much more of a downward shift in the curve in CEB vs. Education than there was with
income. For example, CEB for women of husbands with eight years of education fell by
approximately one CPW over the 100 years we analyze. This quantity is similar at other
levels of education as well.42

4.2.1    Husbands vs. Wives

We now analyze the joint relationship between fertility and the level of schooling both of
the husband and the wife in a married couple. We divided the individual records into a grid
of combinations of years of education for wives and husbands. For each combination and
each birth cohort, we calculated mean CEB. For these basic observations, we estimated
  42
    This masks the possibility that there have been changes in the quality of a year of schooling over the
time range studied, a very likely possibility.




                                                   38
relationships of the form:43

   CEBit = β 0t + β EdW t ∗ EdWit + β EdHt ∗ EdHit + β EdW ∗EdW t ∗ EdWit ∗ EdHit + εit .

    We included a cross term since, in the data, it is apparent that the higher is a woman’s
education the less sensitive is her fertility level to her husband’s education (and vice versa).
    Table 3 summarizes the results of regressions of the mean values of CEB, averaged in
a cell, on education of both the husband and wife. In each cohort regression, we see that
CEB is declining in both the education level of the wife and the husband, and significantly
so.44 Note that the coefficients of husband’s and wife’s education are similar in size (the
wife’s being slightly larger) and that there is no systematic time trend.
    To give a sense of the size of these coefficient estimates, take say 1948, in which the
coefficient on wife’s education is -0.15. This means that, other things equal, the difference
in fertility of a couple in which the wife has completed college and one that has only
completed high school is about 0.6 children. Because of positive assortative mating, the
effect is even larger actually.
    Notice that for most birth cohorts the cross term has a positive coefficient. This
means that, other things equal, a higher education of the husband implies that the fertility
decision is less sensitive to the number of years of education of the wife (and vice versa).
Also note that the coefficient sizes are smaller, but that the units are different for this
variable since it is years2 . Interestingly, we find a negative cross-term for some of the early
cohorts (1868, 1873, 1878, 1888). That is, during this time period, a higher education of
the husband implied that fertility was more sensitive to the wife’s education.
    Temporally, we see that in the period between the baby bust and baby boom, fertility
became more sensitive to years of education of both wives and husbands with the indi-
vidual coefficients increasing from about 0.10 to 0.20. After that, they returned to their
earlier levels.
    These regression results can be used to carry out an accounting exercise much like
those conducted above. Note that mean education of women increases from 6.7 to 13.2
years, while that of their husbands increased from 6.5 to 13.3 from the 1868 to the 1958
birth cohort. Using the regression results from the 1883 birth cohort45 , we would expect
  43
      Following the same approach as before, we ran this regression on 9 × 9 = 81 “observations”, where
each observation is average CEB of a combination of husband’s and wife’s level of schooling.
   44
      The two exceptions to this are the 1868 and 1888 birth cohorts, where CEB is declining in the
education of the wife, but increasing in the education of the husband.
   45
      We use 1883 because this is the first year, where all regression coefficients have the same sign as in
all the later periods.

                                                    39
                    Table 3: Regression Coefficients: CEB on Education

                           Cohort     Age β EdW       β EdH    β EdH∗EdW
                              1868      72    -0.07    0.14        -0.017
                              1873      67    -0.10   -0.03        -0.007
                              1878      62    -0.12   -0.05        -0.001
                              1883      57    -0.14   -0.18         0.008
                              1888      52    -0.08    0.09        -0.014
                              1893      47    -0.16   -0.14         0.007
                              1898      42    -0.12   -0.06        0.0004
                              1903      57    -0.15   -0.10         0.005
                              1908      52    -0.17   -0.16         0.010
                              1913      47    -0.19   -0.21         0.015
                              1918      42    -0.23   -0.19         0.015
                              1923      47    -0.20   -0.16         0.012
                              1928      42    -0.16   -0.14         0.008
                              1933      47    -0.14   -0.13         0.005
                              1938      42    -0.14   -0.19         0.008
                              1943      47    -0.12   -0.09         0.003
                              1948      42    -0.15   -0.11         0.006
                              1958      32    -0.11   -0.07         0.003

Note: Cohorts comprise five years each (labelled by the mid-point). The variable Age refers to the age
of the woman at the moment the census took place. Source: Authors’ calculations based on US Census,
several years.




                                                 40
CEB to fall by 6.5 ∗ 0.14 + 6.8 ∗ 0.18 − 132 ∗ 0.08 = 1.08 CPW over this time period. In
fact fertility during this time period fell by 1.9 CPW. In this sense, 57% of the observed
decline in fertility can be accounted for by increases in education.
    Summarizing, we find that contrary to other studies (e.g. Hotz and Miller (1988),
Heckman and Walker (1990) using Swedish data, Fleisher and Rhodes (1979) and Mer-
rigan and St. Pierre (1998) for Canada), the negative relationship between fertility and
husband’s education is still present when wife’s education is also controlled for in the
analysis. Each of these has a separate and significant impact on fertility. Moreover, we
find a significant and regular ‘cross effect’ – that increases in education have a lesser effect
when the partner is more educated.


5     Other ‘Cuts’ on the Data on Fertility
In the previous sections we have examined the overall history of fertility in the US over
the last 150 years, traced the major events of this history – the Fertility Decline, the Baby
Bust of the 1930’s, the Baby Boom of the 1950’s and the more recent, steady decline in
fertility. We have seen that these basic phenomena have occurred, and with similar timing,
among all the main subgroups of the US population – Urban, Rural, Farm, Non-Farm,
Black, White, Immigrant, Second Generation, Native Born, New Englanders, etc.
    We have also documented how these basic events were related to economic variables –
occupation and education. What the analysis by income shows is that the uniformity of
the overall pattern of decline masks an interesting phenomenon. This is that this decline
was not ‘even’ across the income distribution. Indeed, rather than a slow steady and
uniform decline for all income types at the same rate, this decline first occurred among
the upper incomes and then, later, and more rapidly for the lower incomes. This difference
in timing caused an initial spreading, in levels, of fertility from the top to the bottom,
and similarly, a non-monotonicity of estimated income elasticities of demand for children.
    In this section, we look into these patterns further and address the following questions.
Are elasticities in groups over the entire time period the same as elasticities for everyone
over the entire time period? We find that they are not the same, but surprisingly similar.
We ask to what extent the observed differences in fertility levels across groups (e.g. by
race) are consistent with one overall relationship between fertility and income, but differ-
ences across the groups in income. Finally, we investigate whether the overall patterns
by income described above – first a widening then a reduction in differences – are present
within each subgroup.

                                              41
5.1      Overall CEB vs. Occupational Income for SubGroups
The strong, negative relationship between OI and CEB holds for all cuts on the data
described above – urban/rural, farm/non-farm, black/white, immigrant/non-immigrant
and by region of the country. We examine this relationship in this section both graphically
and through the estimation of income elasticities of demand for children by groups.
    We find that the income elasticities for the various groups are surprisingly similar to
the overall elasticity of -0.38, ranging from -0.24 to -0.48, see Table 4. Each row in this
table describes the result of estimating an income elasticity (i.e., a regression of log(CEB)
on log(OI)) for a particular subgroup of the population, using data from the entire sample
period covered. Note that this period of coverage (generally the birth cohorts between
1828 and 1958) is different for immigrant status because of data availability. The first two
columns of the table give the intercept and slope, respectively from these regressions. The
fourth column gives the average CEB for each group and the last column is a measure
of how much of the difference in CEB can be accounted for exclusively through income
differences.
    One of the most surprising results in this table is the uniformity between the ur-
ban/rural estimates of slope and intercept. Moreover, these are remarkably close to the
overall estimates. The same statement is true for the farm/non-farm cut of the data.
These two facts are despite the leading role played in the verbal stories for the Fertility
Transition in Demography by both Urbanization and movements off the farm. What it
suggests is that the observed differences in levels of fertility are largely due to differences
in income, with both rural and farm areas having lower levels of income.
    To get a better idea about how much of the differences between groups can be ex-
plained, in an accounting sense, by income differences across groups, we added a fourth
column to the table. Using the actual average CEB of a benchmark group (B) for each
cut, the estimated overall elasticity of -0.38, and the actual income gap between a group
and this benchmark group, we calculated a predicted CEB for the remaining cuts.46 The
number reported in the table is the fraction of the actual CEB ratio that is explained
by the predicted CEB ratio. According to this method, we find that about half of the
difference in fertility between urban and rural locations is accounted for by rural areas
being poorer. This result is even more striking when comparing farm and non-farm areas,
where more than 70 percent of the higher fertility on farms is accounted for by the lower
average OI.
                                                                              ³         ´−0.38
 46                                                                               OIG
      Predicted CEB of group G based on benchmark B is calculated as CEBG =       OIB            CEBB .



                                               42
                         Table 4: Income Elasticity of CEB by Groups

Group                              Intercept Income     OI              CEB       CEB gap explained
                                             Elasticity                           by income gap∗∗
All                                4.82         -0.38         15,050    3.57
By Location
Urban                              4.42         -0.35         13,263    3.21      B
Rural                              4.36         -0.33         17,307    3.94      46%
Farm                               4.65         -0.36         10,258    4.28      71%
Non-Farm                           4.46         -0.33         16,863    3.30      B
By Race
Black                              5.29         -0.42         11,343    4.52      42%
White                              4.71         -0.37         15,339    3.49      B
By Immigration Status∗
Foreign Born∗                      5.78         -0.48         11,978    4.06      none∗∗∗
US born, Foreign Parents∗          5.05         -0.41         12,640    3.66      80%
US born, US parents∗               4.88         -0.39         11,411    3.84      B
By Region
New England                        3.42         -0.24         16,242    3.05      B
East North Central                 4.26         -0.32         15,280    3.42      19%
South Atlantic                     5.60         -0.45         13,870    3.41      52%
West South Central                 5.39         -0.43         13,685    4.25      17%
∗
    Immigration status is available only for the cohorts between 1828 and 1928.
∗∗
     relative to benchmark (B) category.
∗∗∗
      Foreign born Americans have higher incomes and higher fertility than US born, US parents.




                                                  43
    The relationship between OI and CEB for whites is very similar to the overall popu-
lation. This is not surprising, given that whites make up 85-95 percent of the population
during this time period. One result that is clear from our estimated relationship between
OI and fertility is that the fertility gap between whites and blacks is not just due to
income (Table A8 in Appendix B gives the estimated cohort elasticities by race). This is
also evident from column 4 in the table, which finds that based on the estimated elasticity,
42% of the one-child difference in CPW between black and whites (i.e. about half a child)
is due to income differences.
    This finding is also reflected in the table by the differences in the constant terms –
5.29 for blacks vs. 4.71 for whites. To get some idea of the magnitude of this difference,
note that it implies that if the estimated elasticities for the two races were the same, then
at every level of income, blacks would have, on average, exp(5.29)/exp(4.71)=1.77 times
as many CPW over the sample period. Since the elasticity estimate for blacks is higher
in absolute value than that for whites and the average incomes are different in the two
groups, this overstates the actual difference however. In fact, since the intercept is larger
for blacks and the elasticity is also larger, it follows that, on average, low income blacks
have more children than low income whites, but that the reverse is true for high incomes.
It is because blacks had lower incomes on average over the period that this is consistent
with overall fertility being higher for blacks. (Note that this also depends on the location
of mean incomes of the groups relative to the intersection point of the two fitted lines.)
    As is the case with race, the differences in intercepts by place of birth, foreign vs.
native, reflects the overall higher level of fertility for foreign born compared with native
women. Second generation mothers, on the other hand, have on average fewer children
than Americans with native parents.47 Again, this difference in intercepts shows that the
difference is not solely due to differences in income. Somewhat surprising is the fact that
the demand for children by foreigners is more income sensitive than the other two groups.
    The relationship between income and fertility is downward sloping in all of the regions
of the country that we study. Conditioning on income, the regional differences are not
that large (roughly half a child). Relative to New England, we find that between 17%
and 52% of the CEB gap can be accounted for by income differences. On the flip side,
this also leaves a lot of room for “regional fixed effects.” Note that of all the cuts in the
data, the one done by region shows the biggest differences across groups. This is true of
both the intercepts, ranging from a high of 5.60 for the South Atlantic region to a low
of 3.42 for New England, and for the income elasticities – roughly in line with modern
 47
      Starting with the 1928 birth cohorts, this trend has reversed.


                                                     44
levels for the country as a whole (in the -0.2 to -0.3 range) for New England and the East
North Central regions and much higher (around -0.4) for both the South Atlantic and
West South Central regions. Thus, although both the SA and WSC regions were poorer
overall throughout most of the sample period, this income difference alone does not seem
to be the source of the fertility differences between North and South, or East and West.


5.2    Compression
As documented in the previous section, there was at first a widening of CEB across
income (1828-1898 birth cohorts), then a compression until the 1923 cohort, after which
the gap in CEB between the top and bottom half of the income distribution stabilized at
about 0.25 CPW. One hypothesis about this compression in fertility is that it is due to
compositional effects with respect to some other variate with no conditional compression.
For example, it might be that within both the urban and rural populations no compression
has occurred, but that a larger and larger fraction of the population is located in lower
fertility, urban areas. In principle, changes over time like this could be responsible for
both the overall decline in fertility and the observed compression. Other alternatives
include the racial make-up of the population, the geographic distribution of the population
and the immigrant and non-immigrant fractions. We explore these possibilities in this
section. As a rule, we find that this pattern over time across the income distribution also
holds within the smaller groups although there is considerably more noise and one or two
notable exceptions. Most striking is the fact that in addition to the overall compression
in fertility between mean CEBs across groups (as discussed in Section 3), there has also
been a compression of CEB across income deciles within most groups. That is, not only
has mean fertility of blacks become more similar to that of whites, it is also true that the
difference in fertility between the top and bottom income levels for blacks and whites has
converged (i.e., the average slope in levels). This is true for all of the other cuts of the
data we examined as well. In sum, these different groups are looking more and more alike
in their fertility behavior over time, both in terms of the overall averages, and in the way
person by person differences in the group vary with income.
    Following the analysis in Section 4, we again compute two measures of the sensitivity
of fertility to income. First, we compute income elasticities group by group for all cohorts
and secondly, we computed the differences in fertility between the top and bottom half of
the income distribution for each cohort for each sub-group.
    The estimated income elasticities give an overall similar, but much noisier picture,


                                            45
especially in the first half of the time period under consideration. Note that some groups
make up only a small fraction of the population (e.g. blacks 15%), which brings down the
sample size by a large factor. In some cases, this results in estimated elasticities changing
substantially from cohort to cohort.
    Since whites constitute between 85% and 95% of the population during this time
period, it is not surprising that the estimated elasticities for whites follow closely those
of the overall population (see Table A8 in the Appendix). Average CEB of black women
also experienced a widening at first followed by a compression. However, the decline in
elasticities started later and was slower, so that the stabilization at around -0.20 did not
occur until the peak of the baby boom (birth cohort 1933), compared to 1918 for the
overall population. Similarly, while the difference in CEB between the bottom and top
half had already fallen well below 0.5 for whites by the 1913 cohort, this did not happen
until 1928 for blacks.
    The time series of our estimated elasticities for the four regions under consideration
is also in parallel with the overall trend: first a widening then a compression of CEB
by income. What is interesting is that New England, the region with the lowest fertility
overall, and the lowest elasticity of CEB across income, also experienced the earliest
income compression. Elasticities fell below -0.2 already by the 1908 cohort in that part
of the country, while in the overall data this did not occur until the 1928 cohort. West
South Central, on the other hand, experienced fertility highly sensitive to income until
very recently, and only with the 1958 cohort reached a level of -0.22. Figure A7 in the
Appendix shows the compression within regions as measured by the difference in CEB of
the bottom to top half of the income distribution. This picture, though noisy, is quite
striking. It shows that the size of the top to bottom widening in fertility that occurred in
the late 19th century differed greatly by region, and was much larger in the West South
Central and South Atlantic regions than it was in the Northeastern part of the country.
For example, the gap from top to bottom was around 0.15 children in New England and
the East North Central areas in the period between the 1825 and 1845 cohorts, much
less than the overall gap of about 0.8 children, and about 0.65 in the South Atlantic and
West South Central regions. Between the 1855 and 1900 cohorts, this gap had increased
to about 1.35 in the south and west and only to about 0.63 in the north and east. Thus,
the change was about 0.7 CPW in the SA and WSC and a bit more than half as much in
NE and the ENC regions. As a point of comparison, overall this gap increased to about
1.2 CPW, about the same as in the SA and WSC.48 By the 1958 birth cohort, the size of
 48
      The average gaps between the 1828 and 1843 cohorts were .12 for NE, .23 for the ENC, .54 for the


                                                  46
this gap had converged to about 0.25 CPW in all regions of the country.
    Whether women are born in the United States or abroad, or are second generation
immigrants, matters a lot for fertility choice, as we have seen in Section 3. As Table 4
shows, the fertility decision of foreign born women is most sensitive to income. This was
not always the case, however. We find that the widening of CEB across incomes occurred
for foreign born women did not occur until 1868, compared to 1838 for the overall group.
The compression, as measured by a decline in the estimated elasticity, had begun among
foreign born women by 1883, about 15 years before this occurred with women as a whole.
American-born women with native parents, on the other hand, experienced very elastic
fertility already as early as 1848, with values ranging between -0.4 and -0.5 between
1848 and 1908, when the compression started very rapidly mirroring the observed overall
compression. The experience of second generation Americans lies somewhere in between.
    In our analysis of urban vs. rural households, we again find a widening at first and
then a compression of CEB across income. However, the compression both for rural and
urban households is much milder than the overall compression. The average gap of CEB
between the top and bottom half of the income distribution narrowed from 0.7 to 0.4 for
rural households and from 0.5 to 0.2 for urban households, compared to an overall decline
in the gap from 1 to 0.3. This is even more striking when comparing farm and non-farm
households, where until 1913 the top to bottom difference for each group is substantially
below the overall top to bottom difference (0.6 for urban, 0.1 for rural and 1.0 overall ).
These numbers suggest that at least part of the observed pattern, a spreading followed
by compression, is due to the movements from rural to urban (resp. farm to non-farm)
locations of the population at large.
    An interesting observation is that the relative CEB for richer vs. poorer households
narrowed substantially between 1883 and 1913 for urban households (from 0.7 to 0.17),
but did not compress at all during this time period for rural households (roughly stable
around 0.7). This can be seen in Figure 14. These results are also apparent from our
elasticity estimates, where we find generally much lower values for urban women between
1908 and 1933 – see Table A8 in Appendix B.
    The farm/non-farm cut on the data is one place in which the overall pattern of first
a widening of fertility from top to bottom, then a contraction, is not seen. The top to
bottom spread among the farm group itself increased monotonically over time. This seems
to have more to do with a significant widening of the ‘occupation spread’ over time than
SA and .74 for the WSC. The averages between the 1863 to 1898 cohorts were .61 for NE and .65 for the
ENC, and 1.44 for the SA and 1.25 for the WSC.


                                                 47
                            Figure 14: CEB gap top and bottom half, urban vs. rural
                                                          Urban / Rural Areas
              6.5


              6.0                                                                       Rural Bottom Half
                                                                                        Rural Top Half
              5.5                                                                       Urban Bottom Half
                                                                                        Urban Top Half
              5.0


              4.5
    CEB Gap




              4.0


              3.5


              3.0


              2.5


              2.0


              1.5
                    1828   1838   1848   1858   1868   1878   1888     1898     1908   1918   1928       1938   1948   1958
                                                              Birth Cohort



anything else– viz., early on almost everyone who lived on a farm was a farmer and hence,
had the same OI, while now, even though a much smaller fraction of the population reports
living on a farm, the range of occupations listed is much wider. This by itself causes the
top to bottom differential for households living on farms to increase independent of any
other shifts over time.
    In sum, we find that women in different parts of the income distribution have become
more similar to each other in their fertility behavior for birth cohorts since the turn of
the century. We find that this general compression of fertility of women with respect
to income holds conditional on many characteristics – race, geography, and whether the
women are immigrants or not.


6             Conclusions
In this paper, we have used data from the US Census to document the major fertility
patterns in the US for women born between 1826 and 1960 and relate them to measures
of economic well-being.
    We have found that in each cohort there is a strong negative correlation between

                                                              48
fertility level of a woman and a measure of her wealth proxied by husband’s occupation,
Adjusted Occupational Income. Overall, the wealth elasticity of demand for children is
estimated to be -0.38 for the period. We find that much of the difference in fertility
experiences (e.g. over time, and between groups such as blacks and whites and between
regions) can be accounted for by differences in income alone. However, we also document
that a single, simple, isoelastic relationship between wealth and fertility misses some key
and, we think, interesting features of the data. Among these are:

  1. An increased spread in fertility from top to bottom of the income distribution be-
     tween the 1828 and 1898 birth cohorts, or, related, an increase in the wealth elasticity
     of demand for children over this period (in absolute value);

  2. A dramatic compression in fertility levels with respect to wealth that took place
     primarily during the Baby Bust of the 1930’s and the Baby Boom of the 1950’s;

  3. A resulting overall pattern through which the Fertility Transition seems to have
     begun early and taken place gradually among the upper income families and began
     later and was much quicker for lower income families;

  4. The sensitivity of fertility to income was in place well before married women began
     participating in the labor market in any significant number;

  5. The patterns identified in 1 through 4 above occurred in a widespread fashion, across
     races, regions of the country, in both urban and rural areas and by place of birth of
     the mother;

  6. Overall, as a result of these facts, modern fertility in the US is compressed – it
     varies little by income (the estimated elasticity of the last cohorts are lower than
     they have ever been), by race or by other key demographic factors.

    Although these facts are of considerable interest to researchers doing quantitative
studies in positive theories of fertility choice, there is still much more that could be done.
Throughout, we have focused only on marital fertility, a restriction that has become more
and more important in recent years. Although a useful and interesting starting point, our
use of occupational income leaves much to be desired. Occupation is only a weak proxy
for true economic wealth for a variety of reasons, and even given those short-comings we
do not have adequate data to perfectly map the implications for changes over time on the
wealth of even an average worker in an occupational class. Moreover, due to the fact that

                                             49
occupation data was not collected for individuals not in the labor force until recently, we
were restricted to using only husband’s occupation in this study. To do more would have
required handling the serious sample selection bias issues that arise when some women
work and others don’t. These issues are present here too of course, but we think that the
findings are of sufficient interest even given these limitations to be useful to researchers.


References
 [1] Ahn, Namkee and P. Mira, (1999), ”A Note on the Changing Relationship Between
     Fertility and Female Employment Rates in Developed Countries,” Journal of Popu-
     lation Economics 15(4), pp. 667-682.

 [2] Akmam, Wardatul, (2002), “Women’s Education and Fertility Rates in Develop-
     ing Countries, with Special Reference to Bangladesh,” Eubios Journal of Asian and
     International Bioethics, 12, pp. 138-143.

 [3] Alter, George, (1992), “Theories of Fertility Decline: A Non-Specialist’s Guide to
     the Current Debate on European Fertility Decline,” The European Experience of
     Declining Fertility, 1850-1970, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, pp. 13-27.

 [4] Alvarez, Fernando, (1999), “Social Mobility: The Barro-Becker Children Meet the
     Laitner-Loury Dynasties,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(1), pp. 65-103.

 [5] Anderton, D. L. 1986. ”Urbanization, Secularization, and Birth Spacing - a Case-
     Study of an Historical Fertility Transition.” Sociological Quarterly 27:43-62.

 [6] Barro, Robert J. and Gary S. Becker, (1989), “Fertility Choice in a Model of Eco-
     nomic Growth,” Econometrica, 57(2), pp. 481-501.

 [7] Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, (1995), Economic Growth McGraw-Hill,
     Inc.

 [8] Becker, Gary, (1960), “An Economic Analysis of Fertility, in Demographic and Eco-
     nomic Change in Developed Countries,” Conference of the Universities, National
     Bureau Committee for Economic Research, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
     pp 209-240.

 [9] Becker, Gary S., (1992), “Fertility and the Economy,” Journal of Population Eco-
     nomics, 5(3), pp. 185-201.

                                             50
[10] Becker, Gary S. and Robert J. Barro, (1988), “A Reformulation of the Theory of
     Fertility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(1), pp. 1-25.

[11] Becker, Gary S. and H. Gregg Lewis, (1973), ”On the Interaction between the Quan-
     tity and Quality of Children,” Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), pp. S279-S288.

[12] Boldrin, Michele B. M. and Larry E. Jones, (2002), “Mortality, Fertility and Saving
     in Malthusian Economy,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(4), pp. 775-814.

[13] Boldrin, Michele B. M., Mariacristina De Nardi and Larry E. Jones, (2005), “Fertility
     and Social Security,” NBER Working Paper No. 11146.

[14] Boldrin, Michele, Jones, Larry E. and Alice Schoonbroodt, (2006), “The Fertility Re-
     sponse to Productivity Fluctuations in the Medium Run,” University of Minnesota,
     mimeo.

[15] Bongaarts, J. and G. Feeney, (1998), “On the Quantum and Tempo of Fertility,”
     Population and Development Review, 24, pp. 271-91.

[16] Borg, Mary O. Malley, (1989), “The Income-Fertility Relationship: Effect of the Net
     Price of a Child,” Demography, 26(2), pp. 301-310.

[17] Breierova, Lucia and Esther Duflo, (2004), “The Impact of Education on Fertility and
     Child Mortality: Do Fathers Really Matter Less than Mothers?” NBER Working
     Paper, No. 10513.

[18] Buttet, S. and A. Schoonbroodt, (2005), ”Life Cycle Labor Supply, Fertility and
     Wages of Women born between 1940 and 1960,” working paper.

[19] Butz, William P. and Michael P. Ward, (1979), “The Emergence of Countercyclical
     U.S. Fertility” American Economic Review, 69(3), pp. 318-328.

[20] Caldwell, John C., (1979), “Education as a Factor in Mortality Decline: An Exami-
     nation of Nigerian Data,” J. C. Caldwell, Population Studies, 33(3), pp. 395-413.

[21] Caldwell, John C., (1982), A Theory of Fertility Decline, New York: Academic Press.

[22] Chenais, Jean-Claude, (1992), The Demographic Transition: Stages, Patterns and
     Economic Implications; A Longitudinal Study of Sixty-Seven Countries Covering the
     Period 1720-1984, Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, New York.


                                           51
[23] Cho, Lee-Jay, (1968), “Income and Differentials in Current Fertility,” Demography
     5(1) 198-211.

[24] Clark, Gregory, (2005), “Human Capital, Fertility, and the Industrial Revolution,”
     Journal of the European Economic Association, 3 (2-3), pp. 505-515.

[25] Clark, Gregory, (2007), “A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the
     World,” Princeton University Press, forthcoming.

[26] Clark, Gregory and Hamilton, Gillian, (2006), “Survival of the Richest: The Malthu-
     sian Mechanism in Pre-Industrial England,” Journal of Economic History 66(3), pp.
     707-736.

[27] Cleland, John, (2004), “Education and Future Fertility Trends, with Special Refer-
     ence to Mid-Transitional Countries” United Nations Population Bulletin, forthcom-
     ing.

[28] David, Paul A. and Warren C. Sanderson, (1987), “The Emergence of a Two-Child
     Norm among American Birth-Controllers,” Population and Development Review,
     13(1), pp.1-41.

[29] De la Croix, David and Matthias Doepke, (2003), “Inequality and Growth: Why
     Differential Fertility Matters,” American Economic Review, 93(4), pp. 1091-1113.

[30] De Tray, Dennis N., (1973), “Child Quality and the Demand for Children,” Journal
     of Political Economy, 81(2), pp. S70-S95.

[31] Docquier, Frederic, (2004), “Income Distribution, Non-Convexities and the Fertility-
     Income Relationship” Economica, 71(282), pp. 261-273.

[32] Doepke, Matthias, (2004), “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition
     to Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9(3), pp. 347-383.

[33] Doepke, Mattias, (2005), “Child Mortality and Fertility Decline: Does the Barro-
     Becker Model Fit the Facts?” Journal of Population Economics, 18(2), pp. 337-366.

[34] Easterlin, Richard A., (1966), “On the Relation of Economic Factors to Recent and
     Projected Fertility Changes,” Demography, 3(1) pp. 131-153.

[35] Falcao, Bruno L. S. And Rodrigo R. Soares, “The Demographic Transition and the
     Sexual Division of Labor, ” Working Paper.

                                           52
[36] Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, (2001), “Was Malthus Right? Economic Growth and
     Population Dynamics,” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

[37] Ferrie, Joseph P., (2003), ”The Rich and the Dead: Socioeconomic Status and Mortal-
     ity in the U.S., 1850-60,” in Dora Costa (ed.), Health and Labor Force Participation
     over the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
     2003).

[38] Fleisher, Belton M. and George Rhodes, (1979), “Fertility, Women’s Wage Rates,
     and Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, 69(1), pp. 14-24.

[39] Freedman, Deborah S. and Arland Thornton, (1982), “Income and Fertility: The
     Elusive Relationship,” Demography, 19(1), pp. 65-78.

[40] Galor, Oded and David N. Weil (1996), “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth,”
     The American Economic Review, 86(3), pp. 374-387.

[41] Galor, Oded and David N. Weil (1999), “From Malthusian Stagnation to Modern
     Growth,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 89 (2), pp. 150-154.

[42] Galor, Oded and David N. Weil, (2000), “Population, Technology, and Growth: From
     Malthusian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond,” The American
     Economic Review 90(4), 806-828.

[43] Gjerde, J. and A. McCants. 1995. ”Fertility, marriage, and culture: Demographic
     processes among Norwegian immigrants to the rural middle west.” Journal of Eco-
     nomic History 55:860-888.

[44] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, (1999), “The Returns to Skill across the
     Twentieth Century United States,” NBER Working Paper no. 7126.

[45] Greenwood, Jeremy and Nezih Guner, (2005), “Social Change,” Economie d’avant
     garde Research Report No. 9, University of Rochester, May 2005.

[46] Greenwood, Jeremy and Ananth Seshadri, (2002), “The U.S. Demographic Transi-
     tion,” American Economic Review, 92(2), pp. 153-159.

[47] Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner and John Knowles, (2003), “More on Marriage,
     Fertility, and the Distribution of Income,” International Economic Review, 44(3),
     pp. 827-862.


                                           53
[48] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri and Guillaume Vandenbroucke, (2005), “The
     Baby Boom and Baby Bust,” American Economic Review, 95(1), pp.183-207.

[49] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri and Mehmet Yorukoglu, (2005), “Engines of
     Liberation,” The Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), pp. 109-133.

[50] Hacker, J. D. 2003. ”Rethinking the ”early” decline of marital fertility in the United
     States.” Demography 40:605-620.

[51] Haines, M. R. 1978. ”Fertility Decline in Industrial America - Analysis of Penn-
     sylvania Anthracite Region, 1850-1900, Using Own Children Methods.” Population
     Studies-a Journal of Demography 32:327-354.

[52] Haines, Michael R., (1976), “Population and Economic Change in Nineteenth Cen-
     tury Eastern Europe: Prussian Upper Silesia, 1840-1913.” The Journal of Economic
     History, 36(2), pp. 334-358.

[53] Haines, Michael R., (1979), “Fertility and Occupation: Population Patterns in In-
     dustrialization,” Academic Press, New York.

[54] Haines, Michael R., (1994), “Estimated Life Tables for the United States, 1850-1900,”
     NBER Historical Paper No. 59.

[55] Haines, Michael R., (2000), “The Population of the United States, 1790 to 1920,”
     The Cambridge Economic History of the United States, 3, pp. 143-205.

[56] Haines, Michael R. and Samuel H. Preston, (1996), “The Use of the Census to Es-
     timate Childhood Mortality: Comparisons from the 1900 and 1910 United States
     Census Public Use Samples,” NBER Historical Paper No. 85.

[57] Hansen, Gary D. and Edward C. Prescott, (2002), “Malthus to Solow,” American
     Economic Review, 92(4), pp. 1205-1217.

[58] Heckman, James J. and Walker, James R., (1990), “The Relationship between Wages
     and the Timing and Spacing of Births: Evidence from Swedish longitudinal Data,”
     Econometrica, 58(6), pp. 1411-1441.

[59] Hotz, V. Joseph and Robert A. Miller, (1988), “An Empirical Analysis of Life Cycle
     Fertility and Female Labor Supply, ” Econometrica, 56(1), pp. 91-118.



                                            54
[60] King, Miriam and Steven Ruggles, (1990), “American Immigration, Fertility, and
     Race Suicide at the Turn of the Century,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History, XX:3,
     347-369.

[61] Livi-Bacci, Massimo (1990), “Population and Nutrition: An Essay on European
     Demographic History,” Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[62] Lucas, Robert E., (2002), “The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future,” Lectures
     on Economic Growth, pp. 109-188.

[63] Macunovich, Diane J., (1996), “Relative Income and Price of Time: Exploring Their
     Effects on US Fertility and Female Labor Force Participation,” Population and De-
     velopment Review, 22(S), pp. 223-257.

[64] Macunovich, Diane J., (1998), “Fertility and the Easterlin Hypothesis: an Assessment
     of the Literature,” Journal of Population Economics, 11(1), pp. 53-111.

[65] Malthus, Thomas J. “An Essay on the Principle of Population,” London, 1798.

[66] McKeown, Thomas, (1979), The Role of Medicine: Dream, Mirage, or Nemesis?,
     Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

[67] Merrigan, Philip and Yvan St. Pierre, (1998), “An Econometric and Neoclassical
     Analysis of the Timing and Spacing of Births in Canada from 1950-1990,” Journal
     of Population Economics, 11(1), pp. 29-51.

[68] Mikevska, Maja B. and Paul J. Zak, (2002), “What Accounts for the Emergence of
     Mathusian Fertility in Transition Economies?” Working Paper, Claremont Univer-
     sity.

[69] Moffitt, Robert, (1984), “Profiles of Fertility, Labour Supply and Wages of Married
     Women: A Complete Life-Cycle Model,” The Review of Economic Studies, 51(2),
     pp. 263-278.

[70] Notestein, Frank W., (1945), “Population: The Long View,” In Schultz, T. W.,(ed.),
     Food for the World, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 36-69.

[71] Prescott, Edward C., (2002), “Prosperity and Depressions: 2002 Richard T. Ely
     Lecture,” Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank Working Paper, No. 618.



                                           55
[72] Preston, Samuel H., (1976), “Family Sizes of Women and Family Sizes of Children,”
     Demography, 13(1), pp. 105-114.

[73] Rosenzweig, Mark R., (1990), “Population Growth and Human Capital Investment:
     Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), pp. S38-S70.

[74] Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald
     Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander, (2004), Integrated
     Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0, Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Cen-
     ter.

[75] Russell, Louise B. (1982), “The Baby Boom Generation and the Economy,” the
     Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

[76] Ryder, Norman B., (1969), “The Emergence of a Modern Fertility Pattern: United
     States 1917-66,” pp. 99-123 in Fertility and Family Planning: A World View, edited
     by S.J. Behrman, L. Corsa, Jr., and R. Freedman, Ann Arbor, MI: University of
     Michigan Press.

[77] Ryder, Norman B., (1980), “Components of Temporal Variations in American Fer-
     tility,” pp. 15-54 in Demographic Patterns in Developed Societies, edited by R.W.
     Hiorns, London: Taylor and Francis.

[78] Ryder, Norman B., (1986), “Observations on the History of Cohort Fertility in the
     United States,” Population and Development Review, 12, pp. 617-43.

[79] Schoen, Robert, (2004), “Timing Effects and the Interpretation of Period Fertility,”
     Demography, Volume 41-Number 4, November, 801-819.

[80] Schoonbroodt, Alice, (2003), “Cross-sectional Properties of Female Labor Force Par-
     ticipation: Theory and Data,” University of Minnesota, mimeo.

[81] Schultz, Theodore W., (1973), ”The Value of Children: An Economic Perspective,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 81(2) New Economic Approaches to Fertility, pp. S2-
     S13.

[82] Schultz, T. Paul, (1986), “The Value and Allocation of Time in High-Income Coun-
     tries: Implications for Fertility,” Population and Development Review, 12(S), pp.
     87-108.


                                           56
[83] Schultz, T. Paul, (1997), “The Demand for Children in Low-Income Countries,”
     Handbook of Population and Family Economics, 1A, pp. 349-430.

[84] Schultz, T. Paul, (1985), “Changing World Prices, Women’s Wages, and the Fertility
     Transition: Sweden, 1860-1910,” The Journal of Political Economy, 93(6), pp. 1126-
     1154.

[85] Simon, Julian L., (1969), “The Effect of Income on Fertility,” Population Studies,
     23(3), pp. 327-341.

[86] Simon, Julian L., (1977), The Economics of Population Growth, Princeton University
     Press, Princeton, New Jersey.

[87] Strulik, Holger and Siddiqui Sikandar, (2002), “Tracing the Income Fertility Nexus:
     Nonparametric Estimates for a Panel of Countries,” Economics Bulletin, 15(5), pp.
     1-9.

[88] Tertilt, Michele, (2005), “Polygyny, Fertility, and Savings,” Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, 113(6), pp. 1341-1371.

[89] Tolnay, S. E., S. N. Graham, and A. M. Guest. 1982. ”Own-Child Estimates of
     United-States White Fertility, 1886-99.” Historical Methods 15:127-138.

[90] U.S. Census Bureau, (2006), “Estimated Median Age at First Marriage, by Sex: 1890
     to the Present,” http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/hh-fam/ms2.pdf, Table
     MS-2, Internet Release: May 25,2006.

[91] Vandenbroucke, Guillaume, (2004), “The American Frontier: A Hundred Years of
     Western Settlement,” University of Rochester, Economie D’Avant Garde Research
     Report No. 7.

[92] Ward, Michael P. and William P. Butz, (1980), “Completed Fertility and Its Timing,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 88(5), pp. 917-940.

[93] Weir, David R., (1995), “Family Income, Mortality, and Fertility on the Eve of
     the Demographic Transition: A Case Study of Rosny-Sous-Bois,” The Journal of
     Economic History, 55(1), pp. 1-26.

[94] Westoff, Charles F., (1954), “Differential Fertility in the United States: 1900 to
     1952,” American Sociological Review, 19(5), pp. 549-561.


                                             57
[95] Willis, Robert J., (1973), “A New Approach to the Theory of Fertility Behavior,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), pp. S14-S64.

[96] Wrigley, E. A., (1961), Industrial Growth and Population Change, Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press, Cambridge.

[97] Wrigley, Edward A., (1988), Continuity, Chance, and Change, Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge.


A      Methodology
The data used throughout this paper is based on a 1% public use sample of the U.S.
Census data, made available from the Minnesota Population Center at www.ipums.org
(Ruggles et al 2004). We are interested in average fertility by cohorts of women. We
define a cohort to be five years of birth years. Data on some cohorts is available from
multiple censuses. For example, one could get information on the 1900 cohort by looking
at 50 year old women in 1950 or 60 year old women in 1960, etc. Our goal was to use
women who have already completed their child-bearing years, but are still young enough
for selection not to be a big problem. We therefore chose to focus on 40-50 year olds.
We supplement this with data from older and sometimes younger women to extend the
time series backward and forward when necessary. Similarly, we use different ages to fill
in missing cohorts due to the lack of fertility information in the 1920 and 1930 censuses.
For any given cohort, we used ages as close as possible to (but older than) 50-60. We used
information on 30-40 year old women to extend the time series by two additional cohorts,
but these last two data points should be treated with caution, since not all women in
this group will have completed their fertility. This methodology led us to the age-census
combinations that are summarized in Table A1.
    For each cohort, the mean number of children ever born (CEB) was derived by com-
puting the weighted49 average of CEB for all women in that cohort who are married when
answering the census survey. Moreover, we included only women whose husbands have a
valid occupational income score.
    For some of the variables, we have to deviate from the age/cohort selections described
in Table A1 because data is not available for all pairs. The modifications are as follows.
Information on urban vs. rural is not available in the 1940 and 1950 census. Thus, all
  49
   The weights are provided in the census data and are needed to correct for over-sampling of certain
populations in some years.


                                                 58
               Table A1: Census Year and Age Group used for Each Cohort

                  Birth Cohort     Cohort Label       Age     Census Year     CEB
                    1816-1820           1818          80-84       1900         4.99
                    1821-1825           1823          75-79       1900         6.07
                    1826-1830           1828          70-74       1900         5.46
                    1831-1835           1833          65-69       1900         5.40
                    1836-1840           1838          60-64       1900         5.50
                    1841-1845           1843          55-59       1900         5.36
                    1846-1850           1848          50-54       1900         5.34
                    1851-1855           1853          45-49       1900         5.27
                    1856-1860           1858          40-44       1900         4.88
                    1861-1865           1863          45-49       1910         4.92
                    1866-1870           1868          40-44       1910         4.48
                    1871-1875           1873          65-69       1940         3.53
                    1876-1880           1878          60-64       1940         3.31
                    1881-1885           1883          55-59       1940         3.25
                    1886-1890           1888          50-54       1940         3.17
                    1891-1895           1893          45-49       1940         3.05
                    1896-1900           1898          40-44       1940         2.83
                    1901-1905           1903          45-49       1950         2.60
                    1906-1910           1908          40-44       1950         2.30
                    1911-1915           1913          45-49       1960         2.41
                    1916-1920           1918          40-44       1960         2.59
                    1921-1925           1923          45-49       1970         2.85
                    1926-1930           1928          40-44       1970         3.11
                    1931-1935           1933          45-49       1980         3.21
                    1936-1940           1938          40-44       1980         3.02
                    1941-1945           1943          45-49       1990         2.56
                    1946-1950           1948          40-44       1990         2.22
                    1951-1955           1953          35-39       1990         2.05
                    1956-1960           1958          30-35       1990         1.81

Note: CEB designates the average number of Children ever Born per woman per cohort. Census year
indicates the date on which the census that is used as source for the calculations took place. The age
refers to the age of the women when the census took place. Source: Authors’ calculations based on US
Census, several years.
                                                 59
                  Table A2: Modifications for urban/rural Sub-Groups

                               Cohort   Census Year       age
                                 1878             1960   80-84
                                 1883             1960   75-79
                                 1888             1960   70-74
                                 1893             1960   65-69
                                 1898             1960   60-64
                                 1903             1960   55-59
                                 1908             1960   50-54



cohorts that are based on information from these two censuses in the main data need to be
derived from a different age/census combination for information on urban/rural fertility.
We use instead the 1960 census, and respectively older ages. Moreover, we excluded the
1873 cohort entirely. The modifications we made for the urban/rural Sub-Groups are
listed in Table A2.
    Information on immigration is not available in the 1980 and 1990 census. Thus, we
used only the cohorts between 1828 and 1928 reported in Table A1. We added one
additional cohort by looking at 35-39 year old women in the 1970 census, which allows us
to include the 1933 cohort, the peak of the baby boom.
    Similarly, education data is not available for all years because information on education
was collected beginning only with the 1940 census. The 1950 census data has information
on education only on one (randomly drawn) person in a household, which means that
there is never information on both spouses simultaneously. We therefore had to make
some replacements for the 1903 and 1908 cohorts as well. The age/cohort combinations
used for the education analysis are listed in Table A3.
    For any calculations based on OIS deciles, we always compute the deciles first within
each group (i.e. age/cohort or age/cohort/race etc.) and then calculate means of all
observations that do not have a missing CEB entry. That is, we make no correction for
any bias in answering these questions.
    The income elasticities reported are regression coefficients from the following regres-
sions:
                           log(CEBit ) = b0t + b1t log(OIit ) + ²it

where each observation it is an average of all women with husbands in the i-th decile of

                                             60
                          Table A3: Cohorts for Education Data

                 cohort    age   census year        cohort   age census year
                  1868      72         1940          1918    42        1960
                  1873      67         1940          1923    47        1970
                  1878      62         1940          1928    42        1970
                  1883      57         1940          1933    47        1980
                  1888      52         1940          1938    42        1980
                  1893      47         1940          1943    47        1990
                  1898      42         1940          1948    42        1990
                  1903      57         1960          1953    37        1990
                  1908      52         1960          1958    32        1990
                  1913      47         1960



the occupational income distribution in year t. We run this regression based on averages
rather than individual observations both because this approach allows us to handle the
10-20% of women with zero children and also because OIit is likely to suffer from errors
in variables. This methodology seems reasonable given that we are more interested in
planned fertility than realized fertility.


B     Additional Data




                                               61
                             Table A4: CEB by Decile, all Cohorts

          Cohort      D1      D2      D3     D4      D5     D6      D7     D8      D9    D10
           1828      5.42    6.22   6.22    6.22   6.22    5.89   5.88    4.96    4.77   4.07
           1833      6.20    5.83   5.83    5.83   5.83    5.63   5.09    4.70    5.03   4.51
           1838      5.57    5.94   5.94    5.94   5.94    5.46   5.49    4.93    5.18   4.57
           1843      5.72    5.79   5.79    5.79   5.73    5.51   5.12    5.29    4.85   4.32
           1848      5.72    6.12   6.12    6.12   5.83    5.36   4.80    4.81    4.55   4.12
           1853      6.07    6.12   6.12    6.12   5.50    5.15   4.99    4.87    4.35   3.71
           1858      5.69    5.69   5.69    5.69   4.84    4.51   4.61    4.59    4.01   3.69
           1863      5.66    5.97   5.97    5.93   5.22    4.29   4.39    4.35    4.10   3.78
           1868      5.19    5.47   5.47    4.92   4.61    4.20   4.11    4.00    3.56   3.44
           1873      3.96    4.20   4.20    3.76   3.45    3.13   3.26    2.73    2.84   2.61
           1878      3.84    4.13   4.13    3.62   3.17    3.12   2.83    2.77    2.42   2.45
           1883      4.20    4.18   3.93    3.62   3.17    2.81   2.72    2.51    2.61   2.41
           1888      3.99    4.04   3.51    3.80   3.03    2.88   2.90    2.54    2.49   2.32
           1893      3.95    3.99   3.38    3.26   2.98    2.89   2.81    2.43    2.47   2.32
           1898      3.76    4.07   3.12    2.83   2.66    2.57   2.53    2.43    2.22   2.04
           1903      3.52    3.14   2.78    2.64   2.46    2.41   2.55    2.28    2.12   1.96
           1908      3.14    2.72   2.46    2.37   2.25    2.25   2.23    2.04    1.77   1.79
           1913      3.27    2.68   2.46    2.36   2.36    2.38   2.33    2.13    2.04   2.05
           1918      3.28    2.83   2.64    2.56   2.51    2.57   2.48    2.37    2.33   2.36
           1923      3.30    3.01   2.98    2.73   2.83    2.88   2.70    2.66    2.67   2.72
           1928      3.54    3.33   3.21    3.04   3.12    3.11   3.02    2.91    2.89   2.92
           1933      3.49    3.41   3.22    3.31   3.20    3.21   3.10    3.07    2.98   2.97
           1938      3.35    3.24   3.02    3.18   3.04    3.02   2.89    2.88    2.77   2.73
           1943      2.89    2.76   2.56    2.65   2.57    2.53   2.41    2.37    2.37   2.35
           1948      2.48    2.46   2.23    2.28   2.29    2.12   2.14    2.07    2.06   2.05
           1953      2.27    2.20   2.05    2.12   2.08    2.02   1.98    1.94    1.91   1.89
           1958      2.03    1.99   1.86    1.87   1.83    1.78   1.74    1.66    1.67   1.58

Note: Each cohort groups five years, and its label is the mid-point (See Table 4). D1 . . . D10 refers to
deciles which are calculated based on Occupational Income as defined in Section 4.1. Source: Authors’
calculations based on US Census, several years.



                                                   62
                   Table A5: Income Elasticities of CEB by Birth Cohorts

                                Cohort     CEB       OI      Elasticity
                                 1828      5.59     4154        -0.33
                                 1833      5.45     4587        -0.24
                                 1838      5.49     5064        -0.20
                                 1843      5.39     5591        -0.22
                                 1848      5.36     6173        -0.32
                                 1853      5.30     6816        -0.38
                                 1858      4.90     7525        -0.35
                                 1863      4.97     8308        -0.35
                                 1868      4.50     9173        -0.34
                                 1873      3.41    10128        -0.37
                                 1878      3.25    11182        -0.42
                                 1883      3.22    12346        -0.47
                                 1888      3.15    13631        -0.45
                                 1893      3.05    15050        -0.44
                                 1898      2.82    16616        -0.50
                                 1903      2.59    18345        -0.41
                                 1908      2.30    20255        -0.42
                                 1913      2.41    22363        -0.35
                                 1918      2.59    24690        -0.25
                                 1923      2.85    27260        -0.17
                                 1928      3.11    30097        -0.17
                                 1933      3.20    33230        -0.16
                                 1938      3.01    36688        -0.19
                                 1943      2.54    40507        -0.21
                                 1948      2.22    44723        -0.20
                                 1953      2.05    49378        -0.17
                                 1958      1.80    54517        -0.22

Note: CEB indicates average Children ever Born and OI is average Occupational Income per cohort.
Cohorts comprise five years each (labelled by the mid-point), and the construction of the variable OI is
described in Section 4.1. The income elasticity is estimated with a log-log regression of CEB on OI where
each observation corresponds to the average CEB and OI of an income decile within the cohort. Source:
Authors’ calculations based on US Census, several years.


                                                   63
                      Table A6: Average CEB by Cohorts and Sub-Groups


 coh.    all     R       U     W       B    NE     ENC     SA    WSC    NAT    FP     FB     NF       F
 1828   5.59   5.92    4.67   5.46   7.12   3.44   5.22   6.46   6.46   5.49   7.24   5.67   4.97   6.09
 1833   5.45   5.66    4.98   5.24   7.93   4.21   5.42   6.21   6.79   5.30   5.64   5.72   5.11   5.79
 1838   5.49   5.67    5.10   5.36   7.02   4.29   5.45   6.02   6.64   5.34   5.05   5.93   5.07   5.92
 1843   5.39   5.59    5.01   5.29   6.64   3.95   5.19   6.07   6.42   5.17   4.87   6.09   5.00   5.81
 1848   5.36   5.74    4.73   5.18   7.25   3.66   5.12   6.56   6.82   5.25   4.98   5.75   4.82   6.03
 1853   5.30   5.78    4.55   5.14   6.93   4.06   4.89   6.27   6.98   5.21   4.87   5.80   4.70   6.10
 1858   4.90   5.38    4.22   4.76   6.50   3.83   4.45   6.16   6.17   4.81   4.55   5.45   4.38   5.68
 1863   4.97   5.57    4.29   4.80   6.62   4.06   4.44   6.29   6.61   4.92   4.30   5.62   4.41   5.97
 1868   4.50   5.05    3.92   4.37   5.91   3.81   4.05   5.60   5.96   4.48   3.91   5.02   4.07   5.39
 1873   3.41      –       –   3.29   5.41   3.27   2.69   4.50   4.54   3.38   3.23   3.94   3.02   4.19
 1878   3.25   3.62    2.83   3.21   3.93   2.79   2.99   4.28   4.25   3.21   3.07   3.64   2.82   4.19
 1883   3.22   3.64    2.71   3.15   4.21   2.88   2.78   4.01   4.23   3.27   2.65   3.66   2.85   4.16
 1888   3.15   3.60    2.68   3.11   3.73   3.05   2.97   3.68   3.86   3.12   2.93   3.53   2.81   4.12
 1893   3.05   3.54    2.50   3.01   3.49   2.86   2.89   3.58   3.48   3.02   2.79   3.42   2.76   3.99
 1898   2.82   3.31    2.30   2.78   3.21   2.61   2.72   3.33   3.17   2.93   2.55   2.80   2.48   4.04
 1903   2.59   3.17    2.15   2.56   2.87   2.49   2.48   2.97   2.82   2.69   2.40   2.44   2.35   3.73
 1908   2.30   3.00    2.07   2.26   2.78   2.11   2.25   2.60   2.43   2.40   2.09   2.19   2.12   3.36
 1913   2.41   2.99    2.14   2.36   2.92   2.30   2.37   2.57   2.62   2.50   2.18   2.24   2.31   3.23
 1918   2.59   3.11    2.37   2.55   3.04   2.43   2.59   2.71   2.82   2.68   2.38   2.38   2.51   3.41
 1923   2.85   3.24    2.71   2.80   3.43   2.85   2.90   2.81   2.96   2.92   2.68   2.57   2.81   3.45
 1928   3.11   3.41    2.99   3.04   3.86   3.10   3.19   3.04   3.26   3.17   3.00   2.77   3.08   3.67
 1933   3.20   3.37    3.12   3.14   3.92   3.25   3.36   3.01   3.27   3.20   3.08   2.78   3.18   3.55
 1938   3.01   3.14    2.96   2.96   3.61   2.99   3.11   2.84   3.17      –      –      –   3.00   3.29
 1943   2.54   2.68    2.49   2.52   2.86   2.48   2.61   2.40   2.65      –      –      –   2.53   2.94
 1948   2.22   2.31    2.18   2.19   2.54   2.11   2.29   2.10   2.33      –      –      –   2.21   2.57
 1953   2.05   2.13    2.01   2.03   2.28   1.89   2.11   1.91   2.18      –      –      –   2.04   2.45
 1958   1.80   1.94    1.75   1.79   1.97   1.65   1.87   1.67   1.90      –      –      –   1.79   2.33

Note: Cohorts comprise five years each (labelled by the mid-point). CEB=Children ever born, R=Rural,
U=Urban, W=White, B=Black, NE=New England, ENC=East North Central, SA=South Atlantic,
WSC=West South Central, NAT=U.S. born, U.S. parents, FP=U.S. born, foreign parents, FB=Foreign
born, NF=Non-Farm, F=Farm. Source: Authors’ calculations based on US Census, several years.




                                                   64
Table A7: Fertility Gap between Bottom and Top Half of the Income Distribution by
Cohorts and Sub-Groups


 Coh.     all     R      U     W        B     NE     ENC      SA    WSC    NAT     FP     FB     NF        F
 1828    0.95   0.46   0.23   0.87    0.86   -0.09    0.19   0.33   0.59   1.16   -1.39   0.57   1.26   -0.08
 1833    0.91   0.64   0.76   0.71    1.06    0.75    0.29   1.32   0.64   1.26    0.14   0.48   0.69    0.13
 1838    0.74   0.39   0.32   0.62   -0.12    0.00   -0.21   0.13   1.18   0.80    1.03   0.29   0.38    0.08
 1843    0.74   0.48   0.56   0.64    0.78    0.27    0.20   0.39   0.52   0.94   -0.43   0.81   0.56    0.00
 1848    1.26   0.60   0.66   1.07    1.01    0.89    0.60   0.89   1.24   1.57    0.89   0.50   0.67    0.15
 1853    1.37   0.74   0.77   1.22    1.51    0.66    0.70   1.70   0.99   1.81    0.67   0.83   0.82    0.14
 1858    1.24   0.65   0.46   1.10    1.55    0.00    0.77   1.24   1.05   1.68    0.63   0.51   0.59    0.05
 1863    1.57   0.81   0.43   1.24    1.88    0.40    0.94   1.59   1.88   1.95    0.67   0.64   0.56    0.22
 1868    1.27   0.77   0.62   1.11    1.31    0.55    0.77   1.27   1.73   1.76    0.95   0.43   0.75    0.13
 1873    1.00      –      –   0.82    0.46    0.52    0.35   1.88   0.24   1.34    0.47   0.83   0.60    0.01
 1878    1.06   1.56   0.30   0.98    1.15    0.70    0.55   1.63   0.97   1.39    0.63   1.00   0.56    0.00
 1883    1.21   0.53   0.70   1.11    2.04    1.25    0.74   1.57   1.51   1.23    0.98   1.37   0.71    0.09
 1888    1.05   0.71   0.41   0.99    1.28    0.97    0.91   0.96   1.11   1.16    0.99   0.85   0.64    0.11
 1893    0.93   0.71   0.51   0.87    1.79    0.54    0.45   1.18   1.46   0.98    0.63   0.87   0.56    0.25
 1898    0.93   0.77   0.36   0.90    0.46   -0.02    0.53   1.42   1.07   1.05    0.60   0.61   0.42    0.14
 1903    0.64   0.72   0.40   0.61    1.01    0.41    0.28   0.98   0.91   0.71    0.41   0.47   0.32    0.18
 1908    0.57   0.73   0.29   0.54    0.49    0.00    0.51   0.83   0.71   0.63    0.39   0.44   0.33    0.09
 1913    0.44   0.69   0.17   0.39    0.62    0.14    0.24   0.68   0.71   0.51    0.22   0.43   0.30    0.34
 1918    0.34   0.56   0.11   0.28    0.71   -0.03    0.14   0.59   0.72   0.41    0.14   0.19   0.21    0.30
 1923    0.24   0.43   0.12   0.18    0.48    0.04    0.11   0.52   0.49   0.31    0.02   0.20   0.21    0.13
 1928    0.27   0.50   0.16   0.19    0.27    0.01    0.17   0.45   0.66   0.32    0.12   0.29   0.25    0.24
 1933    0.26   0.34   0.21   0.18    0.47    0.11    0.20   0.33   0.46   0.29    0.18   0.36   0.24    0.23
 1938    0.31   0.32   0.28   0.26    0.29    0.23    0.20   0.37   0.45      –       –      –   0.30    0.42
 1943    0.28   0.23   0.28   0.27    0.36    0.09    0.17   0.27   0.45      –       –      –   0.28    0.10
 1948    0.26   0.26   0.23   0.23    0.41    0.11    0.19   0.24   0.38      –       –      –   0.26    0.24
 1953    0.20   0.16   0.21   0.19    0.15    0.11    0.11   0.17   0.30      –       –      –   0.19    0.47
 1958    0.23   0.17   0.25   0.21    0.24    0.22    0.15   0.24   0.22      –       –      –   0.23    0.19

Note: The fertility gap is calculated as the difference in average Children ever Born (CEB) between the
bottom and top half of the income distribution, where income is measured according to Occupational
Income (OI) as described in Section 4.1. Cohorts comprise five years each (labelled by the mid-point).
R=Rural, U=Urban, W=White, B=Black, NE=New England, ENC=East North Central, SA=South
Atlantic, WSC=West South Central, NAT=U.S. born, U.S. parents, FP= U.S. born, foreign parents,
FB=Foreign born, NF=Non-Farm, F=Farm. Source: Authors’ calculations based on US Census, several
years.


                                                     65
                Table A8: Income Elasticities by Birth Cohort and Sub-Groups


 coh.     all       R       U      W        B     NE      ENC      SA     WSC     NAT      FP      FB      NF        F
 1828   -0.33    -0.24   -0.07   -0.29   -0.17    0.51    -0.15   -0.20   -0.27   -0.41   -0.08   -0.21   -0.31    0.06
 1833   -0.24    -0.21   -0.22   -0.19   -0.42   -0.20    -0.09   -0.53   -0.36   -0.37    0.08   -0.13   -0.25   -0.20
 1838   -0.20    -0.20   -0.11   -0.16    0.11   -0.08     0.02   -0.11   -0.39   -0.26   -0.22   -0.10   -0.05   -0.13
 1843   -0.22    -0.21   -0.22   -0.20   -0.23   -0.05    -0.07   -0.11   -0.09   -0.25   -0.12   -0.21   -0.21    0.01
 1848   -0.32    -0.29   -0.30   -0.28   -0.29   -0.28    -0.16   -0.33   -0.43   -0.46   -0.19   -0.15   -0.23   -0.31
 1853   -0.38    -0.31   -0.35   -0.34   -0.42   -0.15    -0.24   -0.59   -0.31   -0.50   -0.27   -0.23   -0.31   -0.21
 1858   -0.35    -0.26   -0.28   -0.32   -0.39   -0.23    -0.24   -0.30   -0.26   -0.44   -0.26   -0.20   -0.25   -0.09
 1863   -0.35    -0.33   -0.21   -0.30   -0.52   -0.09    -0.23   -0.37   -0.46   -0.49   -0.26   -0.18   -0.20   -0.28
 1868   -0.34    -0.27   -0.31   -0.33   -0.32   -0.15    -0.26   -0.27   -0.42   -0.43   -0.34   -0.16   -0.28   -0.28
 1873   -0.37        –       –   -0.33   -0.27   -0.18    -0.17   -0.52   -0.01   -0.42   -0.35   -0.30   -0.32   -0.02
 1878   -0.42    -0.46   -0.30   -0.42   -0.52   -0.47    -0.30   -0.54   -0.29   -0.50   -0.28   -0.40   -0.30   -0.02
 1883   -0.47    -0.20   -0.44   -0.44   -0.75   -0.75    -0.37   -0.47   -0.44   -0.46   -0.51   -0.50   -0.40   -0.04
 1888   -0.45    -0.31   -0.30   -0.44   -0.46   -0.54    -0.43   -0.48   -0.37   -0.49   -0.49   -0.36   -0.38   -0.12
 1893   -0.44    -0.29   -0.35   -0.43   -0.63   -0.19    -0.28   -0.54   -0.53   -0.46   -0.39   -0.38   -0.35   -0.21
 1898   -0.50    -0.34   -0.33   -0.50   -0.23   -0.10    -0.38   -0.64   -0.39   -0.50   -0.48   -0.44   -0.32   -0.17
 1903   -0.41    -0.33   -0.36   -0.41   -0.47   -0.37    -0.30   -0.52   -0.40   -0.42   -0.35   -0.34   -0.27   -0.06
 1908   -0.42    -0.37   -0.30   -0.42   -0.29   -0.12    -0.38   -0.48   -0.41   -0.42   -0.37   -0.31   -0.30   -0.11
 1913   -0.35    -0.34   -0.17   -0.32   -0.44   -0.16    -0.27   -0.44   -0.44   -0.37   -0.22   -0.31   -0.28   -0.25
 1918   -0.25    -0.27   -0.10   -0.22   -0.42   -0.02    -0.15   -0.33   -0.36   -0.27   -0.17   -0.17   -0.18   -0.20
 1923   -0.17    -0.23   -0.09   -0.14   -0.32   -0.05    -0.10   -0.30   -0.25   -0.20   -0.05   -0.15   -0.16   -0.11
 1928   -0.17    -0.24   -0.11   -0.13   -0.33   -0.02    -0.13   -0.24   -0.32   -0.19   -0.10   -0.22   -0.16   -0.11
 1933   -0.16    -0.18   -0.14   -0.12   -0.23   -0.06    -0.12   -0.21   -0.25   -0.16   -0.13   -0.16   -0.15   -0.10
 1938   -0.19    -0.18   -0.17   -0.17   -0.20   -0.15    -0.13   -0.22   -0.27       –       –       –   -0.19   -0.16
 1943   -0.21    -0.17   -0.21   -0.19   -0.27   -0.12    -0.15   -0.20   -0.31       –       –       –   -0.21   -0.05
 1948   -0.20    -0.20   -0.19   -0.18   -0.28   -0.11    -0.15   -0.19   -0.29       –       –       –   -0.20   -0.13
 1953   -0.17    -0.17   -0.17   -0.16   -0.16   -0.09    -0.11   -0.14   -0.25       –       –       –   -0.16   -0.24
 1958   -0.22    -0.18   -0.22   -0.21   -0.25   -0.22    -0.16   -0.23   -0.22       –       –       –   -0.22   -0.11

Note: Cohorts comprise five years each (labeled by the mid-point). The income elasticity is estimated
with a log-log regression of Children ever Born (CEB) on Occupational Income (OI) where each ob-
servation corresponds to the average CEB and OI of an income decile within the cohort. R=Rural,
U=Urban, W=White, B=Black, NE=New England, ENC=East North Central, SA=South Atlantic,
WSC=West South Central, NAT=U.S. born, U.S. parents, FP=U.S. born, foreign parents, FB=Foreign
born, NF=Non-Farm, F=Farm. Source: Authors’ calculations based on US Census, several years.




                                                     66
C            Robustness
Actual income data is available from the 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990 censuses. Using
the same age-cohort pairs as in the paper, this allows us to construct CEB estimates by
income deciles for the all cohorts between 1913-1958. In line with our previous analysis,
we use information on husband’s income only. We employ the variable INCTOT, which
reports each respondent’s total pre-tax personal income or losses from all sources for the
previous year. Using current income as an alternative measure of life-time income, we
recompute the fertility gap between the top and bottom halves of the income distribution
and re-estimate the income elasticity of fertility. Figures 15 and 16 compare the new
estimates with the original ones.

              Figure 15: CEB gap top vs. bottom of income distribution, OI vs. Income

                                                      CEB gap
           0.60

                                                                          INC deciles
           0.50
                                                                          OIS deciles



           0.40
 CEB gap




           0.30


           0.20


           0.10


           0.00
                   1913     1918     1923     1928       1933     1938     1943          1948     1953     1958
                  (1960)   (1960)   (1970)   (1970)     (1980)   (1980)   (1990)        (1990)   (1990)   (1990)
                                                            cohort


   As the figures show, the fertility gap between top and bottom halves of the actual
income distribution fell be an even larger amount between the 1913 and the 1958 cohorts
than the gap as measured by our constructed occupational income. The gap as measured
by current income is a fall of 65% compared to a 50% fall when income is approximated
by OI. Similarly, our estimated income elasticities fall by a large amount from the 1913 to


                                                           67
                                      Figure 16: Income Elasticity of Fertility, OI vs. Income

                      0.00



                     -0.05



                     -0.10
 Income Elasticity




                     -0.15



                     -0.20



                     -0.25



                     -0.30

                                                                                                            INC deciles
                     -0.35                                                                                  OIS deciles


                     -0.40
                              1913     1918     1923       1928     1933          1938     1943     1948        1953       1958
                             (1960)   (1960)   (1970)     (1970)   (1980)        (1980)   (1990)   (1990)      (1990)     (1990)
                                                        Birth Cohort (Census Year)



the 1958 cohorts, both when life-time income is proxied by current income (fall of 47%)
and when OI is used as a proxy (fall of 22%).
    One thing to note based on Figure 10 is that although the overall pattern of reduced
elasticity is the same in both measures, the elasticities when estimated using current
income are systematically lower. This is somewhat troubling and warrants both further
discussion and further exploration. There are several possible reasons for this finding:
    First, there are errors in variables problems in using one year of income data. That
is, what most economic models would say that fertility depends on is the present value of
the entire stream of incomes over the lifetime. Since incomes do vary year to year, using
any one entry from this sequence will be an imperfect measure of true economic wealth
– it proxies for wealth with error. As is well known, this will bias coefficient estimates
toward zero. OIS suffers from similar problems, but is, perhaps, more immune.
    A second, related problem is that income changes systematically over the life cycle,
first rising and then falling after reaching a peak at around age 55. Moreover, this pattern
is systematically related to the type of occupation one is in – high paying occupations
have steeper life cycle profiles, low paying ones are flatter.50 Because of this, and because
 50
                     See Buttet and Schoonbroodt (2005), Figure 34, for evidence on this.



                                                                            68
we are only using data on women who are at least 40 (and their husbands are likely even
older) the one year of income that we use is near the peak of their life cycle earnings.
While this is a good proxy for true wealth for individuals with flat profiles (i.e., low income
earners) it is upward biased for individuals with steep profiles (i.e., high income earners).
This will also cause the estimates based on current income to be biased down.
   These points do not resolve the issue, and it is possible that the estimates based on
occupation are too high. This is clearly an area where more work would be fruitful.


D       Definitions of Fertility Measures
Demographers use a variety of different measures to summarize the fertility behavior of a
population over time. The most popular measures are the Crude Birth Rate (CBR) and
the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) which is sometimes also known as Period Total Fertility
Rate. These are both point in time estimates of average fertility in a population in that
they are calculated for a given year using only data on fertility from that year.
    The CBR is simply the number of children born in a year divided by the number of
women in the population. This measure is useful for studying overall population dynamics
but can be misleading as a measure of fertility. For example, CBR could be low in a given
year either because women of child bearing ages are choosing to have a small number of
children or because there are many women in the population who have already completed
their fertility.
    TFR attempts to correct for some of these weaknesses by correcting for the age distri-
bution dependence of CBR. It does this by constructing age dependent fertility rates at
a point in time and then summing them over ages. In this way, if, for example, there is
an unusually large number of women in the population that are not of child bearing age
TFR is unaffected. Formally, let fa,t be the number of children born to women of age a
in period t divided by the number of women of age a in period t. Then T F Rt is defined
                 P
as:51 T F Rt = a=49a=15 fa,t .
    Note that since this measure uses data from different birth cohorts at a given point in
time (i.e., it mixes cohorts) it will be a misleading measure of actual fertility choices in
periods when fertility is changing from cohort to cohort. Examples include the Fertility
Transition, the Baby Busts and the Baby Boom. If fertility choices are stable across time,
however, TFR gives an accurate measure of the number of children a typical woman will
  51
   Typically these age specific fertility rates are constructed for bands of ages of width 5 years and then
summed. The limits of the sum, a = 15 to a = 49, are the ones usually used.


                                                    69
have over her life.
   An alternative that is not used often is the Cohort Total Fertility Rate, defined as:
                    Pa=49
        CT F Rt =    a=15   fa,t+a .

    This would be a measure of the lifetime fertility experience of the average woman born
in period t (i.e., in the t-th birth cohort). Cohort TFR’s are favored by some Demogra-
phers (see Ryder (1969, 1980 and 1986)) for analyzing fertility, but we do not know of
any source that has constructed any long time series of CTFR for the US. The difficulty
is that the census tracks only living people, not actual births, so that in periods in which
infant and child mortality is significant many births never get counted. Unfortunately,
actual Births and Deaths were not recorded in much of the US until the 1930’s.
    Other measures of fertility have also been proposed to try and adjust TFR for the fact
that it tracks only a synthetic cohort. These include TFR* (see Bongaarts and Feeney
(1998)) and Average Cohort Fertility (ACF) (see Schoen (2004)).
    Completed Fertility (CF) is the number of children that a woman has had when she is
done having children, and, as such, is the measure that is closest to what most economists
have in mind when writing models of fertility choice. One difficulty is that one can never
be completely sure that a woman has completed her fertility, so that age must be used
as a proxy for this. This points to using as high an age as possible, but, if the assumed
completion age is too high a substantial number of women will have died. If age at death
is correlated with fertility choice, this introduces a bias.
    The measure that we use, Children Ever Born (CEB), is most closely related to CF
in that it is a self reported measure of CF for those women surveyed. Thus, it suffers
from the same imperfections that CF does, but is available for a long period and can be
checked for robustness to the choice of completion age by examining its value for the same
birth cohort with data from different censuses.
    Another issue that arises is the treatment of women that die during child-bearing years
either from childbirth itself, or from other causes. These women will not be counted in
a measure like CF or CEB, but would be in TFR or CTFR, at least for part of their
reproductive lives. Whether or not this is an important shortcoming is likely to depend
on what one is trying to model in the first place. That is, is the goal to try and model the
expected number of children, or the expected number of children conditional on survival
to completion of fertility? If it is the latter, then CF (and CEB) will provide unbiased
estimates of this concept (subject to the proviso about death rates being uncorrelated
with fertility choice).

                                            70
E   Additional Figures




                         71
                                                    Figure A1: CEB based on different Censuses
                     6
                                                      (numbers indicate age of women when answering survey)
                            72


                                                   52
                     5 82                                                                                             CEB for various ages
                                         92
                                                                                                                      CEB data used
                                                                42
                                                         37
                     4            102
Children Ever born




                                              87         97               77
                                                   82
                                                                72
                     3                                   77               87                         42                                  42
                                                                               32
                                                                                    87     82   77                                  32
                                                         102
                                                                     97                              82   67
                                                   102                         92               87                     77
                     2                                                                                           82
                                                                                                     92   87                32
                                                                                                                 32                             32
                                  97                            92

                                                         87
                     1




                     0
                            102
                     1828              1848                   1868                       1888                  1908              1928         1948
                                                                                     Birth Cohort
                               Figure A2: Distribution of CEB over Time
                      80
                                                                   0 children
                      70                                           1 child
                                                                   2 children
                                                                   3 children
                      60                                           4+ children
Percentage of Women




                      50

                      40

                      30

                      20

                      10

                       0
                      1818   1838   1858    1878 1898       1918     1938   1958
                                            Birth Cohort
                                                                                            Figure A3
                            Birth Cohort 1828                                Birth Cohort 1838                                Birth Cohort 1848                                Birth Cohort 1858                                Birth Cohort 1868

                      40                                               40                                               40                                               40                                               40

Percentage of Women




                                                 Percentage of Women




                                                                                                  Percentage of Women




                                                                                                                                                   Percentage of Women




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Percentage of Women
                      30                                               30                                               30                                               30                                               30

                      20                                               20                                               20                                               20                                               20

                      10                                               10                                               10                                               10                                               10

                      0                                                0                                                0                                                0                                                0
                           0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20
                            Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children
                            Birth Cohort 1878                                Birth Cohort 1888                                Birth Cohort 1898                                Birth Cohort 1908                                Birth Cohort 1918

                      40                                               40                                               40                                               40                                               40
Percentage of Women




                                                 Percentage of Women




                                                                                                  Percentage of Women




                                                                                                                                                   Percentage of Women




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Percentage of Women
                      30                                               30                                               30                                               30                                               30

                      20                                               20                                               20                                               20                                               20

                      10                                               10                                               10                                               10                                               10

                      0                                                0                                                0                                                0                                                0
                           0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20
                            Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children
                            Birth Cohort 1928                                Birth Cohort 1938                                Birth Cohort 1948                                Birth Cohort 1953                                Birth Cohort 1958

                      40                                               40                                               40                                               40                                               40
Percentage of Women




                                                 Percentage of Women




                                                                                                  Percentage of Women




                                                                                                                                                   Percentage of Women




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Percentage of Women
                      30                                               30                                               30                                               30                                               30

                      20                                               20                                               20                                               20                                               20

                      10                                               10                                               10                                               10                                               10

                      0                                                0                                                0                                                0                                                0
                           0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20                               0 2 4 810 13 16 20
                            Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children                               Number of Children
                                         Figure A4 (a): Children ever Born                                                                 Figure A4 (b): Children ever Born
                                              by Immigration Status                                                                                    by Region
                     7.5                                                                                               7.5



                     6.5                                             Overall                                                                                              Overall
                                                                                                                       6.5
                                                                     US born, US parents                                                                                  New England
                                                                                                                                                                          East North Central
                                                                     US born, Foreign parents
Children ever Born




                                                                                                  Children ever Born
                     5.5                                                                                               5.5                                                South Atlantic
                                                                     Foreign born                                                                                         West South Central

                     4.5                                                                                               4.5



                     3.5                                                                                               3.5



                     2.5                                                                                               2.5



                     1.5                                                                                               1.5
                           1828   1843       1858      1873     1888       1903     1918   1933                              1828   1843   1858   1873     1888    1903     1918    1933   1948
                                                      Birth Cohort                                                                                       Birth Cohort
                                   Figure A5: CEB by Decile and Birth Cohort
                     7


                                                                                  Decile 1
                     6                                                            Decile 3
                                                                                  Decile 5
                                                                                  Decile 7
                                                                                  Decile 9
Children ever Born




                     5                                                            Decile 10




                     4




                     3




                     2




                     1
                     1828   1848        1868        1888          1908         1928           1948

                                                   Birth Cohort
                                    Figure A6: CEB by Education of Husband
                      6
                                            Years of schooling
                     5.5
                                                      0          2.5
                                                      6.5        9
                      5
                                                      10         11
                                                      12         14
                     4.5                              16
Children ever Born




                      4


                     3.5


                      3


                     2.5


                      2


                     1.5


                      1
                      1868   1878    1888   1898        1908           1918   1928   1938   1948   1958
                                                   Birth Cohort
                               Figure A7: CEB Gap between Bottom and Top Half of Income Distribution
                                                           by Region
                     2.2

                                                                                   New England
                                                                                   East North Central
                     1.7                                                           South Atlantic
                                                                                   West South Central
                                                                                   Overall
Children ever Born




                     1.2




                     0.7




                     0.2


                        1828          1848        1868        1888          1908       1928             1948

                     -0.3
                                                             Birth Cohort
