                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          OPTIMAL EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION VS. MANAGERIAL POWER:

A REVIEW OF LUCIAN BEBCHUK AND JESSE FRIED'S "PAY WITHOUT PERFORMANCE:
         THE UNFULFILLED PROMISE OF EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION"

                                         Michael S. Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 12798
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12798


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




I would like to thank Lucian Bebchuk and Jesse Fried for pointing out a number of mistakes in an
earlier draft of this review. In addition, many thanks go to Ben Hermalin for his substantial comments,
and more importantly, for his influence on my views on corporate governance that are reflected throughout
this review. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Optimal Executive Compensation vs. Managerial Power: A Review of Lucian Bebchuk and
Jesse Fried's "Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation"
Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 12798
December 2006
JEL No. G3,J4,K22

                                              ABSTRACT

This essay reviews Bebchuk and Fried's "Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive
Compensation". Bebchuk and Fried criticize the standard view of executive compensation, in which
executives negotiate contracts with shareholders that provide incentives that motivate them to maximize
the shareholders' welfare. In contrast, Bebchuk and Fried argue that executive compensation is more
consistent with executives who control their own boards, and who maximize their own compensation
subject to an "outrage constraint". They provide a host of evidence consistent with this alternative
viewpoint. The book can be evaluated from both a positive and a normative perspective. From
a positive perspective, much of the evidence they present, especially about the camouflage and risk-taking
aspects of executive compensation systems, is fairly persuasive. However, from a normative perspective,
the book conveys the idea that policy changes can dramatically improve executive compensation systems
and consequently overall corporate performance. It is unclear to me how effective in practice are potential
reforms designed to achieve such changes likely to be.

Michael S. Weisbach
University Of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu
        Over the last few years, corporate governance has become a popular topic in both the

business and academic presses. The large number of high-publicity scandals, the seemingly

enormous salaries paid to executives, and the celebrity status of CEOs has created unprecedented

public interest in corporate governance. All this attention highlights the importance of corporate

governance in a well-functioning capitalist economy. The fundamental welfare theorems that justify

competition in terms of general welfare presuppose that the internal organization of the firm is such

that the desire for profit maximization by firms’ security holders translates into efficient business

decisions. In other words, corporate governance is a crucially necessary ingredient to a capitalist

economy when the predominant form of organization is the corporation.

        Thus, the attention given to corporate governance by the public at large is well-deserved, and,

in my opinion, long overdue. Not surprisingly, the public attention given governance has coincided

with an astronomical boom in research about governance by economists. To an economist, corporate

governance provides a natural subject for study, both because the issues in it are incredibly

interesting and important, and because it provides a place where our knowledge can provide guidance

to practitioners and policy-makers.

        The appropriate approach to creating an economic model of governance is, however, not

obvious. An ideal model of governance would contain managers whose interests are not aligned with

shareholders, as well as shareholders who wish to maximize profits but face coordination and

information problems, and to the extent that they can exercise control, must do it through a self-

interested board of directors. This ideal model contains too many elements to be useful in most

settings; consequently, economists typically make compromises and concentrate their efforts on

some parts of it.




                                                    1
        The most common approach to modeling governance is to assume away all coordination

problems between shareholders and the board entirely, and to presume that the shareholders agree on

an optimal incentive contract with the CEO. At first glance, this approach seems a natural one:

Since it is infeasible for shareholders to agree on every business decision, they delegate decision

rights to executives, through their voting for the board of directors. Principal-agent theory provides a

way of characterizing optimal contracts in this situation, which has been applied extensively in this

literature. This approach was the foundation for the calls from economists for companies to have

stronger links between pay and performance (Jensen and Murphy (1990)), and undoubtedly helped

lead to the large increase in option-based executive compensation during the 1990s.

        However, it is not the case that the principal-agent approach, in which management receives

an optimal incentive contract given the underlying contracting problem, is an accurate, or even a

particularly useful way to characterize executive compensation. The principal-agent approach

presumes that observed contracts are an optimal response to the contracting environment. But what

if they are not optimal? Even a casual reading of the business press indicates that many CEOs have a

great deal of control over their boards, and thus over the process by which their own pay is

determined. An alternative approach to the principal-agent model involves explicitly recognizing

that the contracts between CEOs and their firms are not those that would occur if CEOs bargained at

arms-length with shareholders interested in maximizing profits. It is possible that the contracts we

observe in practice represent something more like what is often described in the business press, in

which managers extract enormous sums of money through their control of their own pay-setting

process.

        This alternative view concerning executive compensation has been developed by Lucian

Bebchuk and Jesse Fried (sometimes with other coauthors as well) in an influential series of articles.

They recently summarized and further developed this work in a book entitled Pay without

Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation, which was published in 2004. In


                                                   2
the course of developing this view, the authors summarize and synthesize the academic literature on

executive pay in a way that is likely to appeal to a broader audience.1

        Bebchuk and Fried’s central hypothesis is that observed executive pay practices cannot be

explained by a model in which shareholders contract optimally with shareholders. Rather, they argue

that a more accurate characterization of the CEO pay process is one in which the CEO effectively

sets his own pay, subject to some constraints by the market. Of course, CEO pay, although large, is

nonetheless finite, so there must be some constraints that impose limits on its size. Bebchuk and

Fried refer to these constraints as ‘outrage’ constraints, as they stem from the public reaction to

extremely high CEO pay.

        In Pay without Performance, Bebchuk and Fried develop both the principal-agent and the

managerial power hypotheses non-technically in a way that a general audience can understand. They

then do an extensive review of the empirical evidence that, in their opinion, distinguishes these two

views. Their conclusion is that the evidence overwhelmingly supports the notion that CEOs have

great sway over their own pay, and that executive compensation is best understood through this lens,

rather than through an optimal principal-agent contract in which the shareholders capture all the

rents. They also provide some suggestions for reform, which they believe will ultimately improve

corporate governance.

        In this review, I first discuss the principal-agent and the power-based views of executive

compensation, as developed by Bebchuk and Fried. I then summarize the empirical evidence they

present. Finally, I present my own reactions to the book.




1
  See Bebchuk and Fried (2004) for detailed references. I will primarily refer to their book in this review even
though a number of the ideas discussed originated in other papers of theirs. In addition to their book, Bebchuk and
Fried have also written two shorter and easily accessible surveys; see Bebchuk and Fried (2003, 2005).


                                                         3
I. The Principal-Agent View of Executive Compensation

        In the classical principal-agent problem, a principal must delegate a task to an agent, whose

incentives are not perfectly aligned with those of the principal. A partial solution to this problem is

to utilize an incentive contract designed to pay the agent more when the task is performed better.

Executive compensation is often cited as a real-world example of a principal-agent problem, since

the shareholders, the principals, delegate virtually all decision rights to managers, their agents. A

very large literature has emerged that characterizes executive compensation contracts as a solution to

this agency problem both theoretically and empirically. [See Murphy (1999) for a detailed survey.]

        Bebchuk and Fried start their book with a discussion of this literature. They argue that the

dominant view of the finance/economics profession is that a current executive compensation

practices can be well explained as optimal responses to principal-agent problems. As such, they refer

to this view of executive compensation somewhat sarcastically as “the official story” throughout the

book. I think Bebchuk and Fried are correct that the finance/economics literature has focused on

optimal contracting models more than perhaps is warranted. However, I would suggest an alternative

explanation for this focus. Having been part of many seminars over the years in which these issues

were discussed, my feeling is that many people believe that many observed contracts are indeed not

optimal.2 Despite this belief, literatures in economics tend to focus on the kinds of models that are

readily solvable, which for executive compensation have historically been based on the presumption

of optimal contracting. In many ways it is similar to the situation in industrial organization prior to

the advent of game theory; even though most economists recognized that many important markets

were oligopolies of some sort, the formal modeling focused on perfectly competitive models, since

they were the only ones that could be easily solved.




2
 Indeed, I personally have argued, as Bebchuk and Fried do, that the power struggle between managers and the
board is an important determinant of CEO compensation (see Hermalin and Weisbach (1998)).


                                                       4
        Nonetheless, Bebchuk and Fried are quite correct to challenge the presumption that the arms-

length optimal contracting model is the right way to describe executive compensation practices. The

underlying assumption of the principal-agent model is that the principal, in this case the shareholders,

can somehow agree to an optimal contract with the agent, the managers in the case of executive

compensation. In fact, in a modern corporation, the shareholders do not contract directly with the

managers. Instead, they do so indirectly through the board of directors, who act as an intermediary.

Unless the board acts perfectly in the interests of shareholders, contracts will differ from those

predicted by an optimal contracting model. In practice, in fact, a host of issues exist that potentially

distort boards’ preferences from coinciding with those of the shareholders.

        Ultimately, the usefulness of any model depends on exactly how important the departures

from the model assumptions are in practice. Bebchuk and Fried argue that in the case of executive

compensation, these departures are significant, and that the typical economist discussion understates

their importance. In particular, the board of directors, rather than acting solely in the shareholders’

interests, becomes “captured” by the CEO. As such, the contracts that are negotiated between the

CEO and the board are not likely to be those that maximize shareholders’ profits subject to the usual

constraints in prinicipal-agent problems. Rather, the contracts are likely to reflect optimal rent-

grabbing by the CEO.

        There are a number of reasons why the board is likely to consider the CEO’s interests rather

than the shareholders’. First of all, directors have incentives to keep their jobs. Directors are well

paid, and sometimes receive substantial perks.3 Opposing a CEO’s wishes substantially increases the

likelihood that a director will not be renominated to the board and will lose these benefits. Second, a

CEO can provide benefits to directors in a number of ways. Bebchuk and Fried document a number


3
  Bebchuk and Fried cite studies indicating that in 2002, directors of the largest 200 companies received $152,000
annually and directors of the largest 1000 companies received $116,000. As examples of valuable perks, directors
of UAL Corp. can fly free of charge on United Airlines while directors of Starwood Hotels receive complementary
stays. (Bebchuk and Fried, p. 25)


                                                         5
of cases in which a director’s firm received substantial business from the CEO. In addition, CEOs

can and do direct their firms’ charitable contributions toward those favored by the favored directors.

Finally, CEOs can use influence on the companies on whose boards they serve to help their

companies’ directors acquire additional lucrative directorships.

        Overall, there are substantial reasons why a director has incentives to cater to the wishes of

the CEO. There are some factors that go in the other direction and cause directors to favor the

shareholders: Directors do typically own some shares, and care about their reputations as quality

managers. However, Bebchuk and Fried argue, in my opinion persuasively, that these factors are

likely to be substantially smaller than those that favor the CEO. Thus, it is unrealistic to expect the

board to negotiate the best possible executive compensation contract from the shareholders’

perspective.

        Given that boards are not predisposed to act in the shareholders’ interest, there are some

actions shareholders can take directly that potentially affect directors’ actions and align executive

compensation with their interests. For example, shareholders can sue the board, vote down stock

option plans, and put forward their own proposals. However, unless a shareholder holds a large stake

in the company and/or has a seat on the board, these measures are unlikely to have a meaningful

impact on executives’ behavior.

        In addition, there are market forces that limit the extent to which board actions can deviate

from the shareholders’ interests. Managers’ incentives are affected by the managerial labor market,

potential acquirers value the company in the market for corporate control, managers must make their

firms sufficiently attractive so that potential future suppliers of finance are willing to invest, and

firms compete in product markets. Each of these markets potentially limits the extent to which

directors’ interests can deviate from shareholders. The extent to which each is effective in practice is

unclear and is an ongoing topic of research. Nonetheless, Bebchuk and Fried contend, and I tend to

agree, that none of these market forces is sufficiently powerful to push boards toward the equilibrium


                                                     6
described in the optimal contracting models of executive compensation in which the principal holds

the bargaining power.



II. The Managerial Power Approach

        Bebchuk and Fried present an alternative approach to optimal contracting, based on the idea

of managerial power inside the firm. The idea is that the CEO has a good deal of control over the

board, and this control includes the power to set a large part of his own compensation. Of course,

there must be some factors that limit executive compensation; in addition to market forces, Bebchuk

and Fried introduce an additional type of cost that refer to as ‘Outrage Costs.’ Outrage costs occur

when there are costs to the executives and directors from a public reaction to executive compensation

that is perceived as excessively high. The difference between the managerial-power and principal-

agent explanations is stark: The level of pay in the principal-agent approach is set so that the CEO

receives at least his reservation utility, so that he is paid just enough to keep him from leaving and

going to another firm. In contrast, the level of pay in the managerial power approach is set as high as

possible, with the upper bound on pay determined by public perceptions.

        I find this alternative approach to executive compensation to be intriguing, and believe that

understanding and evaluating it will be an important topic of research in the near future.4 Certainly,

the logic of the Bebchuk and Fried approach is in line with popular views of executive compensation

in which managers have a lot of control over their boards. It differs from the optimal contracting

approach both methodologically, and in terms of its predictions.

        The weakness of the managerial power approach is that the ‘outrage’ constraint is not

particularly well-specified. What exactly is public outrage and why should it be treated as a

constraint? What factors cause outrage, and how does outrage feed back and hurt the firm? Murphy


4
 It has already been the subject of some debate; see for example the discussion in a recent issue of Chicago Law
Review between Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker (2002) and Murphy (2002).


                                                         7
(2002), in his discussion of these arguments, concludes that it is ‘sufficiently vague as to be

irrefutable.’ Nonetheless, public opinion is clearly something that does affect executive

compensation. The mechanism by which it does are unclear. For example why does extremely high

levels of compensation for CEOs lead to public outrage, while similarly high pay for other

professions such as entertainers or athletes do not? How does public opinion affect firms’

profitability? What is the role of the media in this process?5 Clearly, these are all important

questions that economists do not know much about. Research into the process by which public

opinion affects executive compensation potentially will aid research into other consequences of

public opinion on economic activities.



III Distinguishing Between the Optimal Contracting and Managerial Power Explanations

           Much of Bebchuk and Fried’s book consists of evidence purporting to distinguish between

the two explanations for executive pay. The arms-length contracting view suggests that managers

will have incentive contracts to encourage managers to maximize profits. A large literature has

developed that characterizes the optimal way to provide these incentives. Bebchuk and Fried focus

on a number of predictions coming from this type of analysis: First, incentive pay should depend on

variables under the manager’s control and not those that the manager has no control over. Second,

the manager should not be able to unwind these incentives; that is, make trades in the securities

markets that somehow offset their effect. Third, the incentives should be clear to everyone; there is

no reason under principal-agent theory why the nature of these contracts should be kept secret or

disguised in any way.

           Bebchuk and Fried’s managerial power based explanation differs substantially in these

predictions. Its main premise is that executive compensation is controlled primarily by the

executives themselves. Stock options and other ‘incentive’ pay are used as a way of justifying high
5
    See Dyck and Zingales (2002) for more on the role of the media in corporate governance.


                                                          8
compensation at a minimum of public outrage, the supposed incentives providing boards a

rationalization for extremely high executive pay. Bebchuk and Fried argue that a closer examination

of executive pay practices indicates that their structure is more consistent with executives

maximizing their pay subject to an outrage constraint than with the contracts that would be the

outcome of arms-length negotiations.

        Filtering out factors beyond the executive’s control. One puzzle for the optimal contracting

approach is that observed incentive packages do not ‘filter out’ factors that affect performance that

are beyond managers’ control. For example, options are always a function of raw (unadjusted) stock

returns, so that during a rising market, executives generally receive large returns from their options,

even if their firms performed average or even below average. Optimal contracting would suggest

that options be written as a function of excess returns relative to the market, or even a potentially

more sophisticated approach designed to filter out all factors that affect firm performance that are out

of the manager’s control. However, executive options are almost always written as a function of raw

returns, never filtering out factors unrelated to executive effort. Consequently, during the bull market

of the 1990s, almost all executives did remarkably well from their option plans, even if their firms

performed average or below average.

        But what about when the market declines, as it did in the early 2000s? Then, options are

commonly ‘repriced,’ lowering the exercise price to adjust for overall marketwide movements. To

provide incentives, firms lower the exercise prices on executive stock options when they are

substantially “out of the money” due to no fault of the executives.6 If, alternatively, the options were

written as a function of excess rather than raw returns, this practice would be unnecessary. The net

effect is that by using options on raw rather than adjusted returns, executives reap benefits when the

market rises but insulate themselves from market declines by repricings. As a result, the executives


6
 Of course, boards never raise exercise prices on executive stock options in a parallel manner when the firm’s stock
price increases due to overall market movements rather than any action of the executives themselves.


                                                         9
are better off with unadjusted options that can be subsequently repriced than they would be with

options on excess returns.

        Bebchuk and Fried argue that the fact that they utilize unadjusted options so commonly is

evidence consistent with the managerial power explanation rather than the optimal contracting one.

By using a seemingly simplistic, inefficient compensation system that does not filter out irrelevant

factors, executives can justify repricing their own options following market declines. Given future

repricings in bad states of the world, executives make themselves better off ex ante than they would

be using a seemingly more efficient compensation system that filters out factors beyond their control.

        Unwinding Incentives. A second issue Bebchuk and Fried focus on that potentially

distinguishes the optimal contracting and managerial power views is executives’ ability to unwind

their incentives. The optimal contracting view presumes that options and restricted stock are

provided to executives as a way of giving them incentives to solve an underlying agency problem.

These options and restricted shares provide incentives, however, only if executives are unable to sell

them during the period in which the incentives are relevant, or to engage in other hedging

transactions that effectively undo the effects of the incentives the options provide. In contrast, the

managerial power view suggests that options and restricted shares are simply another way to transfer

rents to managers, without providing meaningful incentives. This view implies that ‘incentive’

packages should be structured so that in practice managers have substantial freedom to unwind the

incentives in these plans.

        Bebchuk and Fried provide an interesting survey of empirical evidence relating to this topic

in Chapter 14 of their book. Most options are exercised and then sold as soon as they are vested,

which is generally well before the executive leaves office. “Restricted” shares are also sold

relatively quickly. While it makes sense to allow executives some leeway to gain liquidity on some

of their options, Bebchuk and Fried argue that the quantity sold suggest that much “incentive” pay

does not provide nearly as many incentives as one might suppose. In addition, many executives have


                                                   10
been able to hedge their options using “collars,” which are combinations of derivatives that, when

purchased by an executive, have the effect of locking in today’s stock price and offsetting the

incentives in option plans. Overall, Bebchuk and Fried argue that the freedom to unwind incentives

is very large, and likely reflects the fact that ‘incentive plans’ are actually set up to transfer rents

rather than to provide incentives.

        Camouflaging Compensation. Finally, and most persuasive in my opinion, is the fact that

many executive compensation practices are hidden, a practice Bebchuk and Fried refer to as

“camouflage.” Such camouflage is relevant to this discussion because there is no reason why,

according to optimal contracting theory, that firms should hide features of executive compensation

systems. In contrast, if managers are setting their own compensation subject to an outrage constraint,

then compensation should be structured so as to minimize outrage. In particular, if rents can be

transferred to executives in ways that do not attract public attention, then it is possible to pay

executives more total compensation for given amount of public outrage.

        Executive compensation is often camouflaged by having it take forms that are typically not

discussed in the press. For example, executives typically receive supplemental retirement plans

known as SERPs that go well beyond the retirement plans that are given to most employees. In

contrast to the tax-advantaged retirement plans offered to most employees, companies cannot deduct

the funds they use to fund SERPs from corporate income tax, so SERPs are not a tax-efficient way to

pay executives. These retirement plans are, however, a good way to camouflage payments to

executives, since they typically do not show up in press reports of executive compensation. In

addition to retirement plans, firms sometimes allow executives (but not other employees) to defer

compensation until retirement, and typically guarantee a rate of return well in excess of market rates.

As an example, Bebchuk and Fried point out that in 2001, when one-year Treasury bills were

yielding around 4 percent, both GE and Enron guaranteed their executives a 12 percent annual return

on their deferred compensation (p. 102). The present value of this extra guaranteed return is


                                                     11
substantial, but sufficiently hidden that it almost never makes it into press reports of executive

compensation.

        Executives increasingly have been provided in-kind benefits in retirement that substantially

exceed those given to other employees, even adjusting for the differing levels of compensation. In

addition to lifetime health benefits, executives can receive free use of company planes, cars,

apartments, security systems, and many other benefits. While it is unlikely that these perks are the

most efficient way to provide compensation to the executives, their cost is not reflected in that levels

of executive compensation that are publicly disclosed. A valuable benefit retired executives

sometimes receive is lifetime “consulting” contracts that guarantee retired executives large sums in

exchange for consulting work that may or may not ever occur. Finally, executives often receive large

loans from their companies at interest rates well below market. Again, it is not clear why such loans

are part of an optimal compensation contract, but their present value is a form of compensation that is

camouflaged from the press.



IV Positive and Normative Interpretations: A Market Equilibrium in Governance

        Bebchuk and Fried have compiled an impressive array of empirical findings that relate to the

question of how executive compensation systems are set up. They contrast the commonly discussed

optimal contracting view of executive compensation with the notion that executives effectively set

their own compensation subject to what they refer to as an “outrage” constraint. Bebchuk and Fried

present a number of different types of evidence consistent with the view that managerial power is an

important determinant of executive compensation.

        There are two different ways in which one can evaluate this book. One can consider the book

from a positive perspective, and consider whether the managerial power perspective is consistent

with the available evidence. An important question is whether theories of compensation based on

managerial power should supplement or even replace the optimal contracting view. A second way to


                                                   12
evaluate the book consists of a more normative perspective. The tone of the book conveys that there

is a major problem with executive compensation systems and with corporate governance more

generally. More importantly, it suggests that this problem can and should be fixed. One comes away

from reading the book thinking that somehow, the system could be set up in a way that would

substantially improve executive incentives, and consequently corporate performance as well.

           Positive Implications. From a positive perspective, I find the Bebchuk and Fried arguments

fairly persuasive. Although a number of explanations for the lack of filtering of market or industry

performance in executive compensation have been proposed in the literature, I find the most

plausible explanation for this seemingly simplistic practices is that executives prefer this type of

compensation to its alternatives.7 I also find it hard to reconcile optimal incentive contracting with

the fact that “incentives” provided by executive compensation contracts are effectively undone by

other actions on the part of the executive. If the contracts really were optimal and included

incentives for top management, they would have some way of prohibiting executives from

unwinding the incentives. Finally, the high level of camouflage observed in executive compensation

is clearly evidence that boards and managers wish to hide true compensation from the public.

Optimal contracting theory provides no reason why firms would wish to hide compensation, but

Bebchuk and Fried’s explanations do provide such a reason.

           Going forward, the book suggests a number of directions that are potentially fruitful

directions to explore. Optimal incentive contracting and managerial rents are not mutually

incompatible. Developing models of optimal contracting with management rent-seeking along the

lines suggested by Bebchuk and Fried would be a useful addition to the executive compensation

literature. Understanding the nature of the outrage constraint on managers, and the way it relates to

public opinion would be an important element of this type of work. Another approach would be to

presume that some firms approximate arms-length contracts with their executives, while others
7
    See Chapter 12 of Bebchuk and Fried for discussion of these explanations.


                                                          13
follow the Bebchuk and Fried model. Is it possible to estimate approximately how many firms fall

into each category? What factors lead to firms following each model? How are these factors related

to the CEO’s degree of control over his board? How does the extent of the manager’s influence over

his compensation affect subsequent firm-level performance? Certainly, the Bebchuk and Fried

analysis suggests that answers to these types of research questions would be potentially valuable.

        Normative Implications. On a normative level, the book definitely takes the view that

management’s control of its own pay is “bad,” and is a problem that somehow could be corrected.

Starting with the subtitle, The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation, and throughout the

remainder of the book, Bebchuk and Fried imply that something is wrong with the executive

compensation system. What is not clear is what the alternative is. To be relevant, the issues that are

raised not only have to be inefficient relative to a theoretical benchmark, but that they should be

somehow fixable. In other words, there should be a realistic set of reforms that will move us to a

better equilibrium.

        Let us presume that Bebchuk and Fried are correct and that their description of firms’

governance is basically correct, and managers effectively set their own pay subject to an outrage

constraint. Then, of course, shareholders would be better off if we could magically shift to a world in

which they engage in arms-length bargaining with managers and achieve the contracts described in

the principal-agent literature. The problem is that it is not clear how in practice we could shift to the

theoretically better equilibrium; or if the practices Bebchuk and Fried describe are the best that can

be achieved. The reason why CEOs are able to take rents from the shareholders is because of their

bargaining power vis a vis the board. Yet, this bargaining power is itself endogenously determined

inside the firm and is likely outside the realm of potential regulatory improvements.

        In Chapters 15 and 16 of their book, Bebchuk and Fried make some suggestions as to how

executive compensation and corporate governance might be improved. First they encourage

investors to become aware of and to discourage some of the practices they discuss in the book. For


                                                   14
example, they encourage investors to pay executives options that filter out general market or industry

movements, and to make it difficult for executives to unwind incentives. Second, they encourage

both regulators and market participants to make the structure of executive compensation more

transparent. Finally, they suggest some changes that potentially increase the power of the

shareholders relative to the managers, such as improving the rights of shareholder-nominated

candidates in corporate elections.

        The problems Bebchuk and Fried focus on are not new; both Smith (1776) and Berle and

Means (1932) characterize the corporate governance practices of their day in much the same way as

Bebchuk and Fried’s description of modern corporate governance. Perhaps the problem is

fundamental to the nature of the corporation? Perhaps management’s (partial) control over the board,

and ultimately over their own compensation is an inevitable consequence of dispersed ownership and

the corporate form of organization? Certainly, despite these problems, corporations have achieved

remarkable returns, and have been the organizational form responsible for most of the vast wealth

creation that has occurred over the past century.

        A Market Equilibrium in Governance. To evaluate corporate governance and whether it can

be improved, I think that we must think about governance from the same equilibrium perspective as

we do other economic institutions. The basic characteristics of corporate governance, including

managers’ sometimes having control over the board, have remained unchanged for many years.

Management’s having control over the board is one element of the governance equilibrium that has

appeared to prevail over time. Despite this “problem,” the modern, dispersed corporation has been

responsible for the vast majority of economic progress in the last century.

        Bebchuk and Fried imply that it is possible to improve on this equilibrium. My guess is that

in practice this will be difficult; Benjamin Hermalin and I have recently argued that the set of




                                                    15
circumstances under which regulations on governance can improve welfare are indeed limited.8 It is

unclear how attempts to improve governance through regulations will make things better.

          Bebchuk and Fried have assembled a wealth of evidence suggesting that managers have

control over their compensation systems. They argue that executive compensation should be thought

of as a process through which executives take rents from their firms in an attention-minimizing

fashion, rather than an optimal incentive system through which shareholders motivate executives to

choose value-maximizing actions. As positive description of the way that corporations have operated

historically, I tend to agree with this characterization. However, just because executives capture

rents from this process, it is not clear that the process can be easily improved.




8
    See Hermalin and Weisbach (2006).


                                                   16
                                           References


Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Jesse M. Fried (2003) “Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17, 71-92.

Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Jesse M. Fried (2004) Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise
of Executive Compensation, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Jesse M. Fried (2005) “Pay without Performance: Overview of the Issues,”
Journal of Corporation Law, 30, 647-673.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., Jesse M. Fried and David I. Walker (2002) “Managerial Power and Rent
Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation,” University of Chicago Law Review, 69, 751-
846.

Berle, Adolph, and Gardiner Means (1932) The Modern Corporation and Private Property, New
York: MacMillan.

Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales (2002) “The Corporate Governance Role of the Media,” in R.
Islam, ed. The right to tell: The Role of the Media in Development, The World Bank, Washington,
DC.

Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach (1998) “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors
and their Monitoring of the CEO,” American Economic Review, 88 (March), 96-118.

Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach (2006) “A Framework for Assessing Corporate
Governance Reform,” Working Paper, University of California and University of Illinois.

Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy (1990) “Performance Pay and Top-Management
Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 225-264.

Murphy, Kevin J. (1999) “Executive Compensation,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, Vol. 3, Bk. 2., New York: Elsevier.

Murphy, Kevin J. (2002) “Explaining Executive Compensation: Managerial Power vs. the Perceived
Cost of Stock Options,” University of Chicago Law Review, 69, 847-869.

Smith, Adam (1776) The Modern Corporation and Private Property, New York: The Modern
Library.




                                               17
