                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      COPING WITH DISASTER:
THE IMPACT OF HURRICANES ON INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL FLOWS, 1970-2002

                                               Dean Yang

                                         Working Paper 12794
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w12794


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2006




I have valued feedback and suggestions from John DiNardo, Kathryn Dominguez, Liz Gerber, Juan
Carlos Hallak, Jim Hines, Bob Lipsey, Justin McCrary, Albert Park, Kiki Pop-Eleches, Matt Slaughter,
Arvind Subramanian, Linda Tesar, Shang-Jin Wei, David Weinstein, Obie Whichard, and seminar
participants at the IMF, the University of Michigan, the 2005 NBER Summer Institute in International
Trade and Investment, and the 8th BREAD Conference (at Cornell). I also thank David Dollar and
Giuseppe Iarossi for sharing their data. HwaJung Choi and Eric Hendrickson provided superb research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Dean Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial Flows, 1970-2002
Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 12794
December 2006
JEL No. F21,F22,F34,F35,O19,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

How well do countries cope with the aftermath of natural disasters? In particular, do international
financial flows help buffer countries in the wake of disasters? This paper focuses on hurricanes (one
of the most common and destructive types of disasters), and examines the impact of hurricane exposure
on resource flows to developing countries. Using meteorological data on storm paths, I construct a
time-varying storm index that takes into account the fraction of a country's population exposed to storms
of varying intensities. Across developing countries, greater hurricane exposure leads to large increases
in foreign aid. For other types of international financial flows, the impact of hurricanes varies according
to income level. In the poorer half of the sample, hurricane exposure leads to substantial increases
in migrants' remittances, so that total inflows from all sources in the three years following hurricane
exposure amount to roughly three-fourths of estimated damages. In the richer half of the sample, by
contrast, hurricane exposure stimulates inflows of new lending from multilateral institutions, but offsetting
declines in private financial flows are so large that the null hypothesis of zero damage replacement
cannot be rejected.

Dean Yang
Woodrow Wilson School
361 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
deanyang@umich.edu
1         Introduction
Natural disasters cause tremendous losses of human life, as well as substantial economic damages.
From 1970 to 2002, natural disasters killed an estimated 2.74 million people, injured another 2.70
million, and led to US$987 billion in economic damages worldwide (see Table 1).1 Individual
disasters, too, can have appalling tolls; the 1970 hurricane in Bangladesh killed some 300,000
people. It is not uncommon for estimated economic losses from disasters to amount to substantial
fractions of countries’ economic output. For example, damages from the 1973 drought in Burkina
Faso amounted to 104% of gross domestic product, while those from Hurricane Mitch in Honduras
in 1998 came to 38% of GDP. More generally, 39% of world population lives in countries that had
experienced disaster damages of 3% of GDP or more in some year between 1970 and 2002.
        Given the destructive power of many natural events, and their largely unpredictable nature,
it is important to understand how countries cope with the aftermath of disasters. This paper
examines how international financial flows buﬀer the economic losses from natural disasters. In
particular, I focus on the impact of hurricanes, one of the most common and destructive types of
disasters.2 Wind storms, the disaster type that includes hurricanes, caused an estimated 612,000
deaths, 520,000 injuries, and US$280 billion in damages worldwide from 1970 to 2002.
        A key contribution of this paper is to take a worldwide view in examining systematically the
impact of hurricanes on international financial flows to developing countries. I examine several
types of flows–oﬃcial development assistance (ODA), lending from multilateral institutions,
bank and trade-related lending, migrants’ remittances, foreign direct investment, and portfolio
investment–and estimate the responses of such flows to hurricane exposure, on average across
all countries for which data are available. This topic has received only limited prior attention,
typically consisting of studies of the impact of a small number of disasters in a limited set of
countries (Albala-Bertrand 1993, Benson and Clay 2004).
        Past analyses of the impact of hurricanes on international financial flows have been hampered
by the lack of objective data on hurricane exposure at the country-year level. Data do exist on
damages from storms, but such data are reported by national governments or other organizations
and may be influenced by the desire to attract financial inflows. For example, damage estimates
may be exaggerated when international inflows are expected to be small, leading estimates of
    1
     All figures in this paragraph are compiled from estimates in EM-DAT: the OFDA/CRED International Disaster
Database. Damage figures are in 1995 US dollars. Population figures are for 2001, from World Development
Indicators 2004.
   2
     While ‘hurricanes’ typically refer to events in the Atlantic and eastern Pacific, I use the term in this paper to
encompass similar events that are known elsewhere as ‘typhoons’ and ‘tropical cyclones’.


                                                          1
the impact of damage on financial flows to be understated. In addition, unobserved third factors
may influence both international flows and the size of damages suﬀered (if disasters occur), also
potentially leading to biased estimates.
       An innovation of this paper is its use of a time-varying storm index that takes into account
the fraction of a country’s population exposed to storms of varying intensities. The index is
constructed using meteorological data on storm paths and intensities, combined with newly-
available data on the subnational distribution of population. The index is highly predictive of
disaster damages and human losses experienced by countries in particular years.
       Across developing countries, greater hurricane exposure leads to large increases in foreign aid.
For other types of international financial flows, the impact of hurricanes varies according to income
level. In the poorer half of the sample, hurricane exposure also leads to substantial increases in
migrants’ remittances, and a slightly oﬀsetting decline in bank and trade-related lending. For
this poor-country subsample, instrumental variables estimates indicate that total inflows from
all sources in the three years following hurricane exposure amount to roughly three-fourths of
estimated damages. In the richer half of the sample, by contrast, hurricane exposure stimulates
inflows of new lending from multilateral institutions, but oﬀsetting declines in private financial
flows are so large that the null hypothesis of zero damage replacement cannot be rejected.
       This paper is part of a nascent literature on the economics of disasters. Kahn (2005) exam-
ines heterogeneity in the impact of natural disasters on disaster deaths, focusing on the role of
institutions in moderating death tolls. Anbarci, Escaleras, and Register (forthcoming) document
that fatalities from earthquakes are greater in countries that are poorer and that have higher
inequality. Bluedorn (2005) uses Caribbean hurricanes to test the intertemporal approach to
current account determination. Bluedorn and Cascio (2005) study the impact of a hurricane in
Puerto Rico on education and intergenerational mobility.3
       Two highly related bodies of research are those on risk-coping mechanisms used by individual
households in rural communities, on the one hand, and by countries, on the other. There is
substantial microeconomic evidence on the methods used by households to cope with risk in
developing countries. An empirical approach frequently taken is to examine how specific risk-
coping mechanisms (such as transfer receipts, borrowing, asset sales, or savings accumulation or
decumulation) respond to shocks. This paper shares this empirical approach. Studies frequently
   3
    While not explicitly about disasters per se, Miguel, Satyanath, and Shanker (2004) is also related in that it
uses rainfall shocks to instrument for economic growth in estimating the impact of growth on civil conflict. Paxson
(1992) examines the impact of rainfall shocks on household savings in rural Thailand.



                                                        2
document some ability to smooth consumption, but also find that there is far from complete
smoothing (see, for example, Townsend (1995), Udry (1994), and Ligon, Thomas, and Worall
(2002)).
       On the other hand, research in international finance typically concludes that there is relatively
little smoothing of national-level consumption via international risk-sharing arrangements or ex
post smoothing mechanisms, such as French and Poterba (1991), Tesar (1993, 1995), Lewis (1996),
and Van Wincoop (1999).4 By contrast, this paper finds that specific types of international flows
do respond positively to disaster events, replacing a large fraction of losses within a few years of a
disaster. The diﬀerence between this paper’s results and previous findings in international finance
may reflect the fact that disasters are truly exogenous events, so that moral hazard problems that
may inhibit the operation of consumption smoothing mechanisms in the face of other types of
risks are not an issue for disasters.
       Positive responses of international flows to hurricanes are likely to reflect a combination of
both ex ante risk-sharing and ex post consumption smoothing. For example, the response of work-
ers’ remittances to disaster losses may be due to ex ante risk-sharing agreements via reciprocal
transfers among relatives living in diﬀerent countries. Transfers and credits from overseas indi-
viduals, governments, and institutions (appearing in the data as remittances, ODA, and lending
from multilateral institutions) could also simply reflect desires, ex post, to assist those aﬀected by
disasters. On the other hand, if disasters lead to declines in expected rates of return or increases
in risk perceptions, private asset sales (FDI, portfolio investment) and commercial credit could
subsequently decline.
       Finally, this paper’s findings on the response of migrants’ remittances to disaster damage relate
to research on migration as a risk-coping mechanism for households in poor countries. Rosenzweig
and Stark (1989) document the risk-reducing aspects of the spatial distribution of daughters after
marriage in rural India. At the international level, it is commonly posited that remittance flows
from overseas buﬀer economic shocks in the migrants’ home countries (for example, Ratha 2003),
but this claim has been empirically untested until now.5
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on hur-
ricanes worldwide, and discusses the data on hurricanes. Section 3 considers the theoretical role
   4
     However, there is evidence of risk-sharing and consumption smoothing within closely-tied economic regions
such as states in the US and countries in the EU. See, for example, Asdrubali, Sorensen, and Yosha (1996) and
Asdrubali and Kim (2004).
   5
     Although see Yang and Choi (2005) for microeconomic study of the impact of local rainfall shocks in the
Philippines on remittance inflows.



                                                      3
of international financial flows flows in sharing risk (in particular, disaster risk) across countries.
Section 4 discusses relevant econometric issues and presents the empirical evidence. Section 5
discusses the magnitude of the empirical results. Section 6 concludes.



2         Hurricanes: overview and data sources

2.1         What are hurricanes?

Hurricanes are severe storms that originate over tropical oceans.6 The term ‘hurricane’ is typically
used to describe severe tropical storms in the Atlantic and east Pacific, but the same type of event
is known as a ‘typhoon’ in the western Pacific and simply a ‘tropical cyclone’ in the Indian Ocean
and Oceania. A tropical storm is classed as a hurricane if sustains winds in excess of 74 miles
(119 kilometers) per hour.
        Hurricanes only originate over warm tropical waters with a surface temperature of at least
79 degrees F (26 degrees C). Therefore, due to cooler sea surface temperatures, hurricanes never
form in the South Atlantic Ocean or the eastern South Pacific Ocean. In addition, formation
of hurricanes requires a zone of low barometric pressure in combination with rotating winds (a
‘vortex’), ruling out hurricane formation and persistence within 5 degrees of the equator: the
earth’s Coriolis force is too weak near the equator to generate suﬃcient rotating winds.
        Figure 1 helps illustrate the typical architecture of a hurricane (it is an aerial view of Hurricane
Mitch approaching Honduras on October 26, 1998.) The center of a hurricane (the ‘eye’) is a
circular area of low pressure and calm air typically 20-30 miles (roughly 30-50 km.) in diameter.
Surrounding the eye are spiral arms of storm clouds. The spiral-shaped area of weather distur-
bance can be anywhere from 60-900 miles (roughly 100-1,500 km.) in diameter, but the area of
hurricane-force winds is typically smaller. Formation of hurricanes can take place over several
days, or as quickly as within 12 hours. Hurricanes will typically last 2-3 days, with the broader
storm (including periods with less than hurricane-force winds) lasting for 4-5 days in total.
        Hurricanes wreak damage of three general types. First, hurricanes are accompanied by a
storm surge, a rise in the sea level due to wind-driven waves and low atmospheric pressure. Storm
surges can range from 4 feet (1.2 meters) for the smallest hurricanes to 18 feet (5.5 meters) or
more for the strongest ones. They are usually the most deadly aspect of hurricanes, and also cause
extensive property damage alongside destruction of crops and salt contamination of agricultural
    6
    Much of the background description of hurricanes presented here is based on Smith (1992), Alexander (1993),
and Bryant (1991).

                                                       4
land. The storm surge caused by the 1970 Bangladesh hurricane was reported to have reached
30 feet (9 meters). Second, strong winds can cause substantial structural damage as well as
defoliation of crops. The third type of damage is from flooding due to heavy rainfall, which can
also cause landslides in sloped areas. While the storm surge and winds are strongest near the
eye of the hurricane, the eﬀects of flooding can be felt hundreds of miles away and can last well
beyond the dissipation of hurricane-force winds.


2.2       Hurricane data

In examining the impact of hurricanes on international financial flows, a focus on storm damage as
the measure of hurricane "aﬀectedness" would be problematic. Damage reports cannot plausibly
be taken, in and of themselves, as exogenous with respect to the outcomes of interest. For example,
reverse causation is likely to be a problem. If large financial inflows are occurring in response
to disasters, countries or international agencies have no need to exaggerate damage figures. But
when flows are not forthcoming, disaster damages may be exaggerated to attract more resources.
This would lead the estimated eﬀect of damage on financial inflows to be negatively biased. There
may also be omitted variable problems, as when worsening economic conditions or a breakdown
of government functions leads to declines in financial inflows and an increase in vulnerability
to disasters (perhaps due to deteriorating disaster warning systems, deteriorating infrastructure,
declines in property maintenance, etc.).
       To deal with problems of reverse causation or omitted variables, this paper instead focuses
on a storm index created from objective meteorological data. Meteorological data on hurricanes
worldwide are available from two U.S. government agencies: the NOAA Tropical Prediction Cen-
ter (for Atlantic and eastern North Pacific hurricanes) and the Naval Pacific Meteorology and
Oceanography Center/Joint Typhoon Warning Center (for hurricanes in the Indian Ocean, west-
ern North Pacific, and Oceania). Via detailed post-event analysis, these agencies create what are
known as ‘best tracks’ of individual hurricanes: positions (latitude and longitude) of hurricane
centers at 6-hourly intervals, combined with intensity information (wind speed and barometric
pressure). These best tracks incorporate information from a variety of sources, such as reconnai-
sance aircraft, ships, and satellites. While best tracks may be reported as far back as 1851, the
data quality is likely to be highest since the early 1960s and the widespread use of meteorological
satellites (Chu et al 2002).7
   7
     Detailed descriptions of these data files are provided in Jarvinen et al (1984), Davis et al (1984), and Chu et
al (2002). The data files from these two sources have been placed in a consistent format by Unisys Weather and


                                                         5
      Figure 2 shows an example of smoothed hurricane best tracks, with data for the western
North Pacific area in 1985. Figure 3 displays all 6-hour segments of hurricane best tracks that are
associated with hurricane-force winds, from 1949 to 2001. Hurricanes clearly manifest themselves
most prominently in tropical oceans, and tend to eventually lose force upon striking a continental
land mass (although some hurricanes may extend far inland). While hurricanes originate in the
tropics, they can often extend into temperate areas, as evidenced by the profusion of hurricanes
all along the U.S. Atlantic coast and the temperate coast of East Asia and Japan.
      The best track data naturally take hurricanes as the unit of analysis, and so in their raw form
give no indication of the countries which may have been aﬀected. However, the empirical analysis
to follow will take place at country level, and on an annual basis (the unit of observation is a
country-year). I construct a storm index at the country-year level as follows.
      The damage caused by hurricanes certainly depends on the intensity of the hurricane (in
particular, windspeed). In addition, hurricanes should cause more damage if they strike in areas
more highly concentrated in population. A storm index Hjt (for country j in year t) that takes
such considerations into account is as follows:
                                                       XX
                                                                      xisjt
                                                        i       s
                                              Hjt =
                                                                Njt

      where xisjt is a measure of how aﬀected a person i is by individual storm s in country j and
year t. The measure of "aﬀectedness" is the square of the windspeed above the tropical storm
windspeed threshold (33 knots), normalized by the maximum of this variable. Specifically, xisjt
is:
                                                       (wisjt − 33)2
                                            xisjt   =
                                                      (wMAX − 33)2
      wisjt is the windspeed (in knots) to which an individual was exposed.8 wMAX is the maximum
windspeed observed in the data, 152.3 knots. Individual aﬀectedness is then summed across all
storms in a given year and across all individuals in the country. It is then divided by population
Njt to obtain a per-capita measure.
      The storm index can be thought of as intensity-weighted events per capita. If each of a
country’s residents were exposed to the maximum windspeed (xisjt = 1 for all residents) on a
single occasion in a single year, Hjt = 1 for that country in that year. Also, Hjt = 1 if each
are publicly accessible at http://weather.unisys.com/hurricane/index.html.
   8
     A knot is one nautical mile per hour, and a nautical mile is 1.15 statute or land miles.



                                                            6
resident were exposed twice to a storm where xisjt = 0.5.
        While there is no data source for individual-level hurricane aﬀectedness (xisjt ), it is possible
to approximate the numerator in the formula for the storm index Hjt . First, I use available
subnational estimates of population in a 0.25-degree-square worldwide grid.9 Then, I estimate
the windspeed experienced at each gridpoint due to each separate storm using the storm best-
track data, a model of windspeed decay given distance from hurricane eyes (as in Dilley, et al
2005), and geographic information systems software. The summation then is across storms and
across gridpoints (instead of individuals), with each gridpoint weighted by population. Because
of inconsistent availability of windspeed data in initial years of data collection, I only construct
this index for countries in South Asia (aﬀected by North Indian Ocean storms) from 1979 and
onwards, Oceania (South Pacific storms) from 1983 onwards, and Southern Africa (South Indian
Ocean storms) from 1983 onwards. For storms in all remaining parts of the world (aﬀected by
West and East North Pacific and North Atlantic storms), windspeed data are available since the
1940s, so I construct the index for all years from 1970-2002.
        Table 2 displays the mean storm index (for available years between 1970 and 2002 inclusive)
for each country in a hurricane-aﬀected region. The country with the highest mean storm index
is the Philippines, with 0.0287, followed by the Dominican Republic (0.0205), Jamaica (0.0129),
Haiti (0.0079), and Madagascar (0.0072).



3         The impact of disaster damage in theory
When a country experiences a major disaster, how should we expect international financial inflows
to change? A basic theoretical result is that if there is a Pareto-eﬃcient allocation of risk across
individual entities (in this case, individual countries) in a risk-sharing arrangement, individual
consumption should not be aﬀected by idiosyncratic income shocks.
        Consider N countries, indexed by i. Countries have an uncertain income in each period t,
ysi t , depending on the state of nature st ∈ S. A representative household in country i consumes
                                                  ¡ ¢
cist , and experiences within-period utility of Ui cist at time t. Let utility be separable over time,
and let instantaneous utility be twice diﬀerentiable with Ui0 > 0 and Ui00 < 0. For the allocation
of risk across countries to be Pareto-eﬃcient, the ratio of marginal utilities between countries in
    9
    These data are from the Gridded Population of the World (GPW) dataset, described in Balk and Yetman
(2004) and available at http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw.




                                                      7
any state of nature must be equal to a constant:
                                  ¡ ¢
                               Ui0 cist     ωj
                                  ¡  j
                                        ¢ =    , for all i, j, st , and t,
                               Uj0 cst      ωi

   where ωi and ω j are the Pareto weights of countries i and j. Countries’ marginal utilities are
proportional to each other, and so consumption levels between countries move in tandem.
   Let utility be given by the following constant absolute risk aversion function:

                                                                     i
                                             ¡ ¢ −e−θcst
                                           Ui cist =     .
                                                     θ

   Then, following (among others) Mace (1991), Cochrane (1991), Altonji, Hayashi, and Kot-
likoﬀ (1992) and Townsend (1994), we can obtain a relationship between individual country i’s
consumption and average consumption across countries cst :

                                                             1
                                                                 PN
                                                  ln ω i −   N           j=1   ln ω j
                                 cist   = cst +                                                (1)
                                                                 θ

   Eﬃcient risk-sharing implies that individual countries’ consumption levels depend here only
on mean world consumption cst and an eﬀect determined by the country’s Pareto weight relative
to other countries’. Because this latter term is constant over time, then changes in consumption
for particular countries will depend only on the change in mean world consumption. Said another
way, countries face only aggregate global risk.
   The key question is whether idiosyncratic risk or aggregate risk dominates in practice, as
this will determine the extent to which consumption can be smoothed. The empirical analysis to
follow will examine the impact of exposure to hurricanes, which are by their nature only local (not
global) phenomena. So in principle one might expect substantial ability of countries to smooth
consumption in the face of hurricane-related disaster risk. In addition, moral hazard problems
that often inhibit the operation of insurance and other risk-coping arrangements should be much
less of an issue for natural disasters: they are easily observable phenomena, and a country cannot
aﬀect its probability of being struck by one.
   In practice, even if ex ante risk-sharing arrangements are incomplete, countries may also be
able to use ex post mechanisms to smooth consumption, such as international borrowing and
asset sales. Among others, Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Kletzer (1984) and Grossman and Van




                                                      8
Huyck (1988) have underlined the function of sovereign debt as an ex post smoothing device.10
Microeconomic studies have documented the role of asset sales as ex post smoothing devices, such
as Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1993), Lim and Townsend (1998), and Fafchamps, Udry, and Czukas
(1998). International transfers (ODA and remittances) may respond due to ex ante risk-sharing
arrangements, as well as ex post responses by overseas individuals and governments with purely
charitable motives. Microeconomic studies among households of the insurance and smoothing
role of gifts and remittances include Lucas and Stark (1985), Ravallion and Dearden (1988),
Rosenzweig and Stark (1989), Platteau (1991), and Cox, Eser, and Jimenez (1998). In addition,
inflows of new foreign direct investment could occur if asset destruction leads to increases in rates
of return on investment. An increase in FDI due to an increase in the rate of return is diﬀerent
from other risk-sharing or consumption smoothing responses, but in practice it also helps in
replacing lost assets. On the other hand, private asset sales (FDI, portfolio investment) and
commercial credit could decline in the wake of disasters, if disasters lead to declines in expected
rates of return or increases in perceived risk.
       Adapting Fafchamps and Lund (2003), let consumption of country i in state st be the sum
of income ysi t , net inflows of unrequited transfers rsi t , net borrowing bist , and the change in assets
∆aist :
                                                   cist = ysi t + rsi t + bist + ∆aist

       So then we can rewrite equation (1) as:

                                                                                           1
                                                                                               PN
                                                                                ln ω i −   N       j=1   ln ω j
                          rsi t   +   bist   +   ∆aist   =   −ysi t   + cst +                                     (2)
                                                                                               θ

       This equation can be transformed into an empirically testable specification as follows. First,
separate income ysi t into:
                                                             ysi t = yei − zsi t ,

       where yei is the permanent component of income and zsi t is the transitory component of income.
Only the transitory component depends on the state of the world. Note that I define zsi t so that
larger amounts are bad for income, to correspond with the shock measure I will be using in the
empirics (hurricane exposure).
       The function of Pareto weights and the permanent income component yei can be captured by a
  10
    And at the microeconomic level, see (for example) Townsend (1995), Udry (1994), and Rosenzweig (1988) for
evidence on credit as a consumption-smoothing mechanism.



                                                                       9
country fixed eﬀect γ i . The mean world consumption level cst can be represented by a time eﬀect
φt . Also allow a random component εit , a mean-zero error term. Then equation (2) becomes:


                                   rsi t + bist + ∆aist = zsi t + γ i + φt + εit                     (3)


      The empirical test of this paper will be based on equation (3), where the outcome variables are
net transfers, net borrowing, and asset changes separately. Specifically, the net transfer measures
will be net oﬃcial development assistance, and net remittances from overseas migrants. Net
borrowing will be lending from multilateral institutions as well as bank and trade-related private
lending. And asset changes will be represented by net foreign direct investment and portfolio
investment.
      This paper will focus on a particular type of transitory shock zsi t , hurricane exposure. It is of
interest to examine which of the potential types of international financial flows–transfers, loans,
or asset sales–appear to respond positively to hurricane exposure. The empirical analysis will
test the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcient on inflows with respect to damages zsi t is equal to zero.
In addition, the estimates will be used to shed light on the fraction of disaster damages that are
replaced by international inflows (the "replacement rate" of damages by inflows).



4       Empirical evidence
This section documents the impact of hurricane exposure on international financial flows. I first
describe other data sources used in the empirical analysis, and then describe summary statistics.
The empirical results follow.


4.1       Other data sources

To examine the impact of hurricane exposure on disaster damages, I use data from EM-DAT:
the CRED/OFDA International Disaster Database, maintained by the Center for Research on
the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED), Université Catholique de Louvain.11 These estimates are
in currency units and include both direct costs (such as damage to property, infrastructure, and
crops) and the indirect losses due to reductions in economic activity. Disaster damage estimates
are meant to correspond only to the year of the associated event, and not ongoing eﬀects that
 11
      These data are available at <www.em-dat.net>.




                                                        10
persist beyond the disaster year. I collapse these damage data to the country-year level. I also
use data on number of people killed and injured from EM-DAT.
       The sources of disaster impact data in EM-DAT are varied, and include national governments,
UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance companies, research institutes and the
media. Active data collection for EM-DAT started in the late 1960s, and retrospective research
was necessary to record disasters prior to that date, stretching back to 1900 (Guha-Sapir, Hargitt,
and Hoyois 2004).
       The outcome variables of interest in the empirical analysis will be various categories of net
international financial flows. The following come from the World Bank’s World Development In-
dicators 2004 (WDI 2004). Oﬃcial development assistance (ODA) is net bilateral disbursements
of loans and grants made on concessional terms to promote economic development in developing
countries, by members of the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee (DAC). These figures
include oﬃcial aid to transition economies of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Both
emergency aid sent in the immediate aftermath of disasters and aid intended for more long-term
development initiatives are included in ODA. Lending from multilateral institutions is disburse-
ments of loans and credits minus repayments of principal. I calculate the sum of WDI 2004’s
separately-reported net financial flows (both concessional and non-concessional) from the Interna-
tional Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the International Development Associ-
ation (IDA), the IMF, and regional development banks (such as the Inter-American Development
Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the African Development Bank), and other multilateral
lenders reported in the World Bank’s Debtor Reporting System. Bank and trade-related lending
includes commercial bank lending and other private credits. Foreign direct investment (FDI) is
net inflows in the reporting country less net outflows by the reporting country of investment to ac-
quire a lasting management interest (10 percent or more of voting stock) in an enterprise operating
in an economy other than that of the investor. Portfolio investment encompasses transactions in
equity and debt securities, and excludes liabilities constituting foreign authorities’ reserves (LC-
FAR). Data on net flows of migrants’ remittances are from IMF Balance of Payments Statistics
2004, and are the sum of separately-reported items for workers’ remittances, compensation of
employees, and migrants’ transfers.12
       The following adjustments are made to these data. All figures reported in currency amounts
  12
    It is standard in studies of remittances to group these three categories together (see Ratha 2003). Workers’
remittances refer to transfers from persons abroad for a year or longer. Compensation of employees refers to
transfers from persons overseas for less than a year. Migrants’ transfers are transfers of financial assets by migrants
when moving from one country to another.


                                                          11
are converted to 1995 US dollars using GDP deflators in WDI 2004 and the 1995 local currency/US
dollar exchange rate. To facilitate analysis of data across economies of vastly diﬀerent sizes, the
data on disaster damages and international financial flows will be expressed as fractions of GDP.
Because disasters may also aﬀect the denominator of these statistics (the level of GDP), I use
GDP in prior years as the denominator. In particular, because I will be interested in the eﬀects
of disaster damages up to 4 years before, I use mean GDP from 5, 6, and 7 years prior to a given
observation as the denominator for all damage and international flow variables. An analogous
adjustment is made for the number of people killed due to disasters, where the denominator is
mean population in the 5-7 years prior.
      The sample for analysis includes developing countries with greater than one million popu-
lation.13 I also drop countries from the analysis for a given outcome variable if data for that
outcome is available for less than three years between 1970 and 2002 for that country. This
change does not aﬀect the empirical results, as the outcomes for countries that have only one or
two observations of non-missing data are entirely explained by the country fixed eﬀect and the
country-specific linear time trend. To maximize relevance for the samples for the main outcome
variables, in summary statistics tables I drop observations that lack suﬃcient data for inclusion
in any of the international flow outcome regressions.
      The resulting samples contain between 1,501 and 2,275 observations, depending on the out-
come variable, and between 74 and 87 countries. The countries that actually experience hurricane
exposure during the time period are those listed in Table 2 with a non-zero mean storm index.
The remaining countries serve as controls, and primarily contribute to the estimates by improv-
ing the estimates of year fixed eﬀects. The panel is unbalanced, with the number of observations
varying across countries depending on data availability.
      Table 3 presents summary statistics for the observations included in the analyses. Summary
statistics for the storm index and storm damage are for all observations included in at least one
international flow regression. The storm index has a mean of 0.0014 and a standard deviation of
0.0140. Disaster damage as a percentage of GDP has a mean of 0.73%, and the mean in levels is
US$155 million. On average across country-year observations, 2.7 out of 100,000 inhabitants were
killed due to storms. ODA as a share of GDP has a mean of 7.51%, but in some countries this
figure is quite high: the 90th percentile of this variable is 18.69%. Other variables appear more
evenly distributed worldwide. The mean of migrants’ remittances as a share of GDP is 3.22%,
with a 90th percentile of 7.92%. Mean lending from international institutions as a percentage
 13
      I calculate mean population from 1968-1972, or in the earliest 5-year period available.


                                                         12
of GDP is 1.74%, and the corresponding means for bank and trade-related lending, FDI, and
portfolio investment are 1.02%, 1.75%, and 0.18%, respectively.


4.2     Mean impact of hurricane exposure across countries

To assess the average impact of hurricane exposure on country-level outcomes, I estimate the
following regression equation for an outcome Yjt in country j and year t:


                Yjt = α1 Hjt + α2 Hjt−1 + α3 Hjt−2 + α4 Hjt−3 + α5 Hjt−4                         (4)

                         +γ j + φt ASIAj + χt LACj + ωt AF Rj + δ j T REND + εjt


   Hjt is the storm index for country j and year t. Country fixed eﬀects γ j control for time-
invariant diﬀerences across countries. Region-specific year eﬀects φt , χt and ω t allow for time-
varying factors common to all countries in the same region (ASIAj is a dummy variable for Asia,
LACj is a dummy variable for Latin America/Caribbean, and AF Rj is a dummy variable for
Africa). T REND is a linear time trend. Country-specific time trends (δj , the country-specific
coeﬃcient on the time trend) help account for the eﬀect of slow-moving changes over time that
occur throughout the sample period, and that diﬀer across countries. εjt is a mean-zero error
term.
   Serial correlation in the outcome variables is likely to be a problem in this panel dataset,
biasing OLS standard error estimates downward (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004)), so
standard errors allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance structure within countries (standard
errors are clustered by country).
   The coeﬃcients of interest, α1 through α5 , are the impacts of the storm indices in the current
year up to four years before (Hjt through Hjt−4 ) on current deviations from country-specific trends
in the dependent variable.
   Table 4, Panel A presents results for estimation of equation (4) where the dependent variables
are the economic and human losses (as calculated from the EM-DAT database). Column 1 of the
table presents results for a regression where the dependent variable is damage as a share of GDP.
Greater hurricane exposure in the current year leads to higher storm damage. The coeﬃcient on
the storm index in the current year is positive and statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero at
the 5% level. The coeﬃcient on the current-year storm index (0.376) indicates that a 0.1 increase
in the storm index leads to storm damage amounting to 3.76 percent of GDP.


                                                 13
       Columns 2 and 3 of the table present results for regressions where the dependent variables
are number of people killed and number of people injured (respectively) as share of population.
Greater hurricane exposure in the current year leads to greater proportions of population killed
and injured. The coeﬃcients on the year 0 storm index in the killed and injured regressions are
statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively. The coeﬃcients
on the current-year storm indices in columns 2 and 3 indicate that a 0.1 increase in the storm
index leads on average to an additional 0.8 people killed and 1.4 people injured per 1,000,000
population. In columns 1 through 3 all of the coeﬃcients on the storm indices in years prior
to the current year (years -1 to -4) are substantially closer to zero, indicating that the largest
human and economic losses from storms tend to occur contemporaneously, rather than with a lag.
However, there is some evidence of a lagged eﬀect of storms on killed as fraction of population:
the coeﬃcient on the storm index in year -2 is positive and statistically significantly diﬀerent from
zero at the 5% level. Lagged eﬀects of storms perhaps reflect the weakening of structures and
disaster-recovery systems, so that losses from subsequent disasters are increased.
       Subsequent results tables will present the impact of the mean storm index in years 0 to -3
on international financial flows.14 So for comparison, Panel B of Table 4 presents the impact of
the mean storm index in years 0 to -3 on the same outcome variables in Panel A, but where the
outcome variables are now also defined as means in years 0 to -3. The coeﬃcients on the mean
storm index are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero (at the 5% level at least) for all three
outcome variables, and each is somewhat larger than the year 0 coeﬃcient in Panel A (because
now both current and lagged eﬀects of damages are captured).
       Panel A of Table 5 presents results for regressions analogous to those in Panel A of Table 4,
but where the outcomes of interest are various types of international financial flows: oﬃcial de-
velopment assistance (ODA), migrants’ remittances, lending from multilateral institutions, bank
and trade-related lending, foreign direct investment, and portfolio investment. The results in col-
umn 1 indicate that ODA inflows respond positively to hurricane exposure. In that column, the
coeﬃcients on the storm index in years -1 through -3 are positive and statisitically significantly
diﬀerent from zero (all at the 10% level). Lending from multilateral institutions also responds
positively to hurricane exposure: the coeﬃcients on the storm index in years -2 and -3 are positive
and statisitically significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level. There is no evidence that, on
  14
    This is simply the mean of the storm index in year 0 through year -3. In cases where the storm index is missing
in one or more of these years, the mean is taken over the non-missing observations (for this reason, regressions in
Panel B have slightly more observations than those in Panel A).



                                                        14
average across all countries, the other types of international financial flows respond positively to
hurricane exposure. In columns 2, 4, 5, and 6 of the table, none of the coeﬃcients on the current
and lagged storm index variables are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero.
       Because of the existence of lagged eﬀects of hurricane exposure on international financial
inflows, it is of interest to examine the relationship between the mean hurricane exposure in
recent years on current financial flows. So Panel B of Table 5 presents regression results where
the dependent variables are exactly as in Panel A, but where the independent variable of interest
is the mean storm index in years 0 through -3. On average across all developing countries, mean
hurricane exposure in years 0 to -3 causes inflows of oﬃcial development assistance: the coeﬃcient
on the mean storm index in column 1 is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level. In
each of the remaining columns, the coeﬃcient on the mean storm index is always substantially
smaller in magnitude than in the ODA regression (and sometimes negative) and is not statistically
significantly diﬀerent from zero.


4.3       Heterogeneity in impact of storms

The results in Tables 4 and 5 represent the mean impact of hurricane exposure across the de-
veloping countries in the dataset. It is also useful to understand heterogeneity in the eﬀects of
hurricane exposure that may be related to level of economic development, democratic institutions,
international political connectedness to major donor countries, and geographic location.
       The basic strategy is to interact the mean storm index in years 0 to -3 with variables repre-
senting each of these dimensions of heterogeneity. The level of economic development is simply
per capita GDP in the initial period (the mean from 1968-1972), in thousands of 1995 US dol-
lars.15 Democratic institutions are represented by the Polity IV democracy index, which ranges
from 0 to 10. Connectedness to major donor countries is measured by an index of the similarity
of a country’s international political alliances to those of the five largest contributors of foreign
aid (USA, Japan, France, Britain, and Germany), as in Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman (1992),
Bueno de Mesquita (1981), and Bueno de Mesquita (1985). Geographic location is captured
simply by a Latin American dummy variable and an African dummy variable (Asia being the
excluded category). Democratic institutions and alliance similarity are means in the 5-7 years
prior to the observation in question.
       Coeﬃcient estimates on the mean storm index (years 0 to -3) and the associated interaction
  15
    If data were not available on per capita GDP in 1968-1972, the mean was taken over the earliest subsequent
5-year period available.


                                                     15
terms are presented in Table 6.16 In the first column, the dependent variable is mean disaster
damage in years 0 to -3. None of the coeﬃcient estimates on the interaction terms in that column
are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero. There is no indication that there is important
heterogeneity in the impact of hurricanes on disaster damage along these dimensions.
       In the remaining columns of the table, the dependent variables are the six types of international
financial flows previously examined. The most apparent pattern is that migrants’ remittances
respond less to hurricane exposure in richer countries: the coeﬃcient on the per capita GDP
interaction term is negative and statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level. The
interaction term with initial per capita income is also negative (but is not statistically significantly
diﬀerent from zero) in the other flow regressions. Another pattern that emerges (weakly) is that
the coeﬃcient on the democracy index interaction term is positive for all types of flows, but none
of these interaction terms are statistically significant at conventional levels. There does not seem
to be a strong pattern of heterogeneity related to alliance similarity: the interaction with alliance
similarity takes on various signs across regressions, and is never statistically significantly diﬀerent
from zero.
       To the extent there are regional diﬀerences in the impact of storms on international financial
flows, they appear to be limited to Latin America. The Latin American interaction term is
positive and statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero (at the 10% level) in the regressions
for bank and trade-related lending and for portfolio investment. The coeﬃcient on the Latin
American interaction term is also positive (but not statistically significant) in the regressions for
remittances, lending from multilateral institutions, and FDI. The interaction term for Africa, on
the other hand, shows no obvious pattern: the coeﬃcient signs are both positive and negative,
and none are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero.


4.4       Impact of hurricane exposure: richer vs. poorer countries

One of the most striking results in Table 6 was the negative coeﬃcient on the interaction term
between hurricane exposure and initial per capita GDP (particularly the statistically significant
coeﬃcient in the remittances regression). To further explore this particular dimension of hetero-
geneity, Table 7 presents the results from regressing international financial flows of various sorts
on the mean storm index, for subsamples of the data separated at median initial per capita GDP
  16
    Main eﬀects for the democracy index and alliance similarity are also included in the regressions (coeﬃcients
not shown). Main eﬀects for the other interaction terms do not need to be included as they would be absorbed by
the country fixed eﬀects.



                                                      16
(the full set of fixed eﬀects and country-specific linear time trends remain in the regressions). Re-
sults for the richest half of countries are in Panel A, while those for the poorest half of countries
are in Panel B.
   In each panel, the coeﬃcient on the mean storm index in years 0 to -3 is in the row labeled
"Reduced form". In the reduced form coeﬃcients in Panels A and B, the coeﬃcient on the mean
storm index in the ODA regression is positive and statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero
for both the richer and poorer subsamples (at the 10% and 5% levels, respectively). No other
reduced form coeﬃcient is statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero in the subsample of richer
countries, although the coeﬃcients in the regressions for bank and trade-related lending and for
FDI are actually negative and are not small in magnitude.
   In the subsample of poorer countries (Panel B), the coeﬃcient on the mean storm index in
the remittances regression is also positive and is statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero at
the 1% level, while in the regression for bank and trade-related lending the coeﬃcient is negative
and statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level.
   To gauge the magnitude of the financial inflows vis-a-vis the damages caused, a row labeled
"Instrumental variables (IV) estimates" presents coeﬃcient estimates on mean damage as a share
of GDP (in years 0 to -3), where damage is instrumented by the mean storm index in years 0 to
-3. The first-stage and OLS (uninstrumented) regressions corresponding to the IV regressions are
presented, respectively, in Appendix Tables 1 and 2.
   In Appendix Table 1, each first-stage regression is accompanied by the F-statistic of the test
of the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcient on the instrument (mean storm index, years 0 to -3) is
equal to zero. In first-stage regressions for the richer country subsample (Panel A of Appendix
Table 1), the F-statistics range from 2.860 to 4.224, indicating that these are relatively weak
instruments (according to critical values reported in Stock and Yogo 2005). Therefore, the IV
results for the richer country subsample in Table 7 should be interpreted with caution.
   By contrast, in the first-stage regressions for the poorer country subsample (Panel B of Ap-
pendix Table 1), the F-statistics are substantially larger, ranging from 25.101 to 135.751. Because
these F-statistics substantially exceed the Stock and Yogo (2005) critical values, these are rel-
atively strong instruments and the accompanying IV estimates therefore should have attractive
size properties.
   In Table 7, the coeﬃcient on mean damage as share of GDP (in years 0 to -3) in the IV regres-
sions should be interpreted as the fraction of damages replaced by the given type of international
flow in the disaster year and the three years that follow (a "replacement rate"). In the richer

                                                 17
subsample (results in Panel A), positive and statistically significant coeﬃcients on the damage
variable indicate that increases in damage lead to increases in ODA and lending from multilateral
institutions. The point estimates indicate that 52.2 percent of damages are replaced by ODA,
and 12.2 percent of damages are replaced by lending from multilateral institutions within three
years following the damages. That said, the coeﬃcients on damages for the remaining types of
flows are all negative in sign, and the coeﬃcients on bank and trade-related lending and on FDI
are relatively large in magnitude (although none are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero).
    In the poorer subsample (results in Panel B), the results indicate that increases in damage
lead to increases in ODA and in migrants’ remittances (coeﬃcients on damage in these regressions
are positive and statistically significant), but to declines in bank and trade-related lending (the
coeﬃcient in this regression is negative and statistically significant). There is little indication
that other types of financial flows are aﬀected by disaster damage in this poorer subsample:
the coeﬃcients on damage in the remaining regressions are all small in magnitude and none are
statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero.



5     Discussion: magnitudes of the results
How large are the estimated eﬀects of hurricane exposure on international inflows? In particular,
how large are the responses of all international inflows combined relative to the damages caused
by hurricane exposure?
    The replacement rate of disaster damages by some combination of international inflows is
simply the sum of coeﬃcients on mean damage across the corresponding IV regressions in of Table
7. Table 8 presents such sums of coeﬃcients for various combinations of flows (and corresponding
standard errors), separately for the richer and poorer country subsamples.
    Of particular interest is the total replacement rate of disaster damages by all international
inflows combined, the sum of the coeﬃcients across columns 1 through 6. For the richer subsample,
the replacement rate by all flows is 0.167, but this figure is very imprecisely estimated (the
standard error is 0.507) so that the null hypothesis of zero replacement cannot be rejected. By
contrast, for the poorer subsample, the replacement rate by all flows combined is 0.755 (roughly
three-quarters), and this estimate is statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level.
Indeed, the null hypothesis of full replacement (a replacement rate of 1) cannot be rejected. All
told, then, there is strong evidence that international inflows replace disaster damages for the
poorer half of the sample, but not for the richer half.

                                                  18
    Examining the replacement rate for subcategories of flows yields additional insights. When
restricting attention to the two types of flows from "public" sources (the sum of ODA and lending
from multilateral institutions), the replacement rate is positive and statistically significant for both
the richer and poorer country subsamples (at the 1% and 10% levels, respectively). Strikingly,
the estimated replacement rates are almost identical: 0.644 and 0.646 for the richer and poorer
subsamples, respectively.
    Suggestive evidence of diﬀerences across the subsamples emerges when considering private
flows (the sum of remittances, bank and trade-related lending, FDI, and portfolio investment).
For the richer subsample, the sum of coeﬃcients is negative and large in magnitude (-0.477),
while for the poorer subsample the sum is positive and small in magnitude (0.109). However,
standard errors are large, so that neither sum is statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero. It
is apparently the large negative coeﬃcient sum across private flows that leads the sum across all
flows to be small in magnitude and statistically insignificant for the richer subsample.



6     Conclusion
Disasters exact a huge toll worldwide, both in terms of human casualties as well as economic losses.
Until now, however, there has been no systematic assessment of the extent to which international
resource flows help buﬀer countries from the losses they experience in the wake of disasters. This
paper fills this gap, focusing on hurricanes–one of the most common and destructive types of
disasters.
    Using meteorological data on storm paths, I construct a storm index at the country-year
level that takes into account the fraction of a country’s population exposed to storms of varying
intensities. The analysis reveals striking diﬀerences across richer and poorer developing countries
in the responsiveness of international financial flows to hurricane exposure. Across developing
countries, greater hurricane exposure leads to large increases in foreign aid. For other types of
international financial flows, the impact of hurricanes varies according to income level. In the
poorer half of the sample, hurricane exposure also leads to substantial increases in migrants’
remittances, and a slightly oﬀsetting decline in bank and trade-related lending. For this poor-
country subsample, instrumental variables estimates indicate that total inflows from all sources
in the three years following hurricane exposure amount to roughly three-fourths of estimated
damages. In the richer half of the sample, by contrast, hurricane exposure stimulates inflows of
new lending from multilateral institutions, but oﬀsetting declines in private financial flows are so

                                                  19
large that the null hypothesis of zero damage replacement cannot be rejected.
   A key result of this paper is that the response of oﬃcial development assistance (foreign aid)
to hurricane exposure is large in magnitude, and the size of the response does not diﬀer greatly
across countries with varying levels of economic development, democratic institutions, political
connectedness to main donor countries, or geographic location. This result is perhaps surprising
in light of evidence in Alesina and Dollar (2000) that political and strategic considerations have
a large eﬀect on bilateral foreign aid flows. There is no necessary contradition between the two
papers, however. It very well may be that the level of foreign aid is influenced greatly by political
and strategic factors, even if aid’s responsiveness to disasters is not.
   For other types of financial flows, this paper does document heterogeneity in responsiveness
to disasters. The poorer the country, the more do migrants’ remittances respond to hurricane
exposure. This heterogeneity may be due to these countries’ having larger migrant stocks in
the developed world, migrant stocks that are more prone to remit, or both. Other private flows
(commercial lending, FDI, and portfolio investment), actually decline in response to hurricane
exposure, and the declines appear larger in the richer half of the sample (although estimates are too
imprecise to make definitive statements). Declines in these other private flows following disasters
may reflect declines in rates of return or increased risk perceptions on the part of international
lenders and investors. However, these potential reasons behind heterogeneity in responsiveness of
the various private flows are just hypotheses at this point. I consider understanding the reasons
underlying heterogeneity in the impact of hurricane exposure on these private flows to be an
important area for future research.
   More generally, this paper provides the first evidence that some types of international financial
flows help buﬀer countries from negative economic shocks. By contrast, related empirical work
in international finance to date typically concludes that there is little cross-country risk-sharing
and consumption smoothing. That said, this paper examines a specific kind of negative shock:
losses due to natural disasters. A possible explanation for the divergence between this paper’s
results from the rest of the international finance research on the topic is that disasters are highly
observable events, and that countries cannot influence the likelihood of experiencing one. There-
fore, international risk-sharing and consumption smoothing mechanisms in the wake of disasters
are not subject to moral hazard (unlike international mechanisms for dealing with, say, economic
fluctuations driven by poor macroeconomic policy). Valuable future work on this topic could use
an analogous instrumental variables approach to understand the impact of damages from other
types of disasters (such as earthquakes or droughts), to ascertain the generalizability of these

                                                 20
results.



7     References


Albala-Bertrand, J. M., The Political Economy of Large Natural Disasters, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1993.

   Alesina, Alberto and David Dollar, ‘Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?’ Journal of
Economic Growth, Vol. 5, March 2000, pp. 33-63.

    Alexander, David, Natural Disasters. London: University College London Press, 1993.

   Altonji, J. G., F. Hayashi, and L. J. Kotlikoﬀ, ‘Is the Extended Family Altruistically Linked?
Direct Tests Using Micro Data,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 5, December 1992,
pp. 1177-1198.

    Anbarci, Nejat, Monica Escaleras, and Charles A. Register, ‘Earthquake Fatalities: The In-
teraction of Nature and Political Economy,’ Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

   Asdrubali, Pierfederico, Bent E. Sorensen, and Oved Yosha, ‘Channels of Interstate Risk
Sharing: United States 1963-1990,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, November 1996,
pp. 1081-1110.

   Asdrubali, Pierfederico and Soyoung Kim, ‘Dynamic Risk Sharing in the United States and
Europe,’ Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 51, 2004, pp. 809-836.

   Balk, Deborah, and Gregory Yetman, "The Global Distribution of Population: Evaluating
the Gains in Resolution Refinement," mimeo, Center for International Earth Science Information
Network, 10 February 2004.

   Benson, Charlotte and Edward J. Clay, ‘Understanding the Economic and Financial Impacts
of Natural Disasters,’ Disaster Risk Management Series No. 4, World Bank, 2004.

   Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan, ‘How Much Should We Trust
Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerence Estimates?’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No.1, February
2004, pp. 249-275 .

   Bluedorn, John Christopher, "Hurricanes: Intertemporal Trade and Capital Shocks," mimeo,
University of Oxford, 2005.

    Bluedorn, John Christopher and Elizabeth Cascio, "Education and Intergenerational Mobility:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Puerto Rico," mimeo, University of Oxford and University
of California, Davis, 2005.

    Bryant, Edward, Natural Hazards. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

    Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, The War Trap. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1981.

                                               21
   Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, ‘The War Trap Revisited,’ American Political Science Review,
Vol. 79, 1985, pp. 156-177.

   Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, and David Lalman, War and Reason. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1992.

   Chu, Jan-Hwa, Edward Fukada, Andrew S. Levine, and Charles R. Sampson, ‘The Joint
Typhoon Warning Center Tropical Cyclone Best-Tracks, 1945-2000,’ Joint Typhoon Warning
Center, NRL Reference Number: NRL/MR/7540-02-16, August 2002.

   Cochrane, John, ‘A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,’ Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 99, No. 5, 1991, pp. 957-976.

    Cox, Donald, Zekeriya Eser, and Emmanuel Jimenez, ‘Motives for Private Transfers Over the
Life-Cycle: An Analytical Framework and Evidence for Peru,’ Journal of Development Economics,
Vol. 55, 1998, pp. 57-80.

    Davis, Mary A. S., Gail M. Brown, and Preston Leftwich, ‘A Tropical Cyclone Data Tape
for the Eastern and Central North Pacific Basins, 1949-1983: Contents, Limitations, and Uses,’
NOAA Technical Memorandum NWS NHC 25, September 1984.

   Deichmann, Uwe, Deborah Balk, and Greg Yetman, “Transforming Population Data for In-
terdisciplinary Usages: From Census to Grid,” mimeo, World Bank and Columbia University,
2001.

   Dilley, Maxx, Robert S. Chen, Uwe Deichmann, Arthur L. Lerner-Lam, and Margaret Arnold,
with Jonathan Agwe, Piet Buys, Oddvar Kjekstad, Bradfield Lyon, and Gregory Yetman, “Nat-
ural Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk Analysis,” Disaster Risk Management Series No. 5, Hazard
Management Unit, World Bank, 2005.

    Eaton, Jonathan and M. Gersovitz, ‘Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Em-
pirical Analysis,’ Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 48, 1981, pp. 289-309.

   EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database. Université Catholique de Lou-
vain, Brussels, Belgium. (Available at www.em-dat.net).

   Fafchamps, Marcel and Susan Lund, ‘Risk-sharing Networks in Rural Philippines,’ Journal of
Development Economics, Vol. 71, No. 2, August 2003, pp. 261-287.

   Fafchamps, Marcel, Christopher Udry, and Katherine Czukas, ‘Drought and Saving in West
Africa: Are Livestock a Buﬀer Stock?’ Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 55, 1998, pp.
273-305.

   French, Kenneth R. and James M. Poterba, ‘Investor Diversification and International Equity
Markets,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred
and Third Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, May 1991, pp. 222-226.

   Grossman, H. I. and J. B. Van Huyck, ‘Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim: Excusable
Default, Repudiation, and Reputation,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 78, No. 5, 1988, pp.
1088-1097.


                                             22
  Guha-Sapir, D., D. Hargitt, P. Hoyois, Thirty Years of Natural Disasters 1974-2003: The
Numbers. Université Catholique de Louvain, Presses Universitaires de Louvain, 2004.

   Jarvinen, Brian R., Charles J. Neumann, and Mary A. S. Davis, ‘A Tropical Cyclone Data
Tape for the North Atlantic Basin, 1886-1983: Contents, Limitations, and Uses,’ NOAA Technical
Memorandum NWS NHC 22, March 1984.

   Kahn, Matthew, ‘The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: The Role of Income, Geography,
and Institutions,’ Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, No. 2, May 2005.

   Kletzer, Kenneth M., ‘Asymmetries of Information and LDC Borrowing with Sovereign Risk,’
Economic Journal, Vol. 94, June 1984, pp. 287-307.

   Lewis, Karen K. ‘What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption Risk
Sharing?’ Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 104, No. 2, 1996, pp. 267-297.

    Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas, and Tim Worall, ‘Informal Insurance Arrangements with
Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies,’ Review of Economic Stud-
ies, Vol. 69, 2002, pp. 209-244.

   Lim, Y. and Robert M. Townsend, ‘General Equilibrium Models of Financial Systems: Theory
and Measurement in Village Economies,’ Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 1, No. 1, January
1998, pp. 58-118.

   Lucas, Robert E. and Stark Oded, ‘Motivations to Remit: Evidence from Botswana,’ Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 93, No. 5, October 1985, pp. 901-918.

   Mace, B.J., ‘Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty,’ Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 99, No. 5, 1991, pp. 928-956.

     Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti, "Economic Shocks and Civil Con-
flict: An Instrumental Variables Approach," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112 (4), August
2004, pp. 725-753.

    Paxson, Christina, ‘Using Weather Variability to Estimate the Response of Savings to Tran-
sitory Income in Thailand,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 1, March 1992, pp. 15-33.

   Platteau, Jean-Philippe, ‘Traditional Systems of Social Security and Hunger Insurance: Past
Achievements and Modern Challenges,’ in E. Ahmad, J. Dreze, J. Hills, and A. Sen (eds.), Social
Security in Developing Countries, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.

   Ratha, Dilip, “Workers’ Remittances: An Important and Stable Source of External Devel-
opment Finance,” in Global Development Finance 2003: Striving for Stability in Development
Finance. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 2003.

  Ravallion, Martin and L. Dearden, ‘Social Security in a "Moral Economy": An Empirical
Analysis for Java,’ Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 70, 1988, pp. 36-44.

   Rosenzweig, Mark, ‘Risk, Implicit Contracts, and the Family in Rural Areas of Low-Income
Countries,’ Economic Journal, Vol. 98, December 1988, pp. 1148-1170.



                                              23
   Rosenzweig, Mark and Oded Stark, ‘Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and Marriage: Ev-
idence from Rural India,’ Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 4, 1989, pp. 905-926.

   Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin, ‘Credit Market Constraints, Consumption Smoothing
and the Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income Countries: Investments in
Bullocks in India,’ Journal of Political Economy 101, 1993, pp. 223-244.

   Townsend, Robert, ‘Risk and Insurance in Village India,’ Econometrica, Vol. 62, No. 3, May
1994, pp. 539-591.

   Townsend, Robert, ‘Financial Systems in Northern Thai Villages,’ Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, Vol. 110, No. 4, November 1995, pp. 1011-1046.

   Smith, Keith, Environmental Hazards: Assessing Risk and Reducing Disaster. London: Rout-
ledge, 1992.

   Tesar, Linda, ‘International Risksharing and Nontraded Goods,’ Journal of International Eco-
nomics, Vol. 35, 1993, pp. 69-89.

    Tesar, Linda, ‘Evaluating the Gains from International Risksharing,’ Carnegie-Rochester Con-
ference Series on Public Policy, No. 42, 1995, pp. 95-143.

   Udry, Christopher, ‘Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical Investigation
in Northern Nigeria,’ Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 61, No. 3, July 1994, pp. 495-526.

   Van Wincoop, Eric, ‘How Big are Potential Welfare Gains from International Risksharing?’
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 47, No. 1, February 1999, pp. 109-135.

    Yang, Dean and Hwajung Choi, "Are Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Rainfall Shocks
in the Philippines," mimeo, University of Michigan, 2005.




                                              24
Figure 1 Hurricane Mitch approaching Honduras, October 26, 1998




                                                                  1
  Source: http://rsd.gsfc.nasa.gov/rsd/images/Mitch.html.
Figure 2 Western North Pacific best tracks, 1985




Source: Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography Center/Joint Typhoon Warning Center. Link provided in Chu et al (2002) and available at
<http://www.npmoc.navy.mil/jtwc/best_tracks/TC_bt_report.html>.
                                                                                                                                             2
Figure 3 Hurricane best tracks worldwide, 1970-2002




Sources: Hurricane best track databases of the NOAA Tropical Prediction Center and the Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography
Center/Joint Typhoon Warning Center, processed using ArcGIS software.
                                                                                                                                    3
Table 1: Human losses and damages from natural disasters worldwide
      1970-2002

                                                                               % of total
                           Killed          Injured           Damage            damage
Type of disaster          (000s)           (000s)        (1995 US$, 000s)

Drought                             878              0          61,351,458           6.22%
Wind storm                          612            520         280,019,414          28.38%
Earthquake                          574          1,089         300,979,548          30.50%
Famine                              232              0              71,798           0.01%
Flood                               210            982         278,445,093          28.22%
Epidemic                            154             80               1,450           0.00%
Volcano                              26              8           5,514,201           0.56%
Earth slide                          25              8           4,310,708           0.44%
Extreme temperature                  21             10          27,589,390           2.80%
Wave / Surge                          3              1               4,659           0.00%
Wild fire                             1              2          28,244,056           2.86%
Insect infestation                    0              0             251,002           0.03%

Total                           2,737            2,701         986,782,776        100.00%

NOTES -- All figures are in thousands. Data are worldwide totals between 1970-2002 from
EM-DAT: the OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database, Université Catholique de
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (Available at www.em-dat.net). Damage figures in EM-DAT
converted to constant 1995 US dollars using GDP deflators and exchange rates from World
Bank's World Development Indicators 2004. Disaster types in table sorted by number killed.
"Wind storm" category includes phenomena variously referred to as cyclones, hurricanes,
storms, tornadoes, tropical storms, typhoons, or winter storms.
Table 2: Mean storm index by country, 1970-2002

                                                        Mean storm
      Region                       Country                index
Caribbean           Dominican Republic                    0.020492
Caribbean           Jamaica                               0.012867
Caribbean           Haiti                                 0.007932
Central America     Mexico                                0.001487
Central America     Nicaragua                             0.001431
Central America     Honduras                              0.001130
Central America     Guatemala                             0.000434
Central America     El Salvador                           0.000025
Central America     Costa Rica                            0.000001
Central America     Panama                                    0

East Asia           Korea, Rep.                           0.004806
East Asia           China                                 0.001606
East Asia           Mongolia                                  0

Oceania             Papua New Guinea                      0.000003

South Asia          Bangladesh                            0.004568
South Asia          India                                 0.000784
South Asia          Sri Lanka                             0.000308
South Asia          Pakistan                              0.000159
South Asia          Nepal                                     0

Southeast Asia      Philippines                           0.028723
Southeast Asia      Vietnam                               0.006357
Southeast Asia      Myanmar                               0.001354
Southeast Asia      Lao PDR                               0.000413
Southeast Asia      Thailand                              0.000080
Southeast Asia      Malaysia                              0.000036
Southeast Asia      Cambodia                              0.000022
Southeast Asia      Indonesia                             0.000000

Southern Africa     Madagascar                            0.007182
Southern Africa     Mozambique                            0.001550
Southern Africa     Zimbabwe                              0.000062
Southern Africa     Angola                                    0
Southern Africa     Lesotho                                   0
Southern Africa     Malawi                                    0
Southern Africa     South Africa                              0
Southern Africa     Zambia                                    0

NOTES -- Rows of table sorted by region and mean storm index (mean over 1970-2002).
Storm index is intensity-weighted events per capita in a given year, with squared
windspeed as weight. Index is normalized: value of 1 means each inhabitant experiences
a single hurricane at maximum windspeed observed over the time period. Sample of
countries is developing countries with 1,000,000 or more population in 1968-1972.
Hurricane data are from best track databases of the NOAA Tropical Prediction Center and
the Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography Center/Joint Typhoon Warning Center,
processed using ArcGIS.
Table 3: Summary statistics, 1970-2002

                                                         Mean       Std. Dev.    Minimum      10th pctile.   Median       90th pctile.   Maximum      Num. Obs.

Storm index, current year                                  0.0014       0.0140            0              0            0      0.00007          0.461       2,275

Disaster damage (% of GDP)                                  0.73%        6.62%       0.00%         0.00%        0.00%          0.49%       171.88%        2,275
Disaster damage (1995 US$, 000s)                          154,773    1,017,566           0             0            0        142,052     20,670,939       2,275
Killed (% of population)                                 0.0027%      0.0282%           0%            0%     0.0001%        0.0024%        0.8227%        2,275
Injured (% of population)                                0.0036%      0.0505%           0%            0%           0%       0.0011%        1.4679%        2,275

Official development assistance (% of GDP)                 7.51%        9.35%       -0.78%         0.12%       3.97%         18.69%         96.13%        2,264
Migrants' remittances (% of GDP)                           3.22%       10.24%      -10.39%        -1.11%       1.00%          7.92%        137.57%        1,501
Lending from multilateral institutions (% of GDP)          1.74%        2.41%       -5.91%        -0.11%       1.01%          4.71%         28.57%        2,163
Bank and trade-related lending (% of GDP)                  1.02%        3.11%      -14.10%        -0.95%       0.05%          4.25%         34.99%        2,163
Foreign direct investment (% of GDP)                       1.75%        3.61%      -30.32%        -0.02%       0.78%          5.04%         54.80%        1,761
Portfolio investment (% of GDP)                            0.18%        3.26%      -58.41%        -0.33%       0.00%          1.24%         53.20%        1,742

NOTES-- The unit of observation is a country-year. Storm index is intensity-weighted events per capita in a given year, with squared windspeed as weight.
Index is normalized: value of 1 means each inhabitant experiences a single hurricane at maximum windspeed observed over the time period. All
international financial flows are net (inflows minus outflows); lending figures are new credits minus repayment of principal. For variables expressed as % of
GDP, GDP in denominator is average of 5-7 years prior to observation. For number killed as % of population, population in denominator is average of 5-7
years prior to observation. All other currency-denominated variables are in constant 1995 US dollars, including those used for % of GDP figures. Sources:
IMF Government Finance Statistics; World Bank's World Development Indicators; EM-DAT International Disaster Database; hurricane best track databases
of the NOAA Tropical Prediction Center and the Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography Center/Joint Typhoon Warning Center.
Table 4: Impact of storms on economic and human losses, 1970-2002
(Fixed effects OLS estimates)

Panel A: Impact of storm index, years 0 to -4 separately

                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)

               Dependent variable: Disaster damage as Killed as fraction of Injured as fraction of
                                     fraction of GDP       population            population


Coefficient on storm index:
 Year 0                                     0.376               0.000783              0.001356
                                          (0.156)**           (0.000202)***         (0.000582)**
 Year -1                                    0.028               0.000174              0.000413
                                           (0.050)             (0.000130)            (0.000267)
 Year -2                                    0.037               0.000174              0.000238
                                           (0.032)            (0.000087)**           (0.000225)
 Year -3                                    -0.001              0.000223              -0.000127
                                           (0.023)             (0.000181)            (0.000407)
 Year -4                                    -0.003              0.000073              0.000151
                                           (0.034)             (0.000111)            (0.000219)


Num. of obs.                                2,227                 2,227                2,227
R-squared                                   0.17                  0.11                 0.12


Panel B: Impact of mean storm index (years 0 to -3)

                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)

Dependent variable (mean in years Disaster damage as Killed as fraction of Injured as fraction of
                         0 to -3):  fraction of GDP       population            population

Mean storm index, years 0 to -3             0.45                 0.00116              0.001723
                                          (0.197)**           (0.000389)***         (0.000762)**


Num. of obs.                                2,275                 2,275                2,275
R-squared                                   0.52                   0.3                  0.3

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES -- Unit of observation is a country-year. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
country. All regressions include country fixed effects, year-region fixed effects (regions are "Latin
America/Caribbean", "Asia", and "Africa"), and country-specific linear time trends. Damage is divided
by mean GDP 5-7 years before. Killed and injured in storms are divided by mean population 5-7
years before. See Table 3 for variable definitions and other notes.
Table 5: Impact of storms on international financial flows to developing countries, 1970-2002
(Fixed effects OLS estimates)

Panel A: Impact of storm index, years 0 to -4 separately

                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)

   Dependent variable (share of           Official         Migrants'         Lending from     Bank and trade-     Foreign direct        Portfolio
             GDP):                     development        remittances         multilateral    related lending      investment         investment
                                     assistance (ODA)                         institutions

Coefficient on storm index:
 Year 0                                    0.059              0.013              -0.005             -0.02             -0.034             -0.027
                                          (0.037)            (0.015)            (0.010)            (0.022)           (0.021)            (0.028)
 Year -1                                  0.064               0.017              0.016              -0.028            -0.013             0.036
                                         (0.034)*            (0.019)            (0.011)            (0.023)           (0.014)            (0.039)
 Year -2                                  0.094               0.014              0.014              -0.041            -0.018             -0.011
                                         (0.047)*            (0.015)           (0.006)**           (0.033)           (0.034)            (0.029)
 Year -3                                  0.089               -0.015             0.03               -0.028            0.006              -0.008
                                         (0.050)*            (0.017)           (0.015)**           (0.023)           (0.038)            (0.025)
 Year -4                                   0.042              -0.008             -0.003             0.001             0.031              0.034
                                          (0.028)            (0.014)            (0.012)            (0.027)           (0.039)            (0.039)


Num. of obs.                               2,220              1,465             2,119              2,119              1,713              1,694
R-squared                                  0.84               0.96              0.61               0.42               0.64               0.28


Panel B: Impact of mean storm index (years 0 to -3)

                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)

   Dependent variable (share of           Official         Migrants'         Lending from     Bank and trade-     Foreign direct        Portfolio
             GDP):                     development        remittances         multilateral    related lending      investment         investment
                                     assistance (ODA)                         institutions



Mean storm index, years 0 to -3            0.29               0.029              0.054              -0.115            -0.069             -0.022
                                         (0.144)**           (0.055)            (0.033)            (0.078)           (0.085)            (0.052)


Num. of obs.                               2,264              1,501             2,163              2,163              1,761              1,742
R-squared                                  0.84               0.97              0.61               0.43               0.64               0.27

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES -- Unit of observation is a country-year. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country. All regressions include country fixed effects,
year-region fixed effects (regions are "Latin America/Caribbean", "Asia", and "Africa"), and country-specific linear time trends. All dependent
variables divided by mean GDP 5-7 years before. See Table 3 for variable definitions and other notes.
Table 6: Heterogeneity in impact of storms on international financial flows to developing countries, 1970-2002
(Fixed effects OLS estimates)

                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)

      Dependent variable (share of GDP):              Mean          Official  Migrants' Lending from Bank and         Foreign            Portfolio
                                                     disaster    development remittances multilateral trade-related    direct          investment
                                                     damage,      assistance             institutions    lending    investment
                                                   years 0 to -3    (ODA)

Mean storm index, years 0-3                           0.604         0.542         -0.399        0.263         -0.44         -0.537        -0.322
                                                     (1.123)       (0.799)       (0.863)       (0.443)       (0.387)       (0.550)       (0.615)
(Mean storm index, years 0-3) x
  (Per capita GDP, 1968-1972,                         0.131         -0.031       -0.308         -0.118        -0.127        -0.023        -0.163
    000s of 1995 US$)                                (0.204)       (0.290)      (0.118)**      (0.123)       (0.117)       (0.189)       (0.098)
(Mean storm index, years 0-3) x
  (Polity IV democracy index,                         0.05          0.045         0.035         0.04           0.04         0.028         0.023
    5-7 years before)                                (0.051)       (0.064)       (0.032)       (0.034)       (0.026)       (0.046)       (0.026)
(Mean storm index, years 0-3) x
  (Alliance similarity with US, Japan, France,       -5.631        -2.631         4.889        -1.631         0.851         2.14          1.836
    Britain, and West Germany, 5-7 years before)     (4.522)       (3.050)       (4.150)       (1.946)       (1.562)       (2.394)       (2.956)

(Mean storm index, years 0-3) x                       -0.021        -0.077        0.532         0.119         0.426         0.212         0.457
  (Latin America dummy)                              (0.536)       (0.284)       (0.441)       (0.165)       (0.234)*      (0.247)       (0.260)*

(Mean storm index, years 0-3) x                       -0.577        1.218         1.42          -0.458        0.656         -0.688        0.729
  (Africa dummy)                                     (1.181)       (1.632)       (1.104)       (0.482)       (0.422)       (1.320)       (0.628)

Num. of obs.                                          2,111         2,100         1,419         1,999         1,999         1,647         1,636
R-squared                                             0.52          0.85          0.97          0.62          0.41          0.55          0.28

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES -- Unit of observation is a country-year. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country. All regressions include country fixed effects,
year-region fixed effects (regions are "Latin America/Caribbean", "Asia", and "Africa"), and country-specific linear time trends. All dependent
variables divided by mean GDP 5-7 years before. "Alliance similarity" captures extent to which country had similar international alliances with USA,
Japan, France, Britain, and Germany. Polity IV democracy index ranges from 0 to 10 (10 is most democratic). Main effects for democracy index and
alliance similarity also included in regressions (coefficients not shown). See Table 3 for variable definitions and other notes.
Table 7: Impact of storms and disaster damage on international financial flows, separately for
                                  richer and poorer developing countries
1970-2002
(Reduced form and IV estimates)

Panel A: Countries above median initial per capita GDP
                                             (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Dependent variable (share of GDP):          Official      Migrants'      Lending from Bank and trade- Foreign direct           Portfolio
                                         development     remittances      multilateral related lending investment            investment
                                          assistance                      institutions
                                            (ODA)
Reduced form:
 Coefficient on mean storm index,            0.22           -0.013           0.052            -0.091           -0.058           -0.027
  years 0 to -3                            (0.120)*        (0.060)          (0.035)          (0.082)          (0.098)          (0.064)
Num. of obs.                               1,133            763             1,035            1,035             932              942
R-squared                                   0.81            0.91             0.45             0.52             0.71             0.29

Instrumental variables (IV) estimates:
  Coefficient on mean damage                0.522           -0.033           0.122            -0.214           -0.16            -0.07
    as share of GDP, years 0 to -3        (0.098)***       (0.134)         (0.043)***        (0.287)          (0.359)          (0.150)

Num. of obs.                                1,133            763             1,035            1,035            932              942


Panel B: Countries at or below median initial per capita GDP
                                             (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Dependent variable (share of GDP):          Official      Migrants'      Lending from Bank and trade- Foreign direct           Portfolio
                                         development     remittances      multilateral related lending investment            investment
                                          assistance                      institutions
                                            (ODA)
Reduced form:
 Coefficient on mean storm index,           0.72            0.296            -0.025          -0.117            0.027            0.005
  years 0 to -3                           (0.323)**       (0.109)***        (0.057)         (0.048)**         (0.087)          (0.032)
Num. of obs.                               1,066            723             1,063            1,063             799              779
R-squared                                   0.82            0.98             0.66             0.36             0.49             0.34

Instrumental variables (IV) estimates:
  Coefficient on mean damage                0.669           0.198            -0.024          -0.108            0.016            0.003
    as share of GDP, years 0 to -3         (0.351)*       (0.093)**         (0.054)        (0.033)***         (0.052)          (0.019)

Num. of obs.                                1,066            723             1,063            1,063            799              779


* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES -- Unit of observation is a country-year. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country. All regressions include country
fixed effects, year-region fixed effects (regions are "Latin America/Caribbean", "Asia", and "Africa"), and country-specific linear time
trends. All dependent variables divided by mean GDP 5-7 years before. Total number of observations across richer and poorer
subsamples is lower than in previous tables because initial per capita GDP is not available for Myanmar. See Table 3 for variable
definitions and other notes.
Table 8: Replacement rate of disaster damage by international financial flows, separately for richer and poorer developing countries
1970-2002


Panel A: Countries above median initial per capita GDP

                                       All flows                     Flows from governments and                 Flows from private sources
                                                                international institutions (ODA, lending   (remittances, bank and trade-related
                                                                      from multilateral institutions)        lending, FDI, portfolio investment)

Replacement rate                        0.167                                   0.644                                     -0.477
(Standard error)                       (0.507)                                (0.107)***                                 (0.495)


Panel B: Countries at or below median initial per capita GDP

                                       All flows                     Flows from governments and                 Flows from private sources
                                                                international institutions (ODA, lending   (remittances, bank and trade-related
                                                                      from multilateral institutions)        lending, FDI, portfolio investment)



Replacement rate                        0.755                                   0.646                                     0.109
(Standard error)                      (0.373)**                                (0.356)*                                  (0.111)


* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES -- Replacement rates are inflows as fraction of disaster damages, calculated as sum of instrumental variables (IV) coefficients in Table
7 for corresponding flows.
Appendix Table 1: Impact of storms on disaster damage, separately for richer and poorer developing countries
           (first stage of IV regressions of Table 7)
1970-2002
(Fixed effects OLS estimates)

Panel A: Countries above median initial per capita GDP
                 Dependent variable: Mean damage in years 0 to -3 (as share of GDP)

                                            (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
   Sample is observations with non-   Official            Migrants'      Lending from Bank and trade- Foreign direct           Portfolio
                  missing data on: development           remittances      multilateral related lending investment            investment
                                    assistance                            institutions
                                      (ODA)

 Coefficient on mean storm index,          0.422            0.405            0.426            0.426           0.366             0.39
  years 0 to -3                          (0.205)**         (0.205)*        (0.210)**        (0.210)**        (0.216)*         (0.200)*
F-stat: signif. of storm variable          4.224           3.923            4.115            4.115            2.860            3.776
P-value                                    0.046           0.056             0.05             0.05            0.098            0.059

Num. of obs.                               1,133            763              1,035            1,035            932              942
R-squared                                   0.4             0.61             0.39             0.39             0.62             0.62


Panel B: Countries at or below median initial per capita GDP
                 Dependent variable: Mean damage in years 0 to -3 (as share of GDP)

                                            (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
   Sample is observations with non-   Official            Migrants'      Lending from Bank and trade- Foreign direct           Portfolio
                  missing data on: development           remittances      multilateral related lending investment            investment
                                    assistance                            institutions
                                      (ODA)

 Coefficient on mean storm index,          1.075            1.498            1.075           1.075            1.666            1.693
  years 0 to -3                          (0.215)***       (0.221)***       (0.214)***      (0.214)***       (0.150)***       (0.145)***
F-stat: signif. of storm variable         25.101           45.753           25.200           25.200          123.855          135.751
P-value                                    0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000           0.000            0.000

Num. of obs.                               1,066            723              1,063            1,063            799              779
R-squared                                  0.65             0.84             0.65             0.65             0.72             0.74

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES -- Unit of observation is a country-year. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country. All regressions include country
fixed effects, year-region fixed effects (regions are "Latin America/Caribbean", "Asia", and "Africa"), and country-specific linear time
trends. See Table 3 for variable definitions and other notes.
Appendix Table 2: Impact of disaster damage on international financial flows, separately for
            richer and poorer developing countries (OLS analog to IV regressions of Table 7)
1970-2002
(Ordinary least-squares estimates)

Panel A: Countries above median initial per capita GDP
                                            (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Dependent variable (share of GDP):        Official        Migrants'      Lending from Bank and trade- Foreign direct           Portfolio
                                       development       remittances      multilateral related lending investment            investment
                                        assistance                        institutions
                                          (ODA)

 Coefficient on mean damage                0.11             0.012           0.027             0.127            0.087            -0.034
   as share of GDP, years 0 to -3        (0.041)**         (0.114)         (0.016)*         (0.060)**         (0.069)          (0.055)

Num. of obs.                               1,133            763              1,035            1,035            932              942
R-squared                                  0.82             0.91             0.45             0.52             0.71             0.29


Panel B: Countries at or below median initial per capita GDP
                                            (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
Dependent variable (share of GDP):        Official        Migrants'      Lending from Bank and trade- Foreign direct           Portfolio
                                       development       remittances      multilateral related lending investment            investment
                                        assistance                        institutions
                                          (ODA)

 Coefficient on mean damage                0.127           -0.091            0.052            -0.007           0.018            -0.006
   as share of GDP, years 0 to -3        (0.052)**        (0.043)**        (0.018)***        (0.013)          (0.058)          (0.014)

Num. of obs.                               1,066            723              1,063            1,063            799              779
R-squared                                  0.82             0.98             0.66             0.35             0.49             0.34

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES -- Unit of observation is a country-year. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by country. All regressions include country
fixed effects, year-region fixed effects (regions are "Latin America/Caribbean", "Asia", and "Africa"), and country-specific linear time
trends. All dependent variables divided by mean GDP 5-7 years before. See Table 3 for variable definitions and other notes.
