                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DID BIG GOVERNMENT'S LARGESSE HELP THE LOCALS? THE IMPLICATIONS
        OF WWII SPENDING FOR LOCAL ECONOMIC ACTIVITY, 1939-1958

                                            Joseph Cullen
                                          Price V. Fishback

                                        Working Paper 12801
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12801


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




We would like to thank Todd Sorensen, Trevor Kollman, Jennifer Yelle, Bill McNerney, Peter Vu,
Doug Larue, Josh Easterlin, and Allison Johnson for their invaluable help in organizing and computerizing
the data. We are grateful to Martin Feldstein and the National Bureau of Economic Research for financial
support of this project. The National Science Foundation provided grant support to fund collection
of the data from the New Deal project used in this paper. Any analysis and interpretations in the paper
should not be seen as representing the views of those organizations. We received invaluable advice
on earlier versions of this paper in presentations at the University of Arizona Economics Department,
University of Wales at Swansea, Warwick University, Lehigh University, Columbia University, Oxford
University, Seoul National University, the 2007 Economic History Association Meetings, and from
the following people: Manuela Angelucci, Stephen Broadberry, Alan Dye, Alphonso Flores-Lagunes,
Robert Higgs, Kei Hirano, William Horrace, Shawn Kantor, Ronald Oaxaca, Anthony O’Brien, Paul
Rhode, Todd Sorensen, Bishnupriya Gupta, Knick Harley, John Treble, Jane Humphries, Richard
Sutch, Richard Sylla, and John Wallis. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Joseph Cullen and Price V. Fishback. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Did Big Government's Largesse Help the Locals? The Implications of WWII Spending for
Local Economic Activity, 1939-1958
Joseph Cullen and Price V. Fishback
NBER Working Paper No. 12801
December 2006, Revised January 2008
JEL No. H50,N32,N42,N92,R11

                                               ABSTRACT

Studies of the development of local economies often point to large-scale World War II military spending
as a source of long-term economic growth, even though the spending declined sharply after the demobilization.
We examine the longer term impact of the temporary war spending on county economies using a
variety of measures of socioeconomic activity: including per capita retail sales, the extent of manufacturing,
population growth, the share of women in the work force, housing values and ownership, and per capita
savings over the period 1940-1950. We find that in the longer term counties receiving more war
spending per capita during the war experienced extensive growth due to increases in population but
not intensive growth, as the war spending had very small impacts on per capita measures of economic
activity.


Joseph Cullen
University of Arizona
jcullen@email.arizona.edu

Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu
         Does Large-Scale Military Spending Stimulate Local Economies?
    The Implications of WWII Spending for Local Economic Activity, 1939-1958

                            Joseph Cullen and Price Fishback

       Many histories of state and local communities credit the influx of large amounts

of federal military spending during World War II as a transformative episode that led to

long-run economic growth despite the short run nature of the spending. The descriptions

of thriving communities and expanding manufacturing suggest that there was extensive

growth in areas with high military spending. But was the extensive growth they describe

just a sign of expanding populations or did per capita measures of economic activity rise

as well? Was the War spending also associated with greater shifts in the local economies

toward greater manufacturing, greater savings, and more roles for women? We examine

the longer term effects of the rise and fall in local military spending during World War II

on economies at the county level in the United States by examining the changes between

1939 and the late 1940s and the 1950s in a variety of measures of economic activity.

The answers to these questions likely provide useful information for modern policy

makers as well, as many communities have experienced expansions and declines in

federal military spending over the past several decades.

       We focus on the most dramatic rise and fall in military spending in American

history, the decade of the 1940s. At its peak in 1944, military spending accounted for

over forty percent of Gross Domestic Product, receding to about 5 percent by 1950.

Nearly all of the discussions of the War’s economic impact in America have focused on

macroeconomic aggregates before, during, and after the war. The general public and

many standard history texts still cling to a macroeconomic story that describes World

War II as a Keynesian stimulus that brought us out of the Great Depression. However,
Robert Higgs (1992, 1999, 2004, 2006), building on the work of Simon Kuznets (1945)

and others, shows that more accurate measures of real consumption fell during the war,

unemployment was eliminated largely by drafting people into the military, and that the

primary pure economic benefit of the War might have been to improve expectations for

the future.1 Despite predictions of a post-War recession by contemporary Keynesians,

the long-suppressed consumer and investment demand burst forth into a macroeconomic

boom following the War.

         We do not address the macroeconomic question of whether there was a uniform

stimulus or slowing nation-wide. Further macroeconomic analysis of the war in the U.S.

is limited by several factors. There are only a few data points, and there are significant

conceptual measurement issues associated with the transition to and from a command

economy. Standard market-based measures of economic activity are not designed well to

deal with situations in which prices and allocations were largely determined by central

planners, consumers could not purchase a many goods that are normally available, and

face significant rationing of other goods.

         We focus instead on whether community leaders would have found it beneficial in

the longer run for their community to compete in the political arena for federal war

spending.2 To avoid many of the conceptual difficulties of measurement of welfare

under the command economy we examine various aspects of the economy in 1939, just

prior to the military buildup, and again in the late 1940s and in some cases in the 1950s,


         1
           The benefits from the War were largely geo-political. The allied victory prevented the tyranny of
a western Europe controlled by Hitler and Mussolini and a militaristic regime under Japan in Asia. These
results aided economic freedoms and growth and international trade in western Europe and Japan, although
large swaths of the world’s population were now subject to the mercy of Stalin’s USSR regime.
         2
           Rhode, Snyder, and Strumpf (2002) have recently addressed the political economy of the
distribution of war spending.
after the conversion back to the peace-time economy had been completed. To that end,

we have combined information from a wide variety of sources into a data set that allows

us to estimate reduced-form relationships between federal war spending per capita from

1940 through 1945 and various measures of the economic change in local economies

from their positions before the war to a setting several years after the decline in the

spending. To show the path of analysis, we start by examining the impact of war

spending on local growth in retail sales per capita for the periods 1939-1947, 1939-1954,

and 1939-1958. The early portion of the paper describes the military mobilization during

World War II and shows the substantial variation in both war spending and retail sales

growth across counties that is the source of identification of the relationship. We then

show how the estimated reduced-form coefficient summarizes the combined effects of

crowding out of local production, drags on growth from the federal tax rates on additional

income, the shares of inputs for war production bought locally, and the shares of

consumer incomes spent on locally produced goods and services. The coefficients are

estimated with a variety of different control variables. A series of robustness tests of the

results are performed using different sub-samples, instrumental variable estimation, and

difference-in-difference analysis for retail sales per capita growth over the period 1939-

1948, 1939-1954 and 1939-1958.

       Similar reduced-form analysis is used to examine several other dimensions of

economic activity that have received extensive comment in the narratives on World War

II including savings, manufacturing, women in the workforce, and population growth.

Changes in savings during and after the War are measured with per capita E-bond sales in

1944 and 1949, the growth in bank deposits per capita from 1936-1944 and 1936-1949,
and growth in the percent owning homes and housing values from 1940 to 1950. The

impact on the manufacturing structure is measured with the change in the percentage

employed in manufacturing from 1940 through 1950 and growth in manufacturing value

added per capita from 1939 through 1947. The change in the share of women in the

workforce and in the employment rate for women between 1940 and 1950 are used to

capture the impact of military spending on women’s roles in the labor force. Finally, the

impact of the military mobilization on long-term population distribution is captured by

the growth in population from 1940 to 1950.

        The results show that the rise and fall in World War II spending in counties

contributed to extensive growth in the longer run, but had virtually no effect on intensive

growth. Greater WWII military spending in a county left the residents of the county no

better off in per capita terms than the residing in counties without war spending. The

dominant effect of greater War spending in a county was to raise population growth, as a

substantial number of civilians moved to war production areas during the war and many

stayed in the new location rather than incur the costs of a return migration. The War

spending stimulated E-bond sales substantially and bank deposits to a small degree

during the war. When the period is extended to 1949, however, the relationship between

war spending and these forms of saving were slightly negative. Similarly, changes in

home ownership rates and median non-farm housing values were also slightly more

negative in areas with more home spending. Greater war spending in a county had

virtually no effect on decade-long growth rates in retail sales per capita, manufacturing

annual earnings and labor productivity, and the share of manufacturing in the county.

Consistent with the findings of Claudia Goldin (1991), areas with greater war spending
experienced only a minor increase in the share of women in the workforce between 1940

and 1950.

        The lack of a longer term effect of War spending per capita on consumption,

savings, and earnings fits into the mixed set of findings in the literature on the impact of

public works spending.3 There were specific features of the War spending that may have

led to the lack of an effect. First, World War II spending largely replaced production of

private consumption and investment goods. Second, there were significant short-run

costs when factories that normally produced civilian goods were converted into war

production facilities in the early 1940s and than were reconverted back to civilian

production after the War. In a number of cases, war production facilities ended up as

scrap because they could not be converted at reasonable cost to production of civilian

goods (Higgs 2004). Finally, high federal tax rates that were paid by the majority of

households imposed strong fiscal drags on any stimulation to income provided by greater

War spending.



WWII Economic Mobilization, Demobilization, and the Allocation of War Spending

        President Roosevelt initiated World War II economic mobilization nearly two

years prior to the U.S. entry into the War, as military appropriations rose from $0.5

billion in 1939 to $8 billion in 1940 and $26 billion in 1941 (Schubert 1994). Roosevelt

established civilian mobilization agencies, like the War Production Board (WPB), that in

3
 Recent empirical work investigating the impact of civil infrastructure on economic growth gives
mixed support to the hypothesis that more infrastructure spending leads to substantial increases in
economic growth. See Aschauer 1989; Costa, Ellson, and Martin 1987; Duffy-Deno and Eberts
1991; Hulten and Schwab 1991; Garcia-Mila and McGuire 1992; Munnell 1992; Gramlich 1994;
Fernald 1999; Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005, 2006), and Pereira and Flores de Frutos
1999.
theory were expected to oversee the massive transition to a military economy. Yet, most

scholars agree that it was the military procurement agencies and not their civilian

counterparts that wielded the power of allocation during WWII. The military decided

where contracts were allocated with little interference from the WPB. Economic

problems in counties received virtually no systematic consideration in distributing funds,

although political considerations still held some sway. Speed of production almost

always overrode all other considerations.. The sheer magnitude of the procurement effort

and the necessity for speed led the army to contract with as few companies as possible

and leave subcontracting up to the prime contractors. To expedite the process of

procurement, contracts were placed by negotiation rather than competitive bidding.4

Firms with prior military contracts had a significant advantage in the process.5 In

addition, the technological complexity of new war materials required significant

engineering and manufacturing expertise that eliminated many firms from competition

for contracts.

        By 1942 consumers faced price controls and rationing of consumer goods as

military objectives increasingly crowded out production for civilian consumption. Head

of the WPB Donald Nelson noted that “.converting the automobile industry was, in a

sense, destroying it” (Nelson 1946, 218). By 1944 military spending accounted for

forty-four percent of GDP, a level never reached before or since. The production of

consumer durables, like washing machines and electric appliances were restricted or

prohibited altogether (Koistinen 2004, 279). Steel, aluminum, rubber, and numerous


4
         Between July 1, 1939 and June 30, 1940, 87 percent of the War Department procurement was
place using competitive bidding. In the following year between July 1, 1940 and February 28, 1941, 74
percent of purchasing to the form of negotiated contracts (Higgs, 1993)
5
  See Koistinen 2004, Smith 1959, Rhode, Snyer, and Strumph 2003; Higgs 2006, 91.
other materials were primarily allocated to military production under the priority

allocation system, increasing the difficulties for consumer product businesses, usually

small, to operate. Approximately 43 percent of the nation’s 184,000 manufacturing firms

could not be used directly or indirectly for war production and could not be spared

critical materials for nonessential output at even curtailed rates (Koistinen 2004, 278-9).6

         After the official end of the war, the war industries rapidly demobilized. The day

following the surrender of Japan on August 15, 1945, all controls over manpower were

removed and ration restrictions on fuels were lifted. The remaining rationing orders

(except for sugar) were lifted in succession by the end of 1945. Price controls were lifted

in stages through 1946 and 1947. On the producers’ side, the WPB eliminated most

priority controls on input materials, over 2.5 million workers were released from war

jobs, and almost one-third of the almost 300,000 outstanding war contracts had been

canceled by the end of August (U. S. Bureau of Budget 1946, 492}. Many businesses

then went about the process of converting back to production of consumer goods.

Despite predictions that the declines in war spending would lead to a major recession, the

return to peace led to a rapid expansion in business investment, private employment, and

private production (Higgs 1999, 2004, 2006). A significant part of this investment

involved reconverting to a civilian economy. The extent to which war plants could be

effectively converted to civilian production varied by industry. Some firms who could

take advantage of plentiful war contracts and federal tax incentives for plant expansion



6
  Donald Nelson (1946, 269), chair of the WPB, recognized this dichotomy. "I hope that a little repetition
will serve to underscore my acknowledgment that business firms of sub-average size , more often than not,
did get the dirty end of the stick....The difficulty was, we didn't quite know how to utilize the thousands and
thousands of small firms which were beginning to be pinched because of the purchases of goods and raw
materials by the large manufacturers."
had significantly improved their facilities at the war's end. Many repairs and

improvements were made to facilities that had fallen into partial disrepair during the

Depression. However, Robert Higgs (2004) found that the bulk of the government

investment was too specific to military production needs to be useful for consumer goods

after the war.




                 The Geography of War Spending and Economic Activity

        The geographic allocation of war contracts was concentrated due both to firm

behavior and the needs of military planners. Planners divided war spending into two

broad categories: contract spending and facilities spending.

        Contract spending, which accounted for the bulk of all war spending, included the

value of all supply contracts with value of $50,000 or higher that were awarded by major

procurement branches of the military to individual producers for the procurement of

combat supplies such as planes, tanks, guns or ships, as well as incidental materials like

clothing, medical supplies, and paper. The value of contracts reported in our analysis

reflects the net value of contracts with any contract cancellations or contract reductions

having been subtracted. The bulk of the contract awards by value went to combat

equipment such as flight planes, tanks and ships. By value approximately 65 percent of

total contracts went to combat equipment.

        Facilities spending, defined as funds used to build government financed military

or industrial facilities, accounted for only 13 percent of total war spending in 1940-45.7


        7
          These were projects financed by the Army, Navy, Maritime Commission, Defense Plant
Corporation, Reconstruction Finance Corporation, and British Empire governments with estimated value
Although each had a different purpose, facilities and contract spending are so strongly

correlated that concerns with multicollinearity make hypothesis tests on the separate

types of spending difficult. Consequently, for this analysis all spending will be

considered jointly under the term ``war spending.'.

         Spending for a particular contract was assigned to a county if the principal

producing plant was located in the county. The contracting firms were generally large

players in industry who were generally reluctant to subcontract to smaller firms except

for the least profitable parts of the contract. As a result, contract funds remained largely

where the prime contract was allocated. As the demand for military products grew,

production was expanded at first using existing facilities. Eventually, as military demand

exceeded productive capacity, facilities also had to be expanded. Industry revealed a

strong preference for expanding existing facilities rather than setting up a new plant in a

new location; most of the time the military did not challenge their decision (Koistinen

2004).

         Because of the concentration of contracts and the concentration of facilities

expansion, production therefore was concentrated in a relatively small number of firms

and counties, especially early in the mobilization. As seen in the map of county level war

spending in Figure 1, much of the war spending was highly concentrated in the heavily

industrialized areas in the Northeast, along the Great Lakes, and the West Coast.

Collectively, the top twenty counties accounted for almost 40 percent of total spending.

At the top of the list are chiefly large industrial counties. Wayne County, Michigan, home

of the Detroit automakers, accounted for 5.7 percent of the total. Los Angeles, California

greater than $25,000 were reported to the War Production Board. The value of each project represents an
estimate of the final cost of the project. These included industrial facilities that produced war materials
such as aircraft plants or shipyards and military installations such as air fields or cantonments.
was number two with 4.9 percent and Cook County (Chicago), Illinois ranked third with

4.4 percent of total spending. Our data on war spending does not include information on

the secret nuclear projects at Hanford, Washington, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and Los

Alamos, New Mexico. We eliminated the counties from the analysis because the projects

carried on long after the war and did not display the rise and fall seen in the vast majority

of counties in the United States.

        Spending in per capita terms was less concentrated as shown in Figure 2. The

mean squared error (ratio of the standard deviation to the mean) of total spending was

6.5, which was nearly double the mean squared error of 3.6 for war spending per capita.

Further, the per capita distribution in Figure 2 yields some different rankings. Sarpy

County, Nebraska received the most spending per capita with approximately $144,771

(1967$) per 1940 resident from 1940 to 1945. Located just south of Omaha, Sarpy had

been home to the Army’s Offutt Air Field since the early 1920s and in 1940 became the

site of Glenn Martin’s bomber assembly plant (Rhode, Snyder, and Strumpf 2002). At

the bottom of the list, 43 percent of the 3065 counties in the US failed to receive even one

dollar of war spending.

       The central issue in the paper is the extent to which the rise and fall in war

spending stimulated local economic activity over the medium run. We examine the

impact of war spending on several dimensions of economic change over the 1940s. The

most general measure of changing economic activity that we examine is the growth rate

in retail sales per capita between 1939 and 1948. Therefore, we use the growth retail

sales per capita as an example to show the analytical process that we follow for all of the

variables. Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005) used a similar measure in their
examination of the impact of the New Deal on economic activity in the 1930s. County

level measures of income are not available, and retail sales are very highly correlated

with income and with consumption. In comparisons at the state level, where both are

available, for example, retail sales and estimates of personal income have correlations

above 0.87 for several years in the 1930s.

       The war prevented the collection of a retail census on the usual schedule; retail

sales information was collected in 1939 before the start of the war and was not collected

again until 1948. However, a focus on the 1939 and 1948 retail sales measures is

advantageous even if intermediary data were available. Retail sales data from the war

period of 1940-1945 would likely mis-measure the true normal market value of

consumption due to the distortions caused by price ceilings, rationing, and black market

transactions. These problems have plagued the estimates of consumption expenditures as

a measure of consumer welfare during the War Years (Higgs 1992). By 1948 price

controls and rationing were one to two years in the past, and the industries had

reconverted to peacetime production. Hence, our estimates of the impact of WWII

spending on retail sales reflect not the immediate effect, but the medium run

consequences of war spending which occurred after the economy was allowed to readjust

to civilian production.

       Figure 3 shows the state growth rates in retail sales per capita plotted against war

spending per capita. Retail sales per capita grew rapidly between 1939 and 1948. Most

states experienced growth rates of above 65 percent with the lowest rates in

Massachusetts at 36 percent. There appears to have been a slight negative relationship

between war spending and retail sales, which we will explore in much greater depth
econometrically. Connecticut and Michigan had the greatest per capita war spending at

over $10,000 per person, but their growth rates in retail sales were in the lower part of the

state distribution. Meanwhile, a number of farm-oriented states experienced high retail

sales growth while receiving much less war spending.

       Although there was substantial variation at the state level, the variation was even

greater at the county level. The map in Figure 4 shows the range of growth rates in

economic activity at the county level. As seen in the state scatter plots, the highest rates

of retail sales growth per capita were found in the farm belt. Comparisons of Figures 1

and 2 and 4 show again that the highest concentrations of war spending were generally

not associated with the highest growth rates in per capita retail sales. There are a variety

of reasons why this negative relationship appears in simple correlations. For example,

many of the high growth areas were areas with low levels of retail sales per capita as of

1939. Thus, the same dollar increase in retail sales per capita would generate higher

growth rates for those counties than for counties with higher 1939 levels. We will control

for prior levels and a variety of other factors in the econometric analysis.



        Predicting the Effect of World War II Spending on Local Economies.

       The natural expectation is that the introduction of World War II contracts and

facility spending during the War would have led to expansions in the local economy that

might have carried over after the war and led to faster growth over the entire decade of

the 1940s. In late 1940, the unemployment rate was still hovering around 10 percent, so

it would appear that the war spending would help soak up that unemployment. Fishback,

Horrace, and Kantor (2005) find that an additional dollar of New Deal public works and
relief spending between 1933 and 1939 led to an increase in retail sales of roughly 43

cents in retail sales per capita in 1939, which they suggest can be translated into an

expansion of income of over 80 cents in 1939. It is important to note, however, that the

New Deal public works and relief spending were on roads, dams, and other public

projects and were not meant to take the place of private production. There may have

been some crowding out of private employment, as found by Wallis and Benjamin

(1989), but this was more indirect.

       The war contracts and facilities had much stronger and direct crowding out effects

because privately-owned plants that normally produced autos, clothing, and consumer

goods were converted to produce military equipment. Kuznets (1945) and Higgs (1992,

1999) document sharp declines in the production of many consumer goods associated

with this conversion. In addition, there were the added costs of converting from

consumer to military production at the beginning of the war and then the conversion back

after the war had ended. We should not anticipate, however, that the crowding out

would necessarily be one for one, because the plants converted likely were increasing

total production, there were new facilities built, others were expanded, and the

conversion may have led to technological updates that raised productivity.

       Our goal in the paper is to estimate a reduced-form coefficient that summarizes a

group of effects of the change war spending on changes in retail sales at the county level.

We believe it would be valuable to identify the individual effects on these multiple

relationships, but data limitations force us to ask the much simpler question, what was the

overall medium run impact of World War II spending at the local level? As a political

economy question, we are asking would it have been a good move for state and local
community leaders to push strongly to try to obtain war spending that they knew would

be temporary to enhance the relative economic welfare of their communities? .

       Our construction of the underlying factors incorporated in the reduced-from

coefficient builds on a series of identities inspired by a model of fiscal federalism

developed by Wallace Oates (1973, 22-29). It is based on a regional model in which

citizens consume a mixture of goods produced inside and outside their counties and

export and import goods from other counties. Since we are interested in showing the

impact of an additional dollar of WWII spending on the growth rate of retail sales, we

develop this discussion in terms of changes in the relevant variables. In the course of the

section, we show that changes in all of the variables are influenced to some degree by

changes in World War II spending, so the reduced-form impact of World War II spending

is obtained through a series of algebraic substitutions. The ultimate goal of the

substitutions is to end up with the change in retail sales as a function of the change in

World War II spending and the reduced-form parameter, holding other factors constant.

All monetary variables discussed below are assumed to be in per capita terms.

       Increases in after-tax income cause increases in the demand for goods (retail

sales), which lead to increases in the total revenue of retail sales, assuming an upward

sloping or flat supply curve in the retail market. Thus, the relationship between changes

in retail sales and changes in after-tax income can be expressed as



       ΔRi = r (1- tf) (ΔYi – ΔTi sl)                                         (1),
where i indexes the county, ΔRi is the change in retail sales, r is the share of disposable

income devoted to retail sales, ΔYi is the change in income, tf is the federal income tax

rate, and ΔTi sl is the change in lump-sum state and local taxation, which is assumed to be

tax deductible for federal tax purposes.

        The change in county i’s income can be written as the sum of the following

changes:



        ΔYi = ΔPIi + ΔXi – ΔMi + ΔWi + ΔSLi                                              (2),



where ΔPIi is the change in private spending within the county on goods and services

produced within the county, ΔXi is the change in private income from non-war production

exported outside the county, ΔMi is the change in goods and services imported from

outside the county, ΔWi is the change in War spending and ΔSLi is the change in state and

local government spending.8

        The change in private spending on goods and services produced within county i,

ΔPIi, is influenced by changes in after-tax disposable income,



         ΔPIi = γ (1- tf) (ΔYi – ΔTi sl)                                                 (3),



where γ reflects the share of after-tax income allocated to employing unemployed

resources and purchasing local goods in county i. The change in goods imported from




8
         For the purposes of this exercise, we are assuming that all other federal government spending has
stayed constant.
outside the county, ΔMi, is influenced by changes in disposable income and in war

spending,



        ΔMi = m (1- tf) (ΔYi – ΔTi sl) + ms ΔSLi + mw ΔWi,                        (4),



where m denotes the share of additional after-tax income that county residents used to

purchase goods and services outside the county. Similarly, ms and mw are shares of

state/local and War outlays, respectively, that government decision-makers devoted to

purchases from outside the county.9

        Private income from non-war goods sold outside the county, ΔXi, might also have

been influenced by changes in World War II outlays, such that



        ΔXi = π ΔWi                                                               (5).



The π parameter reflects the extent of crowding out or expansions in productivity

associated with the war spending. If there were full one-for-one crowding out of private

production, then π = -1. If we add conversion costs coming into and out of the war, π

could even be more negative than -1. These crowding out effects would be offset by any

productivity increases and expansions of facilities. If the productivity rise fully offset the

crowding out, π = 0. It is more likely that the parameter is between 0 and -1.



9
         Note that after substituting equation 2.4 into equation 2.2, the impact of an added dollar
of New Deal spending on local income is (1 – mn) and that of another dollar of state and local
spending is (1 – ms). We do not include government spending in the private consumption of
internal county production because it would lead to double counting. The sum m + γ would equal
one if there were no saving.
       An influx of federal spending can lead to responses by state and local

governments, so we assume the functional relationship



       ΔSLi = θ ΔWi                                                          (6).



Increased War spending might have led state and local governments to spend more on

roads and infrastructure (θ > 0) to sustain the increased activity around the plants. On the

other hand, cuts in unemployment would have reduced the extent to which the

governments were required to provide public assistance (θ < 0). In either case, the

effects on state and local spending were likely to be offset by changes in state and local

taxation.. As a result, we specify



       ΔTi sl = δ ΔSLi                                                       (7).



Substituting equation (2.6) into (2.7) yields



       ΔTi sl = δ θ ΔWi                                                      (8).



       State and local governments faced significant state constitutional restrictions in

their ability to run short run deficits. Even when the governments ran temporary deficits,

however, the bulk of the bonds were sold in markets outside the local jurisdiction and

thus repayment of the debt at market interest rates was likely to be expected. Thus, a

close to balanced budget (δ near or = 1) assumption, where increases in state and local
spending are matched or nearly matched by increases in state and local taxation, is

reasonable. To the extent that state and local governments had more leeway to run

deficits and obtain subsidized interest rates, δ might be assumed less than one.10

        We can obtain a reduced-form equation with the change in retail sales as a

function of the change in War spending by substituting from equations 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8

into the change in income equation (2). Equation 2 can then be rewritten as the change in

income as a function of the change in war spending and all of the parameters. We then

can substitute from the new version of equation 2 into the retail sales equation (1), which

then yields:



ΔRi = r (1 – tf) [1/(1 – (1– tf) (γ – m))] * [1 – mn + π + (1 – ms – δ) θ] ΔWi             (9).



Define Π to be the base multiplier, which is the first half of the term in equation (9):



        Π = (1– tf)/[(1 – (1– tf) (γ – m)].                                                (10).



The base multiplier increases in value as the share of extra spending on purchases of

unemployed local resources and local goods and services (γ) produced inside the county

rises and as the share of goods and services imported into the county (m) falls. Higher

federal taxes will reduce the size of the multiplier. Thus, the federal tax rates serve as


10
          See Oates 1973. During the 1930s, all of the states ran very large surpluses if capital
outlays are excluded from their budgets. The inclusion of capital outlays led to deficits in two-
thirds of the states. The states appear to have taken repayment of their debts seriously because by
1937 all but four states ran surpluses (including capital outlays as spending), some of which were
very large, and three of the remaining four were very close to a balanced budget (U.S. Bureau of
the Census 1935, 8-17, 28-39; 1940, 7-16).
drag on the benefits of expansion in the local economy and the income multiplier is

reduced. Estimates of base multipliers for employment with more recent county-level

data suggest values ranging from 1 to 2.5 (Vias and Mulligan 1997).11

        Let μ be the reduced-form relationship measuring the impact of an additional

dollar of War spending in county i on retail sales. That is,



        β = r Π [1 – mw + π + (1 – ms – δ) θ ] = r μ                      (11).



The reduced form parameter β summarizes the various channels through which war

spending influenced retail sales and μ is the income multiplier after all influences are

accounted for. To get a sense of what might be reasonable values to expect for β and μ ,

Table 1 shows how different values of the key parameters would affect the impact of

World War II spending on retail sales. Although the reduced-form parameter is

composed of several underlying parameters, we can make educated guesses about some

of their values, while others have very little impact on the predicted value of β.

        In general, we have a good sense of the following parameter values. Estimates

from national data suggest a ratio of retail sales to personal income of roughly 0.53. If

the income elasticity for retail sales was one, we can reasonably assume that the r will

remain the same for different income levels. Alternative income elasticities suggest that

the range of the ratio for income levels 20 percent above or below or the mean would be

within the range of .5 to .6. If we find that an additional dollar of war spending raised

11
         For discussions of the theoretical bases for these multipliers, see McGregor, et. al.
(2000), Merrifield (1987), and the sources cited therein. The multipliers based on neoclassical
principles have assumed that labor markets clear at the prevailing wage. We chose a quasi-
Keynesian approach in part for simplicity and in part because of the strong price controls that
prevented the existence of market clearing prices during the war years.
retail sales by .53, it would suggest that income in the county rose by approximately one

dollar, i.e. an income multiplier (μ) of 1. It is possible that the marginal r might differ

from the average r. As r increases toward 1, so that each additional dollar of income

goes to retail sales, the income multiplier converges to the retail sales coefficient. As r

falls, the income multiplier from the retail sales coefficient rises.

        In Table 1 we assume a nearly balanced state and local government budget, δ =

0.9, and that the War spending had a net effect of increasing state and local spending (θ =

0.1). Changes in the state and local government crowding or matching parameter θ have

little effect on the reduced-form coefficient because state and local governments faced

restrictions on deficit spending. If state and local governments had balanced budgets and

focused their spending on goods and services produced inside the county, δ = 1 and ms =

0, the estimated coefficient will reflect no flypaper or crowding-out effects. A reasonable

assumption can be made that state and local governments focused their spending on local

workers and goods and services, such that only 20 percent of state and local government

spending went toward the purchase of goods and services from outside the county

(ms=0.2). Changes in this assumption also tend to have very small effects on the final

reduced-form parameter.

        Everybody in the U.S. faced the same federal tax schedule, and taxation increased

dramatically during the war. For the first time the majority of the households paid

income taxes. We are assuming that corporate income taxes are being paid in the

counties where the plants were located, as well. The ratio of federal tax revenues

collected to GDP was 0.10 in 1942, 0.23 in 1944 and 0.21 in 1946, so we choose a figure

of 20 percent to reflect the extent of taxation. Lowering the tax rate to 10 percent
compared to the baseline with half crowding out in Table 1 raises the retail sales

coefficient from 0.13 to 0.16.

         The anticipated retail sales coefficient (β) is most strongly influenced by three

parameters: the shares of income spent on local goods and services from outside the

county (m), the extent of crowding out or productivity enhancement of private activity

(π), and the extent to which the war spending was spent on inputs brought in from outside

the county as opposed to wages, rents and other local services (mw). Table 1 shows the

effects of different assumptions for these parameters. When the local/external spending

split rises from 50/50 in the bottom half of the table to 75/25 in the top half, the base

multiplier rises 1.67 fold. As a result the retail sales coefficient is magnified by the same

ratio.

         The extent of crowding out of local activity (π) and the share of war plant

expenditures purchased from outside the county (mw) serve to reduce the coefficient in a

similar fashion. Both effects are magnified by the base multiplier. Given the structure of

the relationship in equation 11, the same change in shares has the same effect in both

cases. In the first line of Table 1, when the crowding out parameter π is -0.5 and the

share of inputs from outside the county at the war plant (mw) is 0.3, the retail sales

coefficient is only 0.13. Increasing the absolute magnitude of the crowding out

parameter (π) from -0.5 to -0.7 in line 2 has the same effect as increasing the external

share of inputs used for war spending (mw) from 0.3 to 0.5. Each reduces the reduced-

form retail sales coefficient (β) from 0.13 to -0.1. If the war had added production with

no replacement or increased productivity from the war spending had offset the crowding
out, the π parameter would be 0. In that case, the retail sales coefficient (β) would be

0.49.

        Therefore, even in the most optimistic scenario with no crowding out and large

shares of consumption and war production spent locally, we should expect no more than

a 50 cent increase in retail sales per capita for a dollar increase in per capita war spending

during the years when the war spending occurred. Given the likelihood of significant

crowding out of private production at the plants, we might expect no effect at all. The

fiscal drag of the tax revenues collected on the expansion in income, the possibility of

leakages in war spending when the plant brings in inputs from outside the county, and the

possibility that war spending crowded out half of private production makes the possibility

of a negative coefficient a real possibility.

        Theoretically we have modeled what might have happened in the period during

which spending took place. This differs from our empirical estimates, which examine

the longer run effect of the military spending that includes not only the war spending

years, but also the several years that followed. If war spending induced a rise in retail

sales per capita during the war, there is the possibility that it could have been sustained

after the war. However, the costs of reconverting to private industry after the warwould

likely have slow retail sales growth after the war. Thus, the longer term effect would

have been less positive than the immediate effect that might have occured during the war.



                                   Estimation Procedure
        We follow the lead of Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005) in estimating a log-

linear growth equation to estimate the impact of war spending on the change in retail

sales between 1939 and 1948.



ln(Ri 48) – ln (Ri,39) = β0 + β1 WARi 40-45 + β2 ln (Ri39) + β3 Zi39 + β4 S + εi   12)



where ln(Ri 48) and ln (Ri,39) are per capita retail sales in 1948 and 1939, WARi 40-45 is per

capita war spending from 1940 through 1945, Zi39 is a vector of structural correlates

measured in 1939 that might have determined economic growth over the decade, S is a

vector of state dummies, and εi is an unobservable error term.

        As in the Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor paper (2005), the vector of structural

correlates includes a large set of variables measuring the economic, demographic and

geographic composition of each county. The reason for including a large set of control

variable is to avoid problems stemming from omitted variables that would lead to biased

coefficients and incorrect inference about the impact of war spending on local economies.

For expositional ease, the vector of correlates is further subdivided into the following

categories: prior levels of retail sales, economic trends, demographic, geographic,

climatic effects and states fixed effects.



(Zi39 S) = (ln(Ri39) Econi39 Demoi39 Geoi39 Climi39 S)      13)



The model includes the lagged log level of retail sales per capita, as in most growth

models to control for convergence and the mechanical negative relationship between
growth rates and prior levels. To control for prior economic trends, the growth rate of

retail sales from 1929 to 1939 is included. A series of demographic correlates control for

differences in retail consumption patterns and income levels by age, race, ethnicity,

education, gender, urbanization, and wealth12. Geographic features influenced the natural

resource base, access to transportation, potential agglomeration economies, and other

factors (Diamond 1997; Gallop, Sachs, and Mellinger 1999). We include weather

information to control for the impact of both regular weather and extremes in weather

that might have influenced building projects. These features were interacted with the

share of farming because weather likely had stronger effects on agricultural output.

Finally, we incorporated state fixed effects to control for factors that were common to all

counties within a state but varied across states, including state taxes. The state dummies

will capture unmeasured heterogeneity such as the extent of mobilization of the

population into the armed forces, state taxation and revenue policies, retail laws, and

differences in the cost of living across states.

        Ordinary Least Squares estimates of the coefficients on war spending are shown

in Table 2 for a series of specifications that add each set of correlates cumulatively. The

simplest OLS specification,(1) shows the descriptive relationship between retail sales

growth and war spending without any controls. As seen in the maps and scatter plots,

there is a negative and statistically significant correlation between war spending and retail

sales growth. A one standard deviation increase in war spending was associated with a

reduction in the retail sales per capita growth rate of 0.19 standard deviations.13 The


12
  We use the share of the population which owns a radio as a proxy for the overall wealth of the county.
13
           The standard deviation of county level war spending per captia is $4847. The standard deviation
of retail sales growth is 0.218. Using the war coefficient in specification (1), we have -8.54E-06 times
4847=-0.041 which is the effect of a one standard deviation change in war spending on retail sales growth.
coefficient implies that at the average level of retail sales per capita in the U.S. in 1939 of

$557, a dollar increase in war spending per capita would have reduced retail sales per

capita in 1948 by less than one cent.14 So the effect is relatively small.

         Each subsequent specification in Table 2 retains the correlates of the previous

specification while adding additional control variables. Although the coefficient remains

statistically significant and negative, the addition of more correlates erodes the

magnitude of the negative economic impact of the war spending. The OLS coefficients

in specification 7 are reported in Table 4.




                                  Exploring Other Methodologies

         The results thus far suggest that a mixture of crowding out of private production,

fiscal drag of taxation, leakages of military input spending, and/or consumption of goods

produced external to the county contributed to war spending having virtually no effect on

the local economies. We follow a series of procedures to examine the robustness of these

findings, including estimations on subsamples, estimation of a simple 0-1 treatment

effect, and the inclusion of agricultural output. Although all of the narrative evidence

suggests no reason to anticipate endogeneity caused by the military trying to spend more

in regions with high unemployment, we explore an instrumental variable analysis using

the 1930s war preparation plans as an instrument. We also estimate a difference in



Dividing by the standard deviation of retail sales growth gives us the change in terms of the standard
deviation, -0.041*0.218=-0.19.
14
          In specification (1), a $1 increase in annual, per capita war spending in a county would reduce the
difference between log retail sales in the later period and the log retail sales in the earlier period by
0.00000854. At the average level of retail sales per capita in the US in 1939 of $533 (the log value is
6.2785) this translates into a $.0046 decrease in retail sales for every war dollar spent in that county.
difference model, where we examine the change in retail spending growth from 1929-39

to 1939-1948.15

Subsamples

       One potential worry with this data set is that the tremendous variation in the

amount of war spending across counties includes outliers are driving the results. The

impact of war spending per capita in specifications (8) through (11) in Table 3 show the

results of checking the sample for outliers. After selecting a subsample from the full set

of counties, each is estimated by OLS using the full set of correlates in specification (7).

       Specification (8) eliminates counties which lie in the top 5% in terms of war

spending per capita, an average of $5028 per capita. These were the most industrialized

counties in the country. In gross terms the top 5% of counties received 72 percent of the

$493 billion in contract war spending while accounting for only 26 percent of the

population. Our goal in this specification is to compare the impact of the war spending in

the counties which received nothing to those that received a moderate amount on the

grounds that they are more alike.

       Specification (9) considers only counties that received a strictly positive amount

of war spending in case counties receiving no spending were too structurally different

from those who received it.

       Specification (10) still considers only counties with positive spending, but further

eliminates counties in the tails of the positive spending distribution. Counties that are




15
  We have also performed the complete analyses in the paper by adding a squared term
for war spending per capita and by using natural logs of war spending per capita after
adding a dollar to all values to eliminate zeroes). The qualitative findings are unchanged.
below the 5th percentile or above the 95 percentile in the positive spending distribution

are removed.

       Specification (11) addresses the implicit assumption made by OLS concerning

common support. Problems with common support occur when there are no “similar”

observations to use as a counterfactual. We are concerned that counties that received war

money were systematically different from those that did not receive money after

controlling for observable characteristics. For comparison purposes we are looking for

counties that are similar along many characteristics but one does not receive spending

while the other does. To examine the common support a dummy variable was created for

receiving a positive amount of war spending. A probit model was used to estimate the

probability of treatment, i.e. receiving greater than $0 of spending on the full set of

correlates in specification (7) of the OLS regression. A histogram of treated and untreated

counties by propensity score was used to determine a “thick region” of common support.

Treated counties in this thick region have as counterfactuals untreated counties with

similar observable characteristics. Counties with a propensity score outside of the thick

region were eliminated. The model was then estimated using OLS with the continuous

measure of war spending and all structural correlates.

       The results in Table 3 for the different subsamples tell the same story as before.

There is a very small negative effect of war spending in each subsample, although several

estimates are now statistically insignificantly different from zero.

Treatment Effects

       Another hypothesis is what really matters is not how much war money is spent in

your county, but simply if a county receives any money at all. Since nearly 40% of the
sample received no war spending, we can run regressions with a balanced number of

treated and control counties. For specification (12), we replace war spending per capita in

specification (7) with a dummy variable equal to one if a county received any level of

spending. The resulting coefficient on the treatment dummy is still small, negative and

insignificant, very much in line with the previous results.

Agricultural Production

        There were numerous reports of a sharp rise in agricultural production as

American farmers grew foodstuff that were transported and sold to allies in war-torn

lands. This rapid growth is highlighted in the county map for retail sales per capita

growth in Figure 4. As seen in the other maps, these many farm counties did not receive

much in the way of war spending. Specification (13) incorporates the growth in the value

of farm output as a correlate. While the growth in farm output has a positive coefficient,

the impact of war spending per capita remains negative, although smaller than in almost

all of the other specifications.

Instrumental Variables

        Another possible criticism of the OLS results is the potential endogeneity of war

spending and retail sales. The allocation of war spending was not random: there is the

possibility that it was endogenous. In order to have a negative endogeneity bias, war

funds would have had to have been increasingly allocated to counties experiencing

economic hardship. If military procurement plans took this into consideration, then the

allocation of war funds to economically distressed counties could make it appear as

though war spending impeded economic growth.
        A negative endogeneity bias is consistent with the following argument. The

massive mobilization of the US economy caused labor shortages in areas with highly

concentrated war spending by the middle of 1942. The shortages were exacerbated by

the conscription of able-bodied workers. Meanwhile, civilian production by many

smaller firms was squeezed by the lack of access to steel, aluminum, rubber and other

necessary materials. In response to these economic disturbances, Critical Labor Areas

and small business programs were developed to steer projects to smaller firms and areas

with more unemployment. The narratives at the time, however, strongly state that the

military, and not the War Production Board, dominated the allocation of the contracts,

and the military paid little attention to these civilian-focused programs (Koistinen 2004).

The programs generally had relatively few dollars to allocate but at the margin they might

have influenced the distribution process in ways that caused some negative endogeneity

bias.

        On the other hand, the case for a positive bias due to endogeneity seems equally if

not more plausible. From historical documents we know that large firms, businesses with

established production records, and firms with manufacturing expertise had an advantage

in acquiring contracts from military procurement agencies. Thus the most industrially

capable and urbanized counties received the most war dollars. If we believe that

economically capable counties also have characteristics that we have not measured that

are correlated with a higher level of retail sale growth in the absence of contracts, then

the allocation of war contracts to manufacturing counties would lead to a positive bias of

our estimates of the impact of war spending. If we believe growth is more or less
independent of the economic capacity of the county then this type of endogeneity is not

an issue.

       In either case, the situation warrants further inspection. A natural recourse in this

situation is to use instrumental variables. To use this procedure, appropriate instruments

must be found that are strongly correlated with per capita war spending, holding the other

correlates constant, and also uncorrelated with the error term of the growth equation. We

find one such set of instruments in the Industrial Mobilization Plan (IMP) of the 1930s.

       The IMP was developed to avoid the shortcomings of the mobilization efforts

during World War I. When the US entered World War I (WW I) in 1917, it had no

stockpiles of equipment or already-laid plans for creating them (Schubert 1994).

Competition between branches of the military for war supplies and inadequate flows of

information led to price inflation, war profiteering, congestion and inefficient use of

resources (Army and Board 1933, 1939). To avoid the problems during WWI, a series of

military boards were established to plan and coordinate military production in time of

war. Between 1931 and 1939 these boards established and revised IMPs based on

surveys of the productive capacity of each firm. In the event of war the IMP plan

assigned each plant a task to be performed for a specific branch of the military. The

“more than ten thousand plants kept under allocation throughout the planning period

represented the bulk, as well as the “cream” of American productive capacity (Smith

1959, 59).” Although the plan was never formally implemented during World War II,

there is plenty of evidence that “the selection of contractors for most items was guided if

not determined by the facility surveys and allocation plans of the previous decade.“[cite]

A 1943 study administered by the Army Industrial College in four major industrial cities
found that 95 percent of contracts by value were awarded to facilities preselected under

the allocation plan (Smith, 1959).

         Given this institutional background, the number of facilities in a county allocated

under the IMP seems to constitute an ideal instrument. The number of allocated facilities

in a county was clearly correlated with placement of contracts in the county. Given that

these allocation decisions were made well before the economic military mobilization,

simultaneity bias is not a problem. The military planning process was designed to

maximize readiness and thus was not oriented to potential unemployment in the 1940s.

         To obtain counts, we use the last published directory of facilities which was

published January 1, 1938, well before the US could anticipate the scale of the conflict to

come. For each county the total number of facilities in the county allocated by the IMP

was recorded. In addition, we count the number of facilities allocated to each

procurement branch of the military.16           In practice the vector of instrumental variables

was a subset of the allocations to particular procurement agencies or boards. We used the

allocations to procurement agencies rather than the total number of facilities in a county

due to heterogenous effects of different kinds of allocations. For example, the

procurement agency with the highest number of allocations in most counties was the

Army Quartermaster Corp. Yet the types of facilities allocated to this agency, such as

clothing manufacturers or paper suppliers, were unlike to secure the high value contracts

that facilities allocated to the Aeronautical Board were likely to obtain. A subset of

16
           The sum of the number of facilities allocated to each procurement branch in a county is greater
than or equal to the total number of allocated facilities in the county. This is because some facilities were
shared by two or more branches of the military. Some "reserved" facilities were shared by all military
branches and were officially allocated to either the Army Navy Munitions Board (ANMB) or the Office of
the Assistant Secretary of War (OASW). Other facilities of strategic importance were made part of a
special plan which had a separate board to manage their use. We note whether a facility was earmarked as
part of a special economic mobilization plan. See Appendix Table I for a list of procurement agencies and
special economic mobilization plan .
counts by agency is used rather than the full set of counts by procurement agency because

many of the counts lacked explanatory power in the first stage of estimation.

         We re-estimate equation 12 using Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS) where the

first-stage equation for war spending per capita contains all of the remaining right-hand

side variables in equation 12 and the IMP counts.17 The first-stage and second-stage

results, along with the OLS results and summary statistics for all variables are reported in

Table 4. Each of the IMP counts had statistically significant effects on war spending per

capita after controlling for the remaining correlates. The F-statistic for the identifying

instruments as a group is 4.70. We anticipated that the Army Quartermaster Allocations

would have a negative effect because of the small size of their contracts, but we did not

expect the negative effects of the Steel Plan Allocations and the Office of the Assistant

Secretary of War (OASW). As we examined the documents further, we discovered that

there was a great deal of interactions between the various plans and the resulting multi-

collinearity makes it difficult to focus on specific coefficients. Although not all agency

allocations are included in this regression, the negative signs on these instruments are still

negative when all agency allocations are included. A Hausman overidentification test did

not reject the null hypothesis that the identifying instruments are uncorrelated with the

errors from the growth equation.

         This is the first estimation procedure that has led to a positive coefficient.

However, the coefficient is not statistically significantly different from zero. Further, the

economic significance is tiny because an additional dollar of war spending raised the

17
           Before discovering the IMP plans, we explored the use of a number of instruments, ranging from
the political variables used by Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005, 2006) to a series of variables used by
Rhode, Snyder, and Strumpf (2002). In most cases they reduced the strength of the instruments, and in a
number of cases their inclusion caused the Hansen test to reject the hypothesis that the specification was
correct; thus there was a reasonable chance that the variables were correlated with the final equation error.
level of retail sales by less than a cent and a one-standard deviation increase in war

spending per capita raised the growth rate of retail sales per capita by 0.029 standard

deviations.



Differencing

       Our final robustness check involves estimating the differenced version of equation

12 with some adjustments that lead to equation 14.



[ln(Ri 48)–ln(Ri,39)] – [ln(Ri,39)–ln(Ri,29)] = α0 + α1 WARi 40-45 - α2 NDPRi,33-39

       + α3 [ln (Ri39)- ln (Ri29)] + α4 [Xi39 – Xi29] + α5 [C39 – C29] + α6 S + ηi    (14



The equation was developed by using information collected by Fishback, Horrace, and

Kantor (2005, 2006) for their studies of the New Deal at the county level. There are

several adjustments made. First, we include New Deal spending on public works and

relief programs, which was the vast majority of federal spending in the 1930s. We don’t

have specific war spending for the 1930s, but we don’t believe this to be problematic

because annual military spending in the 1930s was less than one-twenty-sixth of the

spending in 1942 and one-seventieth of the levels around 1944 (U.S. Census Bureau

1975, 1120). Second, the differencing of the vector of correlates (Z in equation 12)

between 1939 and 1929 drops the geographic variables because they do not vary over

time and becomes the X vector of correlates in equation 14. Third, in differencing we

might also expect that the state correlates will be differenced out, but we include them to

capture the changes in policy and cost of living at the state level that might have
influenced the changing growth rates. Fourth, AAA farm program spending was a key

feature of the New Deal. The AAA continued and was reinforced in the 1940’s (U.S.

War Office of Budget, 1946). We have AAA information by county for the 1930s but

not for the 1940s. To control for the AAA spending in both decades, we use the shares of

crop output devoted to crops that were part of the AAA program in 1929 and in 1939 as

proxies for the extent of AAA activity.18 Fifth, due to lack of information on retail sales

growth per capita in the 1920s, we controlled for lagged growth in the X difference

vector by using the difference in the growth rate of population between 1920-30 and

1930-194019.

         The differenced results are reported in Table 5. Again, we observe a negative

and statistically significant effect of war spending that is very small in economic

magnitude. We have explored using an instrumental variable analysis of the differenced

equation but have been running into problems with finding instruments that are both

strong in this setting and valid.



Longer Range Effects on Retail Sales

         There is always the possibility that the medium term effects we have measured

understate the longer-range benefits of the military spending because by 1948 the

factories only recently had been converted. To check this hypothesis, we have also run

the same sequence of estimates for growth rates in retail sales per capita from 1939

through 1954 and again for retail sales per capita from 1939 through 1958. The basic

18
           The "big five" crops that received subsidies via the AAA were wheat, cotton, corn, tobacco, and
rice. Of these five we control for four of these: wheat, cotton, corn, and tobacco.
19
           The growth rate of the population seems to be a good proxy for retail sales growth. We found that
substituting population growth for retail sale growth in the un-differenced model yielded almost exactly the
same results.
results in Tables 6 and 7 are very similar to what we have reported for the 1939-1948

period. All the War spending coefficients show virtually no relationship of the spending

on the growth in retail sales per capita. All the coefficients are negative except in the

2SLS estimation. There may be some omitted variables issues in these two cases

associated with spending for war production during the Korean War and the very

beginnings of the building of the interstate highway systems after the act was passed in

1956. However, these expenditures were much smaller than the War expenditures and

we do not believe them to have enough influence to alter the findings by much.20



Accounting for the Lack of an Effect on Growth in Retail Sales Per Capita

       The finding of virtually no effect of war spending per capita on retail sales growth

over one or two decades suggests that counties that never participated in the war

contracting process experienced consumption gains that were similar in size to the

consumption gains experienced in the War contracting counties. We can put the War

spending findings into context by comparing them with the much positive stronger effects

of public works and relief spending found by Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2006) in

their study of the impact of New Deal spending on retail sales growth in the 1930s. Both

studies estimated a reduced-form coefficient that simultaneously incorporates a variety of

effects. There are three key differences between the War spending and the New Deal

public works and relief spending that likely led to this result. First, the war spending

explicitly shifted whole plants to war contract production of military goods and

20
   We have also performed the same sequence of estimations using the growth in
manufacturing value added per capita for the periods 1939-1947 and 1939-1954 as the
measures of economic activity. Again, the results are very similar to those found for
retail sales per capita.
subsequently reduced the production of consumer goods at those plants. Shortages of key

materials contributed to this crowding out. In contrast, the New Deal public works and

relief projects were created in a setting where the share of the work force without private

sector jobs ranged from 10 to 25 percent. There was plenty of unemployment to soak up

by building government public works before private employment might have been

affected. In this sense of crowding out, the New Deal AAA programs that took land out

of production is more similar to the war spending. In fact, Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor

(2005) found no positive effect of the AAA spending on retail sales spending.

       Second, the growth rate for retail sales in the war spending study includes years in

the aftermath of the war, while the New Deal study does not include post-New Deal

years. The war spending involved significant costs of conversion from civilian to war

production and then back, which was not an issue for the New Deal spending. Thus, the

post-war transition likely would have led to a smaller positive war spending coefficient

than for the New Deal.

       Third, any expansions in income and consumption from war spending were taxed

at a much higher rate than similar expansions during the New Deal. During the war

average federal tax rates increased sharply from an average of 7 percent to 22 percent.

For the first time the majority of households were paying income taxes, compared with

less than 7 percent of households during the 1930s.

       We considered a fourth possibility, but we do not believe it explains very much of

the difference between the effects of the New Deal and the War spending. It is likely that

a significantly higher share of war spending than of public works and relief went to

inputs imported from outside the county. Roughly 80 to 90 percent of public works and
relief project spending during the New Deal was spent on earnings; therefore, the value

added from the expenditures as well as the initial expenditures within the county

accounted for more than 80 to 90 percent of the amount spent. In the case of the war

spending, there was no such requirement. Based on typical patterns in manufacturing,

our best estimate suggests that about 40 percent of the War spending could be considered

value added that was likely to have initially spent locally. Although we estimated the

relationship between retail sales growth and war spending per capita using total war

spending, it could be said that what we really wanted to measure was war production

value added per capita to focus on the expenditures that we could expect would have

remained in the county. It turns that in cross-county analysis in other periods the

correlation between manufacturing value added per capita and total revenue for

manufacturing per capita is .93, which is very close to being a constant. Since value

added is typically 40 percent of total revenue, assume that the constant is ratio of value

added to revenue is .4, which implies the ratio of total revenue to value added is 2.5.

Econometrically, we have come close to estimating the equivalent of the following

simple relationship.



       Retail Sales Growth = α + γ (2.5*War Production Value Added per Capita)



when we wanted to estimate.



       Retail Sales Growth = α + β War Production Value Added per Capita.
Econometrics textbooks show that the coefficient we actually estimated (γ), would be

               γ = 0.4 * β, which implies β = 2.5 * γ

Therefore, we should scale up the coefficient estimates that we have produced by 2.5.

However, the estimates of the impact of war spending on retail sales growth are so small,

than even after scaling them by 2.5 does not change the finding of a very small effect of

war spending on retail sales growth per capita.



The Impact of War Spending on Other Economic Dimensions

       Given the narratives about the effects of World War II spending, the lack of an

effect of war spending on retail sales growth will surprise most observers. It is therefore

natural to wonder how the economic fabric of the local economies stretched to

accommodate such intense spending. For example, we know that real income payments

rose while real per capita consumption fell (Higgs, 1990); therefore, it is likely that the

war production counties saw a significant increase in savings in the form of government

bond purchases, bank deposits, or home ownership. In the following section we examine

these savings vehicles and other economic characteristics of the counties that likely were

shaped by war spending in the 1940s, including growth in manufacturing annual earnings

and labor productivity, changes in the importance of manufacturing, changes in labor

force activity by women, the growth in housing values, and population growth.

       For most characteristics we analyze the medium term changes between 1939 and

the late 1940s, as we did with retail sales. In the case of E-bond purchases and bank

deposits, we can also examine information from 1944. Table 8 describes the effect of a

one standard deviation increase in war spending per capita on the dependent variable for
a series of regression specifications, summarized in the lower portion of the table. The

second to last row for each variable shows the results from the differenced model that

subtracts the 1930s information from the 1940s information without state effects. The

bottom specification adds the state effects. The effects based on statistically significant

coefficients are marked with a single asterisk for the ten percent level of significance and

two asterisks for the five percent level. The complete regression results for each variable

of interest across all specifications are available from the authors. The results in Table 8

show that omitted variable bias is likely an issue for the simplest specification with the

growth rate as a function of per capita war spending and for the specification that

includes lagged levels of the dependent variable and prior growth trends. The addition of

other controls generally leads to substantial changes in the size of the coefficients used to

calculate the one-standard deviation effects.21 When examining the magnitudes of the

coefficient we use the coefficients from specification 9, which is the model that uses the

differences between the 1940s and 1930s decades and controls to the greatest extent for

omitted variable bias. As noted in the prior section, we might want to scale the

magnitudes of the coefficients upward by multiplying by 2.5. As will be seen, the

magnitudes for all but E-bond sales in 1944 and the growth rate in population from 1940

through 1950 are so small that the rescaling would make little difference to the qualitative

story told by the results.



Savings in the Form of E-Bonds, Bank Deposits, Housing Values and Home Ownership



21
  For all of the different variables, we have run specifications where the dependent variable is the level in
the final year as a function of the prior level before the war and all of the other correlates. The qualitative
results are the same and the magnitudes do not vary much.
        Standard descriptions of strong effects of the war spending on prosperity argue

that workers faced with rationing often put their increased income into savings during the

War. Many saved by buying E-bonds, accumulating bank deposits, and/or buying

housing, which was not rationed during the war. The savings could then be used for

more consumption after the war. The first step in the narrative can be examined by

estimating the impact of war spending on per capita E-bond sales at the issue price and

per capita bank deposits (demand and time in state and national banks) in 1944 near the

end of the war and again in 1949. In addition, we examine the change in home

ownership rates and the growth rate in the median value of homes between 1940 and

1950. All monetary measures are adjusted for inflation using the CPI (1967=100).

        E-bonds, also known as “war” bonds, were first sold in 1941 and were the

dominant form of savings bond sold to small investors during the war.22 E-bond sales

accounted for roughly 75-80 percent of all savings bond sales each year between 1943

and 1950 (U.S. Treasury, 1950, 558). Since there were no E-bonds sold prior to 1941,

the number of E-bond sales in 1944 and in 1949 are the same as the change in E-bond

sales over that period. There were A, B, C, and D issues of savings bonds between 1935

and 1940 but we do not have information on sales of those bonds at the county level. The

sales of the earlier issues were one-tenth the level of E-bond sales in 1944; therefore, we

do not believe that controlling for their prior level will make much difference. We have

not been able to obtain county bank deposit information between 1937 and 1943 at the




22
  Series F and G bonds were also sold to the public but were targeted at larger investors. The E bonds
could be obtained at post offices and a wide range of financial institutions. F and G series bonds could be
purchased only at the Federal Reserve Banks and the Treasury Department, usually with the assistance of a
commercial bank. (U.S. Treasury Department 1941, 23)
county level; therefore we use information from 1936 as the prior level. Both measures

are adjusted for inflation using the CPI (1967=100)..

       War spending had a positive and statistically significant impact on E-bond

purchases and bank deposits in 1944 during the War, but had a slightly negative middle

run effect when the analysis is based on the year 1949. Using the fullest OLS

specification to eliminate issues with omitted variables, a one-standard deviation increase

in war spending per capita over the period 1939 through 1945 raised Ebond sales per

capita in 1944 by 0.294 standard deviations and bank deposits by 0.050 standard

deviations. The E-bond sales effect is a sizeable one, roughly the same size as the effect

on E-bond sales of the level of retail sales per capita in 1939 (not reported). In dollar-for-

dollar terms an additional dollar per capita of war spending during the war raised E-bond

sales by 0.4 cents in 1944. This may seem small at first, but remember that only about 30

percent of the war spending was paid directly as wages. Assuming the typical worker

saved about 5 percent of their income, they normally would have saved 1.5 cents out of

the 30 cents of income derived from the dollar of war spending. Thus, the 0.4 cent

increase would have accounted for a little less than one third of the rise in a worker’s

savings. The effect was much smaller for bank deposits.

       The results for the 1949 figures suggest that any positive effect on savings had

gone away by the end of the decade. The one standard deviation effects of war spending

per capita were negative but small, less than 0.04 standard deviations. The middle run

effects, like the retail sales effects suggest that counties with more war spending had no

higher savings in the middle-run or longer-term. The positive effects on savings during
the War might suggest that if we had had accurate retail sales measures in 1944 or 1945

that we would have seen some war stimulus to those sales.

       Since housing is a major portion of the typical home owner’s wealth, housing

might also be considered a form of saving. Similar to the small effects found on bond

sales and bank deposits, counties with more war spending per capita experienced slightly

higher growth rates of housing values between 1940 and 1950 and slighty lower home

ownership rates between 1940 and 1950.



Manufacturing Wages and Share of Workers in Manufacturing

       The war spending was focused heavily on manufacturing; therefore, it is likely

that the strongest structural changes arising from the war spending would have come in

the form of a shift to the manufacturing sector. We investigate the middle-run changes

within manufacturing associated with several measures: the growth rates between 1939

and 1947 in annual manufacturing earnings for production workers in 1967 dollars and in

manufacturing value added per worker in 1967 dollars. In addition, we examine two

measures of the size of manufacturing’s role in the local economy, the change in the

share of workers employed in manufacturing between 1940 and 1950 and the growth rate

in manufacturing value added per capita between 1939 and 1947. In all specifications,

we control for the prior level of the variable and the trend in the prior decade.

       The results in Table 8 show that there was very little change in the impact of war

spending on annual earnings and labor productivity within manufacturing. The one-

standard deviation effects are less than 0.025 in both cases and neither is statistically
different from zero. The war spending did lead to a statistically significant but very slight

increase in the share of workers in manufacturing and in the value added per capita.



Women's employment

       Histories of WWII point to women's participation in the workforce as a key

element of the war effort during WWII.     Many people had thought World War II led to

permanent changes in women’s labor force participation. Claudia Goldin (1991),

however, examined the issue using retrospective labor histories from 1944 and 1951

surveys collected by Gladys Palmer. The retrospective histories show that only 20

percent of women working in 1950 had entered the work force during World War II and

that the rate of entry of women into the workforce was roughly the same during the War

as it was from 1946 to 1950. We examine the issue using an alternative set of data that

covers the entire workforce in the United States by estimating the impact of war spending

per capita on the change in the percentage of women in the population who were

employed and on the change in women’s share of the workforce.

       The results are similar to Goldin’s finding. War spending had at best a small

positive impact on women’s roles in the workplace by 1950. Counties with war spending

per capita that was one standard deviation larger than the mean, had a female share of the

workforce that rose by a relatively small but statistically significant 0.022 standard

deviations. Meanwhile, the employment rate for women rose a small and statistically

insignificant 0.004 standard deviations.

Population Growth
       Numerous narratives describe World War II as a period of significant internal

movement within the United States. A substantial number of people moved from

economically stagnant areas to cities experiencing labor shortages due to rapid

expansions in war production (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1944). The rise in

population described during the war carried through the end of the decade, as a

substantial number of civilians moved to war production areas during the war and many

stayed in the new location rather than incur the costs of a return migration. The effect

may have been compounded somewhat when soldiers were demobilized and returned to

new locations rather than their original home. Counties with war spending per capita that

was higher by one standard deviation experienced population growth that was 0.217

standard deviations higher. This effect was second in size only to the one-standard

deviation effect for E-bond sales in 1944.



Conclusions

       Our goal was to measure whether community leaders would have found it

beneficial in the long term to compete to obtain military contracts and facilities for their

communities during the War. The answer appears to be no, unless the goal was to

expand the population base. The sharp rise and fall in World War II military spending

contributed to a substantial redistribution of the population between 1940 and 1950

toward the counties where the spending was concentrated during the War. However, the

rise in war-time military spending in a county had virtually no longer term effect on per

capita measures of economic activity, including per capita retail sales, E-bond sales, bank

deposits, manufacturing annual earnings, manufacturing productivity per worker,
women’s share of the workforce, the share of manufacturing in the economy, housing

values and home ownership.

       Aside from the E-bond sales and bank deposits, we have not estimated the impact

of the war spending at the time it was spent. There was a strong effect of war spending

on sales of E-bonds per capita during the war and a small positive effect on bank deposits

per capita. However, the effect was no longer there by 1949. The pattern for E-bond

sales is suggestive that there was an immediate stimulus from the War that was not

sustained once the military demobilization occurred.

       The question remains as to why the longer-term effect of spending on per capita

measures is so small. One possibility is that the true effect of World War II spending

was a series of economy-wide macroeconomic shocks to the entire economy at once,

including a large-scale shift toward a command economy. The tremendous economic

diversity of the various regions of the United States raises some doubts that such a shock

would have the same effects everywhere. However, it is possible that the War years

pushed the U.S. Economy to the edge of the production possibility frontier on every

dimension. Thus farmers and areas that did not receive much in military manufacturing

spending and facilities still experienced large-scale increases in demand, so that it did not

matter whether a county participated or not in the scramble for military manufacturing

contracts in the short or the long term.

       There are also reasons to believe that the gains from obtaining war contracts at the

local level were offset by similar-sized costs. Nearly all of the military production

directly crowded out the production of goods for private consumption and investment.

Further, the transition costs from civilian production to military production before the
War and then the reconversion back to civilian production following the War likely ate

into the benefits of war production. Finally, the administration of the War imposed a

large tax burden on expansions of income during the war, as income tax rates and the

share of the American public paying taxes rose sharply. These taxes imposed a strong

fiscal drag that would have diminished the local benefits to individuals in the counties.
                                           Data Appendix

War Spending.
          War spending figures come from the County Data Book of 1947 compiled by the Bureau
of the Census and available in part 70 from the ICPSR in the datasets compiled and revised by
Michael Haines (no date). There were two categories of war spending: supply contracts and
facilities projects. Supply contracts represented major war supply contracts awarded between
June 1940 and September 1945 by the War Department, the Navy Department , the Maritime
Commission, The Treasury Procurement Division , and foreign purchasing missions as reported
to the War Production Board. A major war supply contract was a prime contract involving a sum
of \$50,000 or more. The total value of contracts reflects the net value of contracts with any
contract reductions and cancellations having been deducted. Contracts for combat equipment such
as aircraft, ships, and ordnance were separately tabulated from other contracts. Supply contracts
were assigned to counties if the location of the principle producing plants were located in the
county. If it was not possible to assign a contract definitely to any county, then the contract was
omitted. Contracts for foodstuffs and food processing were also omitted.
          Facilities projects include any undertaking reported to the War Production Board between
June 1940 and June 1945 for which a contract or project order was issued in excess of \$25,000.
Projects financed by the Army, Navy, Maritime Commission, Defense Plant Corporation,
Reconstruction Finance Corporation, and British Empire governments are included. The value of
each project represents an estimate of the final cost of the project. Facilities spending was further
broken down into industrial facilities spending and military facilities spending. Industrial
facilities represent plants constructed to produce war materials such as shipyards, munitions
factories, and aircraft plants. Military facilities represent cantonments, airports, and other military
installations for which direct outlays were made by the armed forces. The value of any facilities
which were constructed using private funds was excluded.
          For the purposes of this study supply contracts (both combat supplies and other supplies)
and facilities spending (both industrial and military facilities) were aggregated to construct total
measure of war spending in a county between 1940 and 1945. Spending was adjusted to 1967
dollars to match other monetary measures in the study.

Industrial Mobilization Counts
          Facility allocations under the Industrial Mobilization Plan were found using the
“Directory of Facilities, Allocated and Reserved” compiled by the Office of the Assistant
Secretary of War’s Planning Branch. This document, which was restricted at the time, was
published several times during the 1930’s. The data for this study are complied from the version
released January 1, 1938.
          Almost 10,000 facilities are included in this publication. For each facility the following
was recorded: location(city and state), the procuring agency it was assigned to, and finally
whether it had a special designation. Some facilities were assigned to more than one procuring
agency. Procurement agencies included the Navy Department, Army Quartermaster Corps, Army
Ordnance Department, Army Air Corps, Army Corps of Engineers, Army Chemical Warfare
Service, Army Signal Corps, Army Medical Department, and the Army Coast Artillery Corps.
Special mobilization designations include the Steel Mobilization Plan, Machine Tool facility,
Optical & Precision Instruments facility , Aeronautic facility, Army and Navy Munitions Board
facility, and Offices of the Assistant Secretary of War facility.
          For each city the total number of facilities were counted. In addition the total number of
facilities allocated to each procuring agency was tabulated. The number of facilities with each
special designation were also calculated. City counts were then aggregated to the county level.
The final data shows the number of facilities in each county which were allocated to each
procurement agency and designation.
         Information on the correlates in 1940 and 1930 have been compiled by Price Fishback
and Shawn Kantor from a wide range of sources. See the data appendices in Fishback, Horrace,
and Kantor (2005, 2006) and the NBER working papers associated with those papers. See Price
Fishback’s website at the Department of Economics at the University of Arizona for access to the
working papers and the portions of the data that have already been used in publications. Look at
the link dataset from published research at http://econ.arizona.edu/faculty/Fishback.aspx.
Population in 1948 was calculated via linear interpolation of populations from U.S. Population
Census Information in 1940 and 1950 from Haines (ICPSR).
         Fishback and Kantor had combined a number of counties and city districts in areas where
the New Deal information was reported for the larger district. For this study additional counties
were combined in cases where there were significant boundary changes in the 1940s. In
Virginia this involved combining the following cities back into their counties: Bedford city into
Bedford county, Chesapeake city into Princess Anne, Virginia Beach City into Princess Anne,
Colonial Heights into Prince George, Covington City into Allegheny County; Fairfax City into
Fairfax County, Falls Church City into Fairfax County, Franklin City into Southhampton
County, Lexington City into Rockbridge, Manassas City into Prince William County, Poquosan
City into York, Salem City into Roanoke, Waynesboro City into Augusta County, Emporia City
into Greensville County, Galax City into Carroll, Norton City into Wise County. In New Mexico,
Los Alamos was created in 1949 out of Sandoval and Santa Fe counties, so we combined them
into one. In North Dakota Washington County was eliminated and merged into Shannon
County.
         E-bond sales in 1944 and 1949, population in 1920, 1930, 1940, 1950, shares of women
employed and the share of women in the workforce in 1940 and 1950, home ownership rates and
housing values in 1920, 1930, 1940 and 1950, manufacturing annual earnings and value added
per worker in 1919, 1929, 1939 and 1947 were calculated from data provided in computerized
form in Haines (no date, ICPSR 2896) from the U.S. Censuses of 1920, 1930, 1940, and 1950 and
the County Data Books from 1947 and 1949.
                                     References:

Aschauer, David Alan, “Is Public Expenditure Productive?” Journal of Monetary
        Economics 23 (March 1989), 177-200.
Bailey, Stephen J., and Stephen Connolly, “The Flypaper Effect: Identifying Areas for
        Further Research,” Public Choice 95 (June 1998), 335-61.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, second edition
        (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004).
Costa, Jose da Silva, Richard W. Ellson, and Randolph C. Martin, “Public Capital,
        Regional Output, and Development: Some Empirical Evidence,” Journal of
        Regional Science 27 (Aug. 1987), 419-37.
Diamond, Jared, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York: W.
        W. Norton, 1997).
Duffy-Deno, Kevin T., and Randall W. Eberts, “Public Infrastructure and Regional
       Economic Development: A Simultaneous Equations Approach,” Journal of
       Urban Economics 30 (Nov. 1991), 329-43.
Fernald, John G., “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and
       Productivity,” American Economic Review 89 (June 1999), 619-38.
Fishback, Price V. Fishback, William C. Horrace and Shawn Kantor. 2005. “Did New
       Deal Grant Programs Stimulate Local Economies? A Study of Federal
    Grants and Retail Sales During the Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History
       63 (March 2005):
Fishback, Price.V., Horrace, William C., and Kantor S. (2006). “Do Federal Programs
       Affect Internal Migration? The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility
       During the Great Depression,” Explorations in Economic History 43 (April 2006):
       179-222.
Fishback, Price V., Shawn Kantor, and John Joseph Wallis, “Can the Three R’s be
       Rehabilitated? A Comprehensive Analysis, Program by Program, County by
       County,” Explorations in Economic History 40 (July 2003), 278-307.
Gallop, John Luke, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Andrew D. Mellinger, “Geography and
       Economic Development,” in Boris Pleskovic and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., Annual
       World Bank Conference on Development Economics, 1998 (Washington, DC:
       World Bank, 1999), 127-78.
Garcia-Mila, Theresa, and Therese J. McGuire, “The Contribution of Publicly Provided
       Inputs to States’ Economies,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 22 (June
       1992), 229-41.
Gardner, John, and William Cohen, “Demographic Characteristics of the Population of
       the United States, 1930-1950: County-Level,” ICPSR file 0020, 1992.
Gramlich, Edward M., “Infrastructure Investment: A Review Essay,” Journal of
       Economic Literature, 32 (Sept. 1994), 1176-96.
_____, “Intergovernmental Grants: A Review of the Empirical Literature.” In The
       Political Economy of Fiscal Federalism. Edited by Wallace E. Oates. Lexington,
       Massachusetts: Lexington Books, 1977.
Greene, William H., Econometric Analysis, Fifth Edition (New York: Prentice Hall,
       2003).
Hahn, Jinyong, and Jerry Hausman, “A new specification test for the validity of
       instrumental variables,” Econometrica 70 (Jan. 2002), 163-89.
Haines, Michael. (no date). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The
       United States, 1790-2000. Computerized Data sets from the Inter-University
       Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR). ICPSR No. 2896.
Hausman, Jerry, “Specification and Estimation of Simultaneous Equations Models,” In
       Zvi Griliches and Michael Intrilligator, eds, Handbook of Econometrics
       (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1983).
Higgs, Robert. 1992. “Wartime Prosperity? A Reassessment of the US Economy in the
       1940’s,” Journal of Economic History 52 (March): 41-60.
Higgs, Robert. 1993. “Private Profit, Public Risk: Institutional Antecedents of the
       Modern Military Procurement System in the Rearmament Program of 1940-41.”
       Sinews of War: Essays on the Economic History of World War Industrial
       Mobilization Plan. Edited by Geofrey T. Mills and Hugh Rockoff. Ames, Iowa:
       Iowa State University Press, pp. 166-198.
Higgs, Robert. 1999. “From Central Planning to Market, The American Transition,
       1945-1947.” Journal of Economic History 59 (September): 600-23.
Higgs, Robert. 2004. “Wartime Socialization of Investment: A Reassessment of U. S.
       Capital Formation.” Journal of Economic History 64 (June): 500-520.
Higgs, Robert. 2006. Depression, War, and Cold War: Studies in Political Economy.
       Independent Institute.
Hines, James R. Jr., and Richard H. Thaler, “The Flypaper Effect,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 9 (Fall 1995), 217-26.
Hulten, Charles R., and Robert M. Schwab, “Public Capital Formation and the Growth of
       Regional Manufacturing Industries,” National Tax Journal 44 (Dec. 1991), 121-
       34.
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, Historical, Demographic,
       Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970, ICPSR Number 0003.
       The version has corrections by Michael Haines, Department of Economics,
       Colgate University, Hamilton, NY.
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, United States Historical
       Election Returns, 1824-1968, ICPSR Number 0001.
Koistinen, Paul A. C. 2004. Arsenal Of World War II, The Political Economy Of
       American Warfare. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas.
Kuznets, Simon. National Product in Wartime. New York, 1945.
McGregor, Peter, Eric McVittie, J. Kim Swales, and Ya Ping Yin, “The Neoclassical
       Economic Base Multiplier,” Journal of Regional Science 40 (Feb. 2000), 1-31.
Melman, Seymour. 1985. The Permanent War Economy: American Capitalism in
       Decline. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Merrifield, John, “A Neoclassical Anatomy of the Economic Base Multiplier,” Journal of
       Regional Science 27 (May 1987), 283-94.
Munnell, Alicia, “Infrastructure Investment and Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 6 (Fall 1992), 189-98.
Nelson, Donald Marr. 1946. Arsenal Of Democracy, The Story Of American War
       Production. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company,
Nordhaus, William and James Tobin. 1972. “Is Growth Obsolete?” in National Bureau
        of Economic Research volume on Economic Growth 96: 1-80.
Novick, David, Melvin Anshen, and William Charles Truppner. 1949. Wartime
        Production Control. New York: Columbia University Press.
Oates, Wallace, Fiscal Federalism (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1973).
Pereira, Alfredo M., and Rafael Flores de Frutos, “Public Capital Accumulation and
        Private Sector Performance,” Journal of Urban Economics 46 (September 1999),
        300-22.
Rappaport, Jordan, and Jeffrey D. Sachs, “The United States as a Coastal Nation,”
        Journal of Economic Growth 8 (March 2003), 5-46.
Rhode, Paul, James Snyder, and Koleman Strumpf. 2002. “The Great Arsenal of
        Democracy”: The Political Economy of the County Level Allocation of World
        War Two Military Spending. Working Paper presented at the NBER Summer
        Institute.
Schubert, Frank. 1994. Mobilization: the United States Army in World War II. Defense
        Dept., Army, Center of Military History.
Smith, R. Elberton. 1959. The Army and Economic Mobilization. Washington, D.C.
        Center of Military History, U.S. Army. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
        Office reprinted 1991.
United States Bureau of Budget. 1946. The United States at War: Development and
        Administration of the War Program by the Federal Government. New York: Da
        Capo Press, Inc.,
United States Bureau of the Census. (1975). Historical Statistics of the United States:
        Colonial Times to 1970. Part II. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. County Data Book. (Washington, D.C.: Government
        Printing Office, 1947.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. County and City Data Book. (Washington, D.C.:
        Government Printing Office, 1949.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to
        1970 (Washington, DC: GPO, 1975).
U.S. Bureau of the Census, “Illiteracy in the United States, October 1947,” Current
        Population
U.S. Congress, Official Congressional Directory, for the 73rd Congress 1st session
        through 76th Congress (Washington, D.C.: GPO, various years).
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Fifteenth Census of the United States, 1930, Population,
        Volume VI: Families. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1933.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Sixteenth Census of the United States, 1940: Population,
        Internal Migration, 1935 to 1940 (Washington, DC: GPO, 1943).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “State Variations in War Migration and Post-War
       Demobilization.” Monthly Labor Review (September 1944): 481-485.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Consumer
       Market Data Handbook. (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1936).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Consumer
       Market Data Handbook. (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1939).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, General
       Consumer Market Statistics, Supplement 1 to the Market Data Handbook of the
       United States. (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1932).
U.S. Office of Government Reports, Statistical Section, Report No. 9, Volume 1, “Direct
       and Cooperative Loans and Expenditures of the Federal Government for Fiscal
       Years 1933 through 1939.” Mimeo, 1940.
U.S. Office of Government Reports, Statistical Section, Report No. 10, Volume 1,
       “County Reports of Estimated Federal Expenditures March 4 1933-June 30,
       1939,” Mimeo, 1940.
United States Joint Army and Navy Munitions Board. 1933. Industrial Mobilization
       Plan. Washington DC: United States Government Printing Office. 1933
United States Joint Army and Navy Munitions Board. 1938. Industrial Mobilization
       Plan. Revision Of 1938. Washington DC: United States Government Printing
       Office.
United States Joint Army and Navy Munitions Board. 1939. Industrial Mobilization
       Plan. Revision Of 1939. A Study Of Methods For The Effective And Equitable
       Utilization Of The Industrial Resouces Of The United States In Time Of War.,
       Washington DC: United States Government Printing Office.
Vias, Alexander and Gordon Mulligan. 1997. “Disaggregate Economic Base Multipliers
       in Small Communities.” Environment and Planning 29 (June): 955-74.
                                                 Table 1
Predicted Change in Retail Sales from an Additional Dollar of War Spending
                                     Under Various Assumptions
                                 Share    Base       Crowding               Share of  Income     Change
                              population Multiplier    Out/                   War    Multiplier in Retail
                                spends              Productivity              plant                Sales
                              externally                                     inputs              from $1
                                                                           imported               of New
                                                                                                   Deal
                                                                                                spending
                                 M               Π                 Π           mw       Μ            rμ

                EXTRA INCOME IS SPENT 75 % LOCALLY, 25 % EXTERNALLY
    1 Baseline         0.25     1.33       -0.5      0.3      0.25                                 0.13
    2 0.2 rise in      0.25     1.33       -0.7      0.3     -0.01                                -0.01
      crowding
      out
    3 No crowding      0.25     1.33        0        0.3      0.92                                 0.49
      out
    4 Baseline         0.25     1.33       -0.5      0.5     -0.01                                -0.01
      with 0.2 rise
      in war plant
      share of
      inputs
      imported

                EXTRA INCOME IS SPENT 50% LOCALLY, 50 % EXTERNALLY
    5 Baseline         0.5      0.80      -0.5      0.3      0.15                                  0.08
    6 0.2 rise in      0.5      0.80      -0.7      0.3     -0.01                                  0.00
      crowding
      out
    7 No crowding      0.5      0.80       0        0.3      0.55                                  0.29
      out
    8 Baseline         0.5      0.80      -0.5      0.5     -0.01                                  0.00
      with 0.2 rise
      in war plant
      share of
      inputs
      imported
Assumptions:
r the ratio of retail sales to income is assumed 0.53.
tf the fed tax rate is 0.2.
θ the flypaper/crowding out effect on state and local spending is 0.1.
δ the ratio of state and local taxes to state and local spending is 0.9.
                                                   Table 2
            Change in the Estimated Impact of War Spending on Retail Sales Growth, 1939-
                        1948 As Correlates Are Added in a Cumulative Fashion
                                                             War
                                                          Spending            OSD             Dollar
      Specification     Variables in Specification       Coefficient P-Value Change           Change
           1            War                               -8.54E-06     0.000   -0.190        -$0.0046
           2            (1) + Retail Sales 1939           -5.09E-06     0.000   -0.113        -$0.0027
           3            (2) + Economic Correlates         -2.91E-06     0.000   -0.065        -$0.0016
           4            (3) + Demographic Correlates       -1.11E-06    0.019   -0.025        -$0.0006
           5            (4) + Geographic Correlates        -1.27E-06    0.012   -0.028        -$0.0007
           6            (5) + Climatic Correlates         -1.04E-06     0.026   -0.023        -$0.0006
           7            (6) + State Dummies               -9.53E-07     0.106   -0.021        -$0.0005

          Notes. Results for specification 7 are reported for all variables except state dummies in
          Table 4.


                                                   Table 3
                                         Exploratory Specifications


                                                          War
                                                        Spending           OSD     Dollar
Specification    Description                           Coefficient P-Value Change Change               N
     8           No Spending Above 95 percentile        -5.88E-06    0.048  -0.032 -$0.0031           2885
     9           Positive Spending Only                 -7.41E-07    0.190  -0.026 -$0.0004           1763
                 Positive Spending, 5th < war <
     10          95th                                    -2.10E-06      0.264     -0.023   -$0.0011   1589
     11          Common Support                          -2.08E-06      0.000     -0.050   -$0.0011   1252
     12          Zero-One Treatment Effect               -1.59E-02      0.029     -0.036   -$8.4739   3036
     13          Ag Production                           -6.69E-07      0.381     -0.015   -$0.0004   3059

          Notes. Uses specification 7 from Table 2.
                                    Table 4: Coefficients and p-values from OLS and 2SLS Regressions
                                                                                                    2SLS
                                                               OLS                 First stage              Second stage              Summary Stats
                                                                                           P-                        P-
Variables                                                 Coeff       P-value   Coeff      value           Coeff     value    Mean    Dev     Min     Max
Variable of Interest:
     Annual War Spending Per Capita                     -9.53E-07     0.106                            1.20E-06       0.630   1327    4847    0.0     144771
Instrumental Variables:
     Army Quartermaster Allocations                                              -65.2      0.001                              2.0    15.96   0.0      504
     Navy Allocations                                                            381.1      0.030                              0.3     2.93   0.0      139
     Army Engineers Allocations                                                  392.9      0.005                              0.2     1.76   0.0      62
     Tool Plan Allocations                                                       425.7      0.001                              0.1     0.88   0.0      28
                                                                                   -
                                                                                            0.041                              0.0    0.55    0.0      25
    OASW Allocations                                                            1482.5
    Areo Allocations                                                            1308.8      0.001                              0.0    0.32    0.0      14
    Steel Plan Allocations                                                      -590.0      0.013                              0.1    0.82    0.0      29
Exogenous Variables
                                                                                  -
                                                         -0.041       0.066                 0.001          -0.037     0.094    6.1    0.58    3.2       8
    Log retail sales per capita                                                 1387.8
    % dwellings w/ radio, 1940                          -3.36E-04     0.674      31.0       0.286      -3.95E-04      0.617   69.3    19.90   13.2     98
                                                                                                                                               -
                                                         -0.001       0.000       0.9       0.471          -0.001     0.000   97.6    60.13           1344
    % retail sales growth, 1930-40                                                                                                            30.6
    % employment in manufacturing, 1940                  0.001        0.181     262.9       0.000          0.001      0.493   4.0      4.27   0.0      28
    % of population female, 1940                         0.006        0.097     -44.1       0.708          0.006      0.087   48.6     1.98   19.6     53
    % of population black, 1940                          -0.001       0.014      4.1        0.506          -0.001     0.012   10.7    17.84   0.0      86
    % of population urban, 1940                          -0.001       0.001      17.3       0.014          -0.001     0.000   22.8    24.51   0.0      100
    % of population foreign born, 1940                   0.002        0.175      4.4        0.925          0.002      0.173   3.7      4.62   0.0      29
    % of population illiterate, 1940                     -0.001       0.507     -18.4       0.629          -0.001     0.526   5.7      5.02   0.3      41
    % of population in age categories, 1940
                                 10-19                     0.029      0.000     -248.3      0.127         0.029       0.000   19.9     2.52   8.9      27
                                 20-29                    -0.011      0.101      207.3      0.097        -0.012       0.079   16.5     1.73   12.2     47
                                 30-34                     0.031      0.019     -475.2      0.283         0.032       0.015    7.1     0.88   3.9      13
                                 35-44                    -0.007      0.328      47.4       0.736        -0.007       0.309   12.2     1.45   8.4      18
                                 45-54                     0.010      0.123      157.5      0.145         0.009       0.135   10.6     1.76   4.3      17
                                 55-64                     0.016      0.021     -385.8      0.010         0.017       0.014    7.8     1.77   1.4      14
                                 65-up                     0.001      0.927       -2.3      0.987         0.001       0.916    7.1     2.29   0.0      15
    # rivers in county flowing through 11-20 counties      0.009      0.134      452.4      0.202         0.008       0.177   0.24     0.45   0.0       2
    # rivers in county flowing through 21-50 counties      0.008      0.394      230.6      0.174         0.007       0.418   0.14     0.37   0.0       3
    # rivers in county flowing through >50 counties        0.023      0.016      553.0      0.342         0.022       0.023   0.09     0.29   0.0       2
    Elevation range                                      3.71E-06     0.555        0.1      0.662         0.000       0.570   1517    2359    11.0    14652
    Max elevation                                       -8.28E-06     0.194       -0.2      0.379      -7.94E-06      0.208   2397    2959    11.0    14494
    Number of bays                                      -1.22E-04     0.636        9.3      0.492      -1.39E-04      0.579    3.0    13.95   0.0      312
    Number of lakes                                     -1.96E-05     0.685       -0.5      0.774      -1.79E-05      0.708   21.0    55.31   0.0      796
    Number of beaches                                     -0.002      0.037       1.9       0.964        -0.002       0.028   0.50     3.15   0.0      64
    Number of swamps                                     4.18E-04     0.193      -12.9      0.290       4.51E-04      0.161    2.4     8.07   0.0      136
    Atlantic coast county                                  0.032      0.082     1313.9      0.086         0.030       0.107   0.043    0.20   0.0       1
    Pacific coast county                                   0.006      0.818      817.3      0.626         0.003       0.890   0.013    0.11   0.0       1
    Gulf coast county                                      0.015      0.570      815.6      0.429         0.013       0.618   0.018    0.13   0.0       1
                                                                                    -
                                                          0.002       0.904                 0.111          0.003      0.831   0.027   0.16    0.0       1
     Great Lakes county                                                         1141.8
     Dustbowl                                              0.066      0.041      947.5      0.073         0.064       0.044   0.016    0.13   0.0       1
     % of population farming                               0.007      0.000       -8.5      0.840         0.007       0.000   46.2    21.62   0.0      100
     Average monthly temperature, 1940-50                  0.001      0.520      104.6      0.054         0.001       0.603   54.4     8.15   37.0     75
     Average monthly precipitation, 1940-50                0.007      0.530     -181.0      0.690         0.007       0.499    3.2     1.12   0.4       6
     Months of excess or severe drought, 1940-50           0.002      0.012        7.9      0.782         0.002       0.011    9.0     8.78   0.0      50
     Months of excess or severe wetness, 1940-50           0.002      0.085        0.9      0.974         0.002       0.081   12.2    12.80   0.0      82
     % of population farming X avg. temperature         -6.89E-05     0.025       -0.7      0.397      -6.75E-05      0.025   2546    1329    0.0     6029
     % of population farming X avg. precipitation       -3.52E-04     0.201        8.7      0.258      -3.70E-04      0.171   149.9   98.11   0.0      480
     % of population farming X months of drought        -4.40E-05     0.016      -0.04      0.934      -4.41E-05      0.014   429.5   521.9   0.0     3028
     % of population farming X months of wetness         1.24E-05     0.467       -0.1      0.870       1.26E-05      0.449   572.3   693.2   0.0     4623
     Constant                                             -0.381      0.266     9441.5      0.211         -0.406      0.232
State fixed effects                                     Included                 Included                Included
R2                                                             0.54                 0.18                       0.54
N                                                             3036                 3036                       3036
                  Table 5: OLS Estimates Differenced Between 1940s and 1930s
                                                                          OLS
Variables                                                      Coeff      P-value   OSD       Δ$
Variable of Interest:
             Annual War Spending Per Capita                   -2.53E-06    0.001    -0.031   -0.0013
Exogenous Variables
             Δ Public Relief Spending 1930's                   9.77E-05    0.403     0.012
             Δ Log retail sales per capita                      -1.269     0.000    -0.794
             Δ % dwellings w/ radio, 1940                     -1.53E-04    0.786    -0.003
             Δ % population growth, 1930-40                   -2.17E-05    0.280    -0.013
             Δ % employment in manufacturing, 1940               0.009     0.000     0.042
             Δ % of population female, 1940                     -0.006     0.401    -0.014
             Δ % of population black, 1940                      -0.004     0.104    -0.018
             Δ % of population urban, 1940                       0.000     0.643     0.004
             Δ % of population foreign born, 1940                0.003     0.229     0.015
             Δ % of population illiterate, 1940                  0.003     0.102     0.020
             Δ % of population in age categories, 1940
                         10-19                                   0.006     0.235    0.020
                         20-29                                   0.003     0.639    0.010
                         30-34                                   0.003     0.760    0.006
                         35-44                                  -0.005     0.354    -0.015
                         45-54                                   0.005     0.319    0.013
                         55-64                                   0.015     0.011    0.036
                         65-up                                   0.016     0.026    0.032
             Δ % of population farming                           0.018     0.000    0.250
             Δ Average monthly temperature, 1940-50              0.008     0.471     0.008
             Δ Average monthly precipitation, 1940-50           -0.116     0.000    -0.069
             Δ Months of excess or severe drought, 1940-50       0.003     0.000     0.153
             Δ Months of excess or severe wetness, 1940-50      -0.001     0.534    -0.018
             Δ % of population farming X avg. temperature     -4.54E-04    0.000    -0.368
             Δ % of population farming X avg. precipitation      0.002     0.000     0.110
             Δ % of population farming X months of drought    -7.14E-05    0.000    -0.181
             Δ % of population farming X months of wetness     5.27E-05    0.001     0.093
             Δ % value of crops from cotton                   -2.42E-04    0.695    -0.006
             Δ % value of crops from corn                       -0.001     0.010    -0.030
             Δ % value of crops from wheat                      -0.002     0.008    -0.025
             Δ % value of crops from tobacco                  -3.82E-04    0.723    -0.003
             Constant                                            0.406     0.000    0.000
State fixed effects                                           Included
R2                                                                 0.84
N                                                                  3032
                                                       Table 6
                Change in the Estimated Impact of War Spending on Retail Sales Growth, 1939-
                 1954 As Correlates Are Added in a Cumulative Fashion and Under Different




                                                              War
                                                           Spending            OSD      Dollar
Specification    Variables in Specification               Coefficient P-Value Change    Change
     1           War                                        -1.04E-05    0.000   -0.178  -$0.0055
     2           (1) + Retail Sales 1939                    -4.27E-06    0.000   -0.073  -$0.0023
     3           (2) + Economic Correlates                  -2.29E-06    0.000   -0.039  -$0.0012
     4           (3) + Demographic Correlates               -8.67E-07    0.148   -0.015  -$0.0005
     5           (4) + Geographic Correlates                -1.14E-06    0.077   -0.020  -$0.0006
     6           (5) + Climatic Correlates                  -9.20E-07    0.178   -0.016  -$0.0005
     7           (6) + State Dummies                        -7.65E-07    0.382   -0.013  -$0.0004


                                                              War
                                                           Spending            OSD      Dollar
Specification    Alternative Estimations                  Coefficient P-Value Change    Change       N
     8           No Spending Above 95 percentile            -3.33E-06    0.400   -0.014  -$0.0018   2881
     9           Positive Spending Only                     -7.43E-07    0.368   -0.019  -$0.0004   1763
     10          Positive Spending, 5th < war < 95th         2.18E-06   0.376     0.017   $0.0012   1589
     11          Common Support                             -2.51E-06    0.001   -0.045  -$0.0013   1252
     12          0-1 Treatment Effect                       -2.35E-02    0.015   -0.041  -$12.500   3032
     13          Ag Production                              -6.98E-07    0.515   -0.012  -$0.0004   3031
     14          2SLS                                        4.98E-06    0.129    0.086   $0.0027   3032
     15          Difference 1939-54 minus 1929-39           -3.74E-06    0.001   -0.043  -$0.0020   3028
                                                       Table 7
                Change in the Estimated Impact of War Spending on Retail Sales Growth, 1939-
                 1958 As Correlates Are Added in a Cumulative Fashion and Under Different
                                                Estimations

                                                          War Spending           OSD       Dollar
Specification    Variables in Specification                Coefficient P-Value   Change    Change
     1           War                                       -1.25E-05    0.000     -0.197   -$0.0067
     2           (1) + Retail Sales 1939                   -4.87E-06    0.000     -0.077   -$0.0026
     3           (2) + Economic Correlates                 -2.57E-06    0.000     -0.041   -$0.0014
     4           (3) + Demographic Correlates              -1.05E-06    0.051     0.017    -$0.0006
     5           (4) + Geographic Correlates               -1.31E-06    0.017     -0.021   -$0.0007
     6           (5) + Climatic Correlates                 -1.04E-06    0.080     -0.016   -$0.0006
     7           (6) + State Dummies                       -5.21E-07    0.468     -0.008   -$0.0003


                                                          War Spending            OSD        Dollar
Specification    Alternative Estimations                   Coefficient P-Value   Change     Change     N
      8          No Spending Above 95 percentile           -5.86E-06    0.144    -0.023    -$0.0031   2882
      9          Positive Spending Only                    -9.70E-07    0.169    -0.022    -$0.0005   1763
     10          Positive Spending, 5th < war < 95th       -9.03E-07    0.695    -0.006    -$0.0005   1589
     11          Common Support                            -2.25E-06    0.001    -0.036    -$0.0012   1252
     12          0-1 Treatment Effect                      -1.56E-02    0.104    -0.025    -$8.3076   3033
     13          Ag Production                             -4.56E-07    0.589    -0.007    -$0.0002   3032
     14          2SLS                                       4.86E-06    0.097     0.077     $0.0026   3033
     15          Difference 1939-58 minus 1929-39          -4.27E-06    0.002    -0.046    -$0.0460   3029
                                                      Table 8:
           Change in Number of Standard Deviations in Growth Rate of Variables Associated
                with a One Standard Deviation Increase in War Spending Per Capita
                                                                                      Value
                                           Bank          Bank      Manufacturing    Added Per
                Ebonds        Ebonds      Deposits      Deposits   Wages (1939‐      Worker
               (1940‐44)     (1940‐49)   (1936‐44)     (1936‐49)       47)          (1939‐47)
Spec (1)        0.359**        0.024     ‐0.060**      ‐0.160**      ‐0.058**         ‐0.017
Spec (2)           ‐‐‐           ‐‐‐     0.050**       ‐0.058**      0.066**         0.062**
Spec (3)        0.252**      ‐0.051**      0.000       ‐0.088**       0.034**          0.014
Spec (4)        0.253**      ‐0.046**      0.003       ‐0.082**       0.035**          0.017
Spec (5)        0.270**      ‐0.031**      0.016       ‐0.067**       0.032**          0.019
Spec (6)        0.289**       ‐0.001      0.043**      ‐0.040**        0.021           0.016
Spec (7)        0.294**        0.003      0.050**      ‐0.036**        0.021           0.014
Spec (8)        0.325**       0.011*       0.016       ‐0.040**        0.008           0.012
Spec (9)        0.305**        0.006      0.017**      ‐0.038**        0.001           0.007


                Share of      Share of     Share of      Value                       Housing
               Workforce      Women       Workers      Added Per   Housing Value    Ownership     Population
                Female       Employed     in Manu.       Capita    Growth (1940‐      Rate         Growth
               (1940‐50)     (1940‐50)   (1939‐47)     (1939‐47)        50)         (1940‐50)     (1940‐48)
Spec (1)         0.022         0.012      0.147**      ‐0.047**      ‐0.074**        ‐0.099**      0.347**
Spec (2)       0.103**        0.074**     0.086**        0.009       0.055**         ‐0.101**      0.313**
Spec (3)       0.032**         0.009      0.083**      0.039**         0.015         ‐0.044**      0.222**
Spec (4)       0.033**         0.016      0.089**       0.041**        0.014         ‐0.044**      0.206**
Spec (5)       0.030**         0.020      0.089**       0.041**       0.023**        ‐0.040**      0.206**
Spec (6)       0.033**         0.012      0.063**       0.036**       0.031**        ‐0.051**      0.208**
Spec (7)        0.026*         0.007      0.061*        0.035**      0.035**           ‐0.056      0.217**
Spec (8)       0.026**         0.007      0.055**        0.011         0.000         ‐0.042**      0.234**
Spec (9)        0.022*         0.004      0.059**        0.012         0.001          ‐0.029*      0.207**
** = Significant at 5%
* = Significant at 10%


           Specification one through seven build cumulatively. The first specification includes only
           war spending per capita. Specification two add prior levels and trends of the dependent
           variable. Specification three adds demographic characteristics as of 1940. Specification
           four adds Geographic features of the counties. Specification five adds climate changes
           during the 1940s. Specification six adds economic factors. Specification 7 adds state
           fixed effects. Specification 8 is the differencing specification between the 1940s and the
           1930s without state fixed effects. Specification 9 is the differencing specification
           including state fixed effects.
We also have run specifications where we made adjustments to the samples like the ones
we made in specifications 8 through 13 in Table 3. The results suggest that there would
be no qualitative change in our final conclusions using the more restricted samples.
Figure 1: Total War Spending 1940-45
Figure 2: Total War Spending Per Capita 1940-45
Figure 3: Scatter Plot of State Retail Sales Per Capita (1967$) Growth Rate, 1939-1948
                    90




                                                           AZ

                                           ND
   Retail Sales Growth Rate, 1940-48
                                  80




                                                            FL
                                                NM
                                                            AL
                                            SD
                                                 AR
                                                                     TX               OR
                                                 MS NC       VA                  KS
                        70




                                                                          DE
                                                     SCTN    LA                                   CA
                                                       GA       UT
                                            ID                NE                             WA        IN
                                                                                            NV                     MI
                                                 KY                MO
                                                      WV     OK
                60




                                                     IO
                                                     WY                         IL                MD
                                                        CO
                                                                               WI           OH

                                                                          PA
      50




                                                         MN
                                                                                                            NJ
                                                       VT                                                                CT
                                            MT
                                                                           ME
                                                                               NY      RI
                    40




                                                              NH
                                                                                MA

                                       0                                        5000                             10000
                                                                          War Spending Per Capita
Figure 4: Per Capita Retail Sales Growth, 1939-48
