                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DEBT ENFORCEMENT AROUND THE WORLD

                                          Simeon Djankov
                                            Oliver Hart
                                          Caralee McLiesh
                                           Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 12807
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w12807


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2006




The authors are from the World Bank, Harvard University, the World Bank, and Harvard University,
respectively. They thank Osborne Jackson, Julien Levis, Tatiana Nenova and Justin Yap for assistance
with this project, Douglas Baird, Julian Franks, Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, Giacomo Ponzetto,
Stefano Rossi, David Scharfstein, and Ivo Welch for helpful comments, and the World Bank for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Simeon Djankov, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Debt Enforcement Around the World
Simeon Djankov, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 12807
December 2006
JEL No. G33,K2

                                              ABSTRACT

We present insolvency practitioners from 88 countries with an identical case of a hotel about to default
on its debt, and ask them to describe in detail how debt enforcement against this hotel will proceed
in their countries. We use the data on time, cost, and the likely disposition of the assets (preservation
as a going concern versus piecemeal sale) to construct a measure of the efficiency of debt enforcement
in each country. We identify several characteristics of debt enforcement procedures, such as the structure
of appeals and availability of floating charge finance, that influence efficiency. Our measure of efficiency
of debt enforcement is strongly correlated with per capita income and legal origin and predicts debt
market development across countries. Interestingly, it is also highly correlated with measures of the
quality of contract enforcement and public regulation obtained in other studies.

Simeon Djankov                                       Caralee McLiesh
The World Bank                                       The World Bank
1818 H Street                                        1818 H Street
Washington, DC 20433                                 Washington, DC 20433
sdjankov@worldbank.org                               cmcliesh@worldbank.org

Oliver Hart                                          Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220                                  Harvard University
Harvard University                                   Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                             and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu                                    ashleifer@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

         Debt is one of the most useful contracts in every economy, since it enables firms

to finance investment and individuals to smooth consumption.                         But, like any other

contract, debt needs to be enforced. To enforce debt contracts, societies create a variety

of legal mechanisms or institutions that allow lenders to go after a defaulting borrower’s

income and assets without resorting to violence.                     Some of the debt enforcement

institutions, such as some foreclosure proceedings, do not require courts. However, in

the case of firms with multiple creditors, many societies rely on courts to enforce debt

contracts, usually through bankruptcy or insolvency procedures1.

         Despite the importance of debt enforcement, insolvency institutions are generally

perceived to perform poorly, even in advanced market economies but especially in

developing countries.         This raises several questions. How poorly do these institutions

function? Why do they function poorly? Are there ways to improve them? Are these

reform strategies consistent with the other institutions and capabilities of a country?

         To address these questions, we study debt enforcement with respect to an

insolvent firm in 88 countries. Our empirical strategy is to present insolvency

practitioners in each country with the same case study of an insolvent firm. The firm is a

hotel with a given number of employees, capital and ownership structure, value as a

going concern and value if sold piecemeal. Each insolvency practitioner is presented

with two versions of the case: in the first, going concern value exceeds piecemeal sale

value; in the second version, piecemeal sale value exceeds going concern value. The firm

is otherwise identical across countries except that the economic values are all normalized

1
  We do not consider why societies need public regulation of debt enforcement in the first place, rather than
leaving everything to contract. The usual reason is to stop the grab for assets and the destruction of a viable
firm (Jackson 1986). We show that insolvency procedures often fail to achieve this goal.


                                                      2
by the country’s per capita income. In the United States, the firm would correspond to a

medium-sized hotel, such as the Charles Hotel in Cambridge, Mass.

       We then ask each practitioner to describe in detail how debt enforcement for these

case facts in his or her country will proceed, step by step. The detailed narratives

provided and confirmed by the practitioners tell us which procedure is likely to be used in

each country for debt enforcement (foreclosure with no court protection from creditors,

liquidation, or an attempt at reorganization), and allow us to compute the time and the

cost of the chosen procedure, to learn whether the hotel will be kept together or sold

piecemeal, and to use all these data to compute the efficiency of the debt enforcement

procedure for each country. We also collect detailed data on both legal and economic

characteristics of the debt enforcement procedure for our case in each country. We can

therefore assess which institutional features are conducive to the economically efficient

treatment of assets as well as to overall efficiency – at least in our relatively simple case.

       Comparing debt enforcement against essentially the same business in different

countries has many advantages. First, it allows an analysis of the efficiency of these

procedures, as well as of its determinants, with relatively less concern that we are

comparing apples to oranges. Second, we provide quantitative measures of enforcement,

and so are less vulnerable to the critique that we are just looking at law on the books

(frequently leveled against La Porta et al. 1997, 1998).       Third, because we have these

commonly defined measures of law enforcement across countries, we can ask how debt

enforcement compares to public enforcement more generally. Quantitative measures of

the efficiency of public contract enforcement can be used in a broad range of studies, as

they capture one of the most important functions of government.




                                               3
        Nonetheless, the case study approach necessarily limits the generality of our

results. Most importantly, the hotel we study has one senior secured creditor and a

number of unsecured ones. This assumption is key since, under our case facts (but

obviously not always in reality), the efficient strategy is to turn the hotel over to the

senior creditor, and let him run or sell it, as a whole or in pieces. In other words, the

senior creditor has socially correct incentives with respect to the hotel.

        Our analysis is organized around the procedures that the respondents say are

likely to be used in their countries to address the insolvency of the hotel. There are only

three basic procedures used around the world: 1) foreclosure by the senior creditor, which

may or may not involve a court, 2) liquidation, and 3) reorganization, which often leads

to subsequent liquidation (we call this type of procedure “reorganization first”)2.

Foreclosure serves as an important benchmark since, with only one senior creditor with

socially correct incentives, it can at least conceptually achieve the efficient outcome.

Because under our case facts foreclosure, which can be a contractual solution with no or

minimal court involvement, can address insolvency without formal bankruptcy, the title

of the paper is “debt enforcement” rather than bankruptcy or insolvency.

        Our main findings can be briefly summarized.

        First, looking worldwide averages, all procedures are extremely time consuming,

costly, and inefficient. In our leading case, where the efficient outcome is achieved by

keeping the hotel as a going concern rather than selling its assets piecemeal, only 36% of

the countries achieve this efficient outcome.              Between the transaction costs of debt

enforcement, the delay cost of the proceedings, and the loss from reaching the wrong

2
 Baird (1986), White (1989), Baird and Rasmussen (2002), and LoPucki (2003) discuss the procedures
used in the U.S. Thorburn (2000) presents evidence in support of liquidation in Sweden. Bris et al. (2006)
present evidence that reorganization generates greater asset values than liquidation in the United States.


                                                    4
outcome, a worldwide average of 48% of the hotel’s value is lost in debt enforcement.

The average efficiency is 65% when it is efficient to sell the assets piecemeal.

           Second, countries vary enormously in the efficiency of their debt enforcement

mechanisms.         Practitioners from some countries, such as Japan, Singapore, and the

Netherlands, estimate that only about 5% of the value of the hotel is lost in the debt

enforcement proceedings. At the other extreme, more than 90% of the value is lost in

Turkey and Angola, according to this analysis.

           Third, the variation in the efficiency of debt enforcement procedures is highly

systematic. Most important, for each procedure, richer countries are more efficient than

poorer countries, and the differences in efficiency are huge.

           Fourth, there is some evidence that richer countries have a comparative advantage

at more complex procedures.              In the rich countries, the most efficient procedure is

reorganization. In the lower middle income countries, attempts to rehabilitate the firm

nearly always fail3, so the best procedure is foreclosure. The evidence suggests that

different debt enforcement institutions might be appropriate for countries at different

income levels (Djankov et al. 2003a, Ayotte and Yun 2006, Gennaioli and Rossi 2006).

           Fifth, again for all procedures, there is a clear variation in the efficiency of debt

enforcement by legal origin. Specifically, French legal origin countries have the lowest

level of efficiency of debt enforcement, while Nordic and common law countries have the

highest. This variation is not explained away by per capita income.

           Sixth, various specific economic and legal rules are associated with differences in

efficiency of debt enforcement procedures across countries.                          Foreclosure works

extremely well with “floating charge” debt securities, when the whole business is pledged
3
    See also Franks and Loranth (2004) for evidence on ineffective reorganization in Hungary.


                                                      5
as collateral, but poorly when only specific assets can be pledged.                   This result is

consistent with the observation that, under our case facts, the senior creditor has the

socially optimal incentives to dispose of the business as long as he can gain control of it

in default. We also find, in the same spirit, that the efficiency of foreclosure rises when

the senior creditor is allowed to take collateral in an out-of-court procedure4. Turning to

insolvency proceedings, we find that legal rules that require the company to suspend

operations, or that allow suppliers and customers to rescind contracts while the company

is in bankruptcy, reduce efficiency. Moreover, extensive appeal of judicial decisions

during insolvency proceeding, and the failure to continue the proceeding during appeal,

are both detrimental to efficiency. Although many of these legal rules influence

efficiency – and their significance points to strategies for reform – no rule by itself

eliminates the significance of per capita income or legal origin as predictors of efficiency.

        Seventh, many of the conclusions described above apply not only to the leading

version of the case where going concern value exceeds liquidation value, but also to the

version where it is efficient to sell the business piecemeal. In this second version, the

efficient outcome (piecemeal sale) is eventually achieved everywhere, but the transaction

and delay costs still keep the worldwide average efficiency down to 65%. In general, for

our case facts, debt enforcement procedures appear to have a bias for piecemeal sale. Per

capita income and legal origin remain important determinants of efficiency, and many of

the institutional variables that are predictive of efficiency in the basic case, such as the

nature of the appeals process, remain important here as well.




4
 Franks and Sussman (2006) provide compelling evidence that floating charge debt works extremely well
as the basis of foreclosure of small and medium size UK companies.


                                                  6
       Eighth, many countries legally mandate deviations from absolute priority of the

secured senior creditor. Such deviations are more pronounced in the poorer and the

French legal origin countries. Looking at debt recovery by the senior creditor (a measure

of ex ante efficiency) as opposed to ex post efficiency as the indicator of debt

enforcement renders our findings on per capita income and legal origin even stronger.

       Ninth, our measures of the efficiency of debt enforcement are economically and

statistically significant predictors of the development of debt markets across countries,

ranging from the ratio of private credit to GDP to more subjective indicators.

       Tenth, our measures of the efficiency of the debt enforcement procedure are

uncorrelated with the creditor rights index of La Porta et al (1997, 1998) and with the

measures of information sharing about borrowers from Djankov et al. (2006). On the

other hand, the efficiency of debt enforcement is highly correlated with other measures of

public enforcement and public sector performance more generally, including tax

compliance, legal formalism, corruption, and infrastructure quality. Debt enforcement

looks a lot like other measures of the quality of government.

       Section 2 of the paper presents our case and the data collection procedure.

Section 3 describes how we go from the information collected from insolvency

practitioners to data. Section 4 presents the basic results on the time, cost, resolution, and

efficiency of the procedures and their fundamental determinants in 88 countries. In that

section, we focus on the version of the case in which it is efficient to keep the hotel as a

going concern rather than sell it piecemeal. Section 5 looks at the specific structural

features of the debt enforcement procedures. Section 6 summarizes three extensions:

alternative definitions of efficiency, the version of the case where it is efficient to sell the




                                               7
assets piecemeal, and the consequences of deviations from absolute priority. Section 7

analyzes cross-country determinants of private debt market development. Section 8

compares our evidence to earlier work on the efficiency of public sector performance

across income levels and legal origins. Section 9 concludes.



2. The case study

        We collect our data from detailed descriptions of debt enforcement in a

hypothetical case of an insolvent firm provided by insolvency lawyers from 88 countries.

Respondents are members of the International Bar Association’s Committee on

Bankruptcy. Four rounds of the survey were conducted, in January 2003, 2004, 2005 and

2006, respectively. This paper uses the latest data, benchmarked to January 2006. In

total, 344 lawyers participated in the surveys. In 32 countries, bankruptcy judges also

filled in surveys. Their answers were used as checks on the lawyers’ answers. Extensive

conference calls were held with all respondents to verify the data and to resolve

disagreements among respondents within a country, most of which arose from

misunderstanding the case facts.

        The sample covers all countries with income per capita greater than US$1,000

and population more than one-and-a-half million in 2005.5 It includes 30 high income,

20 upper-middle income and 38 lower-middle income countries. Eight countries are in

the East Asia region, 22 in Eastern Europe, 18 in Latin America, 13 in the Middle East, 4

in Africa, 1 in South Asia and 22 are OECD countries6.



5
 The World Bank defines a small state to be one with a population of less than 1.5 million.
6
 The sample covers all countries included in La Porta et al. (1997) except India, Kenya, Nigeria, Pakistan
and Zimbabwe. These five countries have income per capita below $1,000.


                                                    8
       The respondents are presented with a standardized case study of an insolvent firm

called “Mirage.” Mirage is a limited liability, domestically-owned hotel business located

in the most populous city. Mirage has 201 employees and 50 suppliers, each of which is

owed money for their last delivery. Five years ago, Mirage borrowed from Bizbank, a

domestic bank, and bought real estate (the hotel building), using it as a security for the

Bizbank loan. The loan has a 10 year term. Mirage has observed the payment schedule

and all other conditions of the loan up to now.

       Mirage is founded and owned 51% by Mr. Douglas, who is also the chairman of

the supervisory board. No other shareholder has above 5% of the voting power. There is

a professional general manager, with no idiosyncratic human capital. The total amount of

debt outstanding is set at 136 units. Unsecured creditors (including suppliers, the Tax

Authority, and the employees) hold 36 units (26%) as a whole, or 12 units for each group.

The balance of total debt is held by Bizbank (74%)—equivalent to 100 units. With only

one large secured creditor, Mirage’s bankruptcy presents a relatively simple case

(although in some countries, this creditor does not have absolute priority).

       In the past, Mirage has always turned a profit, covering all costs and regularly

paying the loan from Bizbank. The company had projected to continue this performance

into the future. However, recently Mirage experienced an unexpected operating loss due

to worsened industry conditions. The management expects that, in the next 2 years,

Mirage can cover its operating expenses from projected revenues (and so does not need

additional cash to operate), but will not make enough money to pay back Bizbank. As a

consequence, Mirage is about to default. Bizbank has not seen the new projections yet.




                                             9
       The incentive of all parties but Bizbank and the Tax Authority is to keep Mirage

operating as a going concern and avoid piecemeal sale, or delay it in the hope that

Mirage’s fortunes change. Mr. Douglas wants to keep the firm in operation under his

control, but does not care whether current management stays. Minority shareholders

want to do likewise because with a piecemeal sale they get nothing. The management of

Mirage wants to keep the firm in operation and keep their jobs. The suppliers prefer

Mirage to continue operations, as this may make it more likely that they recover the trade

credit due, and they want to continue doing business with Mirage. In countries where

wages do not have priority over secured creditors, workers want Mirage to continue in

business, since they may not get paid in full if it is sold piecemeal. Even where wages

have priority, workers still prefer Mirage to continue operating, so long as they value

their jobs. The Tax Administration will follow the procedure that maximizes its expected

recovery rate. Other things equal, the Tax Administration wants Mirage to continue in

business, since future tax revenues are lost in a piecemeal sale. Finally, Bizbank will

seek to maximize its own expected recovery net of costs.

       The management of Mirage has full knowledge of the case facts presented above,

and therefore has a first mover advantage. Bizbank will observe the payment default by

Mirage tomorrow. However, the bank does not know whether Mirage’s bad luck is likely

to be prolonged. That information will be available only in the Annual Report published

in 3 months’ time. Shareholders, suppliers, the tax administration and employees will

become aware of the situation when they have access to the Annual Report.

       With these case facts, we pose two scenarios. Under “Version A,” we stipulate

that the value of Mirage is higher as a going concern than if sold piecemeal. Specifically,




                                            10
Mirage is worth 100 units as a going concern (equal to the value owed to Bizbank), and

70 units if sold piecemeal (buildings, furniture, etc). Since Mirage is experiencing a

temporary downturn, the economically efficient outcome is to keep it a going concern.

          Under “Version B,” we stipulate that, even though Mirage can cover its costs over

the next two years, it will not recover from its downturn. The value of Mirage is 100 if it

is sold piecemeal, and 70 if it continues operating as a going concern.            All other

characteristics of the case remain the same. The economically efficient outcome now is

for the business to discontinue operations and be sold in pieces.

          As this description illustrates, our case is relatively simple and abstracts from a

number of issues that have been the focus of bankruptcy scholarship in recent years.

          First, we focus on formal insolvency proceedings, and ignore informal workouts,

which are extremely prevalent (Gilson, John, and Lang 1990, Asquith, Gertner, and

Scharfstein 1994).      Claessens and Klapper (2005) suggest that such workouts are

common in countries with concentrated banking relationships; Franks and Loranth (2004)

have a similar finding for Hungary, where bankruptcy is highly inefficient.

          Second, the security on which Mirage defaults is straight debt; by assumption we

do not allow complex financial structures that can get away from formal bankruptcy.

Some of the problems we discuss can be avoided with convertible debt, for example.

Recent research suggests that financial contracts indeed adjust to the legal environment

(Lerner and Schoar 2005, Qian and Strahan 2006, Gennaioli and Rossi 2006).

          Third, we have only one senior secured creditor (along with employees, suppliers

and the government who are unsecured), so conflicts among creditors are not a major

factor.    Indeed, in both versions of the case, the amount owed to the secured creditor




                                              11
Bizbank equals the larger of Mirage’s going concern and piecemeal sale value. Under a

perfectly efficient bankruptcy procedure, then, Bizbank would just be fully repaid. We

chose the numbers in this way to highlight the most basic costs of debt enforcement,

which arise even when Bizbank is the residual claimant with respect to the future value of

the business. In reality, conflicts of interest among creditors create major complications

(Bebchuk 1988, Gertner and Scharfstein 1991, Aghion, Hart, and Moore 1992, Bolton

and Scharfstein 1996, Stromberg 2000, Berglof, Roland, and von Thadden 2003).

       Fourth, in both versions of the case, we assume that the creditor knows from the

start whether piecemeal sale or preservation as a going concern is efficient for Mirage.

One argument for court-supervised bankruptcy is that such knowledge is unavailable, and

bankruptcy should facilitate the discovery of the efficient way to deal with Mirage.

       Fifth, the hotel does not require any additional financing to continue operations –

its problem is the inability to pay the outstanding debt. This assumption may bias the

results in favor of foreclosure, since one reason for bankruptcy protection is to allow the

firm to raise additional finance, something it does not need to do in our case.

       Sixth, the hotel is small and therefore not important enough for politicians or

judges to try to keep it going “in the public interest.” Politicization of bankruptcy has

also been an important concern (Weiss and Wruck 1998, Lambert-Moglianski, Sonin, and

Zhuravskaya 2006, Chen and Schoar 2006).

       Seventh, our case facts explicitly rule out tunneling of the hotel’s assets during

debt enforcement. In the developing countries in particular, tunneling of the firm by the

controlling shareholder may present a major problem for creditors, creating pressure for a

quick piecemeal sale (Johnson et al. 2002, La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes, and Zamarripa




                                             12
2003, Gennaioli and Rossi 2006). This means that some institutional arrangements, such

as automatically shutting down a firm during insolvency proceedings, will perform

extremely badly under our no tunneling assumption, although such arrangements could

make sense if keeping the firm alive encourages the diversion of assets.



3. Data

3a. Procedures

       The legal procedures that respondents choose as the most likely option for

resolving Mirage’s insolvency include foreclosure, liquidation and reorganization. Each

procedure can lead either to Mirage continuing operation as a going concern, or to its

piecemeal sale (figure 1) below.



                        3 Procedures                    2 Outcomes

                          Foreclosure
                                                        Going Concern

                         Reorganization
                              first
                                                        Piecemeal sale


                          Liquidation




                           Figure 1: Procedures and Outcomes

       Foreclosure is a debt enforcement procedure aimed at recovering money owed to

secured creditors. Foreclosure does not protect unsecured creditors, who must rely on

separate insolvency proceedings to recover the amounts owed them. In some countries,

an insolvent company (or unsecured creditors) can cause a stay of foreclosure

proceedings by initiating a reorganization or liquidation procedure, while in other


                                            13
countries, a reorganization or liquidation filing does not stop foreclosure. In the latter

case, liquidation procedures may take place in tandem with or after foreclosure.

         Foreclosure can be an entirely out-of-court procedure, in which a receiver steers

the company to a sale of assets (either piecemeal or as a going concern). Indeed, the

appointment of such a receiver can be part of the debt contract. In other countries, a

court oversees foreclosure, although it is typically less involved than in bankruptcy.

Some countries allow a creditor to take security over an entire business—often known as

a “floating charge.”7         Under our case facts, foreclosure under floating charge gives

Bizbank socially optimal incentives to dispose of Mirage. In other countries, Mirage as a

business is not legally valid collateral, which obviously distorts Bizbank’s incentives.

         Liquidation is the procedure of winding up a company under court supervision.8

In principle, it may lead to a sale of Mirage as a going concern, and does not necessarily

result in the piecemeal sale of its assets.

         Reorganization is a court-supervised procedure aimed at rehabilitating companies

in financial distress. It is not available in all countries. Reorganization protects the

company while it attempts to rehabilitate itself; once reorganization begins, creditors

generally may not enforce their claims against the company. The current management of

Mirage may or may not retain control of the company during reorganization.

         In some instances, as is the case with Chapter 7 and 11 proceedings in the United

States, liquidation and reorganization are separate procedures. A petitioner must choose

7
  We use the term “floating charge” when the assets of the entire business can be pledged as collateral.
Countries use different terms for this concept, including “enterprise mortgage,” “enterprise charge,” or
“pledge of business.” In the UK, “floating charge” can be used more narrowly, for instance by excluding
inventory from the pool of pledged assets, but it is still possible to pledge the assets of an entire business.
8
  We consider here compulsory liquidation, where either a creditor files a liquidation petition, or
the law requires that an insolvent debtor file the same petition under certain circumstances.
Another process, voluntary liquidation not required by law, is outside the scope of our study.


                                                       14
between the two. In other countries, there exists a single insolvency procedure and the

company may be directed either to the liquidation or to the reorganization “track.”

       Regardless of the nature of the reorganization procedure, in many countries

Mirage may still end up in liquidation after an initial attempt at reorganization.



3b. Responses

       We present the two versions of the case to respondents and ask: what happens

next? We first ask the respondents to outline the procedures available by law in the case

of Mirage. They then indicate which legal procedure is most likely to be followed in the

case of Mirage—given their experience, their country’s laws, and the assumptions of the

case study. Respondents explain which procedure is chosen and which party—Bizbank,

Mirage, or another—selects it. Mirage has a first mover’s advantage as its management

knows it will default. In countries where a debtor can seek relief from enforcement by

unilaterally applying for reorganization, Mirage is likely to initiate a reorganization

proceeding, as management wishes it to continue as a going concern. In countries where

liquidation and reorganization do not automatically stay foreclosure proceedings and

where foreclosure is faster and cheaper than other procedures, Bizbank will initiate

foreclosure. In countries where Mirage’s financial position (it has negative net worth and

is in default) automatically triggers liquidation, liquidation is the most likely procedure.

       In the United States, for example, our respondents indicate that Mirage will

successfully apply for Chapter 11 reorganization. Reorganization imposes an automatic

stay on enforcement and offers the best chance of keeping the firm in operation and

current management in control. Mirage’s first-mover advantage allows it to take this




                                             15
course of action. In the United Kingdom, our respondent reported that Bizbank retains

the right to appoint an administrative receiver under a foreclosure measure because its

security was granted before the effective date of the Enterprise Act, 2002.

Administrative receivership mainly benefits the secured creditor; if the security had taken

effect after the effective date of the Enterprise Act, Bizbank would not have been able to

appoint an administrative receiver and Mirage would have appointed an administrator,

with the goal of preserving it as a going concern.         In Greece, commencement of

reorganization requires the consent of 60% of all creditors, including at least 40% of

secured creditors. Reorganization is therefore possible only with Bizbank’s consent.

Bizbank is unlikely to offer such consent because suppliers to Mirage in reorganization

will become senior to Bizbank. Enforcement of the security right by Bizbank is also

possible in Greece, but expensive. Our respondents indicate that liquidation is the most

likely choice, and that Mirage is likely to be sold piecemeal.

       We also ask respondents to describe how the insolvency process evolves in the

most likely scenario under the assumptions of the case. They describe the main sequence

of steps and associated time from the moment of filing until the payment of all parties,

including the main points of delay such as appeals. In Singapore, for example, there are

8 main steps to the insolvency case. First, Bizbank would issue a formal demand for the

monies due under the security, normally within 14 days. Since Mirage is unable to pay,

Bizbank would then appoint a receiver to manage Mirage, who would assume control of

the business with an objective to sell it as a going concern and recover the debt owed to

Bizbank. This step typically takes 4 weeks. Marketing submissions are received and

analyzed (requiring 2 weeks), and a marketing program agreed and implemented (5




                                             16
weeks). Negotiations with interested parties and execution of the contract of sale for

Mirage take place (4 weeks), followed by completion of the contract of sale (12 weeks).

Unsecured creditors are likely to appeal the matter on the grounds that the sale price is

not reasonable, delaying the proceedings by 2 months assuming that there is no real

evidence to support their challenge (as under the facts of the case). Funds are disbursed

and final reports are prepared (3 weeks).

        Respondents predict whether Mirage continues operating as a going concern after

the resolution of the case and justify their choice with written arguments. In Italy, for

example, reorganization plans may be approved by the court only if 40% of unsecured

creditor debt is satisfied in the plan and 100% of secured creditor debt is satisfied in the

plan. Since the value of Mirage is exactly equal to the amount owed Bizbank but is not

enough to satisfy unsecured creditors, the reorganization plan is not accepted and the firm

is automatically sold piecemeal. In the Czech Republic, the administrator is paid more

for each sale that is conducted, thus increasing the incentive for piecemeal sale.

        Last, respondents estimate the cost of the proceeding borne by all parties. These

costs include: court fees, attorney fees, notification fees, publication fees, administrator

fees,   assessor   and   inspector    fees,   asset   storage   and    preservation   costs,

liquidation/auctioneer fees, government fees/levies, and other fees respondents are asked

to describe. In most countries, the largest component of costs is attorney fees.



3c. Main variables

        Table 1 defines the variables used in the analysis.       Four main variables are

recorded from survey responses. First, we document the time to resolve the insolvency




                                              17
process. Time covers the period from the moment that Mirage defaults until its fate is

realized: it is kept as a going concern or sold piecemeal. Time includes all delays from

disputed claims and appeals that are likely given the assumptions of the case study. In

some countries, Bizbank is not paid immediately when the insolvency process is

resolved. Accordingly, we also define Time to Payment as the time from default until

Bizbank is paid. Of course, Time is relevant for computing the efficiency of debt

enforcement, whereas Time to Payment is relevant for computing Bizbank’s recovery

rate (Davydenko and Franks 2005). Time and Time to Payment are reported in years.

       Next, we record the cost to complete the insolvency proceeding, expressed as a

percentage of the bankruptcy estate at the time of entry into bankruptcy. The bankruptcy

estate is the greater of the going concern and piecemeal sale values, which is always 100.

       Third, we create a dummy variable for whether the efficient insolvency outcome

is achieved. In Version A, the efficient outcome variable is assigned a score of 1 if

Mirage continues operating as a going concern upon completion of the insolvency

process. If Mirage is sold piecemeal in Version A, the efficient outcome is assigned a

score of 0. In Version B, the scoring of the efficient outcome variable is reversed. The

variable is assigned a score of 1 if Mirage discontinues operations and is sold piecemeal,

and a score of 0 if it continues operating as a going concern. Scoring the efficient

outcome is independent of the choice of procedure.

       To assess the efficiency of each procedure, we need to make two additional

assumptions that are not covered in the responses we have received. First, we need to

make an assumption as to whether the cost of debt enforcement is incurred at the

beginning or at the end. We assume it is incurred at the end, which gives an advantage to




                                            18
relatively poor countries with high interest rates and costs. Second, we need to make an

assumption as to the value Mirage generates while in debt enforcement proceedings. We

assume that Mirage just covers its variable costs and generates no value during the

insolvency process. This assumption holds regardless of whether Mirage operates as a

going concern during the insolvency process or is closed down.               This assumption

obviously makes bankruptcy costlier for the poorer countries, with long durations of

proceedings and high interest rates. In section 6, we examine the robustness of our

results with respect to changing each of these two assumptions.

       Under these assumptions, we calculate a measure of efficiency, defined as the

present value of the terminal value of the firm after bankruptcy costs, or

                              100 * EO + 70 * (1 − EO ) − 100 * c
                         E=                                                              (1)
                                            (1 + r ) t

Here EO equals 1 if the efficient outcome is achieved and 0 otherwise, c is the cost and t

is the Time to resolve insolvency, and r is the lending rate.

       We organize the data by income levels and the legal origin of a country’s

bankruptcy laws. Legal origin is obtained from a study of the origin of bankruptcy laws.

There are four main insolvency legal origins: English, French, German and Nordic. The

coding is similar to the general commercial legal origin reported in La Porta et al. (1997,

1998), with some exceptions. For example, the commercial and company laws in Iran,

Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates are based on English laws, but their

bankruptcy laws are of French tradition—via France, Egypt and Kuwait, respectively.

Although Japan and Korea are of German commercial legal origin, their bankruptcy

codes are based on English law. Switzerland, Russia and Bulgaria based their bankruptcy

laws on the French tradition; their commercial laws are of German origin.


                                             19
       In addition, we surveyed respondents on a range of structural features of the

bankruptcy system (see section 5), and on priority rules in bankruptcy (see section 6).

The former come from responses to questions on the type of courts with jurisdiction over

bankruptcy cases, rules on appeals in bankruptcy, restrictions on available bankruptcy

procedures, rules to keep the business operating as a going concern, and information on

which participants control the bankruptcy process. Twenty-four of these questions for

which we have adequate answers (and which are relevant for our case) were coded for the

analysis. These variables were verified from the available laws and public information.



4. Basic Results

       Tables 2 and 3 present our basic data and results for version A, in which it is

efficient to keep Mirage as a going concern. In Table 2, countries are independently

divided into three per capita income categories (high, upper middle, and lower middle

income) and three categories based on the likely procedure to be used to enforce Mirage’s

debt (foreclosure, liquidation, and reorganization).     Each of the nine cells lists the

countries that fall into that cell, and for each country the time and cost of its procedure,

the expected outcome (whether the firm continues as a going concern), and the summary

efficiency measure. We also report the average for each income/procedure cell, as well

as the average of each variable by income group and by procedure.

       Before turning to Table 2, note world-averages for our key variables. On average,

the insolvency of Mirage takes 2.64 years to resolve, costs 14% of the estate, and

preserves Mirage as a going concern in only 36% of the cases. The world-wide average

efficiency measure is 51.97%, which means that almost half of Mirage’s value is lost in




                                            20
debt enforcement. The fact that in our simple case -- with one senior creditor, known

going concern and piecemeal sale values, and no tunneling – half the value is lost in

enforcement reinforces the common concern about the efficiency of bankruptcy.

        There is tremendous variation among countries in time, cost and efficiency. In

fourteen countries (all of them rich), insolvency takes less than a year to resolve, but in

nine (mostly poor), it takes more than five years. The costs are not enormous on average,

but in seven countries, typically those with very long proceedings, they consume over

30% of the estate, with the dominant cost being attorney fees. In Singapore, Netherlands,

and Japan, our respondents indicate that only about 5% of the estate is wasted in debt

enforcement. In Turkey and Angola, less than 7% of the estate is left, in present value

terms, by the end of debt enforcement.              There is thus tremendous variation among

countries in the efficiency of debt enforcement proceedings, which suggests the need to

dig deeper and understand some of the key determinants of outcomes and efficiency9.

        The most basic findings of Table 2 can be gleaned by looking across averages by

procedure and by income. Countries are roughly evenly divided between those most

likely to use foreclosure, liquidation, and reorganization to deal with Mirage, with

reorganization a somewhat larger category than the other two. Averaging across all

countries using a particular procedure, there is no evidence that any procedure is always

superior to others. This is particularly interesting since, in our context, foreclosure in

theory yields the first best. The question of appropriate debt enforcement rules cannot be

resolved at such a broad level.




9
 We use nominal lending rates from the IFC in these calculations of efficiency. We confirmed the
principal results using real lending rates as well as a fixed 8% rate for each country.


                                                  21
       Looking across income groups, in contrast, enormous differences emerge. The

richer countries are vastly more efficient at debt enforcement than the poorer ones.

Averaging over all the procedures, the richest countries take 1.5 years to resolve debt

enforcement, at a transaction cost of 9% of the estate. They preserve Mirage as a going

concern in 70% of the cases, and achieve the average efficiency score of 77.3.          The

corresponding numbers for upper middle income countries are 2.88 years, 16% of the

estate, with Mirage continuing as a going concern in only 20% of the cases, and the

average efficiency score of 44.9. For the lower middle income countries, the time is 3.45

years, the cost is also 16%, the going concern outcome also materializes in 20% of the

cases, and the efficiency score is 35 on average. The decline in the efficiency score

compared to upper middle income countries comes from higher interest rates in the lower

middle income countries. Clearly, per capita income is a crucial determinant both of

getting the right outcome and of the overall efficiency of debt enforcement.

       There are several potential reasons for the enormous difference – 70% versus 20%

-- between the rich and the middle income countries in efficiently preserving Mirage as a

going concern. One possibility is the difference in administrative or judicial competence,

which causes lower middle income countries to nearly always fail at rehabilitation

(Ayotte and Yun 2006). Alternatively, successful rehabilitation may require a good deal

of security of Bizbank’s property rights, which cannot be guaranteed in middle income

countries (Gennaioli and Rossi 2006). If suppliers, customers, employees, management,

or Mr. Douglas can lay claims on Mirage assets during rehabilitation (or even tunnel

them), Bizbank has a very strong incentive to grab what it can and sell it piecemeal.




                                            22
       Per capita income does not explain everything, however. Some rich countries,

such as United Arab Emirates and Italy, have hugely inefficient debt enforcement. Some

lower middle income countries, such as Bosnia, Jamaica and Colombia, do pretty well.

Nonetheless, debt enforcement joins the list of many other public, as well as private,

activities in which per capita income predicts efficiency.

       Per capita income is a strong predictor of both the going concern outcome and

efficiency for every procedure. The rich countries are the most efficient at foreclosure,

liquidation, and reorganization; the upper middle income countries are roughly as

efficient as lower middle income ones at foreclosure and reorganization, and sharply

more efficient at liquidation. The basic finding is not a procedure composition effect.

       A closer look reveals an interesting pattern in Table 2.       Among high income

countries, foreclosure is roughly as efficient as liquidation, but reorganization is the most

efficient procedure. The main reason is that reorganization preserves Mirage as a going

concern 80% of the time, compared to 63% for foreclosure and 71% for liquidation.

Among the lower middle income countries, reorganization is roughly as efficient as

liquidation, but foreclosure is the most efficient procedure.       These countries rarely

manage to save Mirage as a going concern, so speed and lower cost are conducive to

efficiency.   For upper middle income countries, the most efficient procedure is

liquidation. Overall, the most efficient procedures line up along the diagonal, with the

richer countries doing better at the more complex procedures.

       We revisit these results in a regression framework in Table 4, but the suggestion

is clear. Richer countries have a comparative advantage at the more complex procedures,

meaning procedures involving a higher level of public sector (court) intervention. A rich




                                             23
country benefits from trying to rehabilitate Mirage because it raises the likelihood of

preserving it as a going concern, a poor country should forget about reorganization since

it rarely saves Mirage, and should stick to the quickest and simplest procedure, which

here is foreclosure.

       Table 3 presents the same data as Table 2, except countries are organized by

procedure and legal origin rather than procedure and per capita income. Several results

stand out. First, relative to general world patterns, French legal origin countries rely

particularly heavily on reorganization of Mirage, and German legal origin countries on

liquidation – the latter being a familiar result. None of the four Nordic countries utilizes

foreclosure. The Nordic countries achieve very high efficiency, largely because they

always succeed in keeping Mirage as a going concern (and are very fast). Some of this

efficiency undoubtedly comes from being rich.

       Averaging across procedures, common law countries achieve sharply higher

efficiency scores than either German or French legal origin countries in their debt

enforcement. The German legal origin countries are more efficient than the French ones

in foreclosure and liquidation, but are slightly behind in reorganization. The common

law countries are more efficient than French and German legal origin ones at all

procedures, although they are only slightly ahead of German legal origin countries in

liquidation. The latter clearly have a comparative advantage at liquidation; the common

law countries have a comparative advantage at foreclosure.

       The immediate reason for the low efficiency of French legal origin countries in

debt enforcement is clear from the data: whatever procedure they use, they succeed in

keeping Mirage as a going concern in only 20% of the cases. The comparable number




                                            24
for common law countries is 80%. The failure to keep Mirage going is not just a poor

country outcome; both France and Italy fail to do so, according to our respondents.

Related to this failed effort to rehabilitate, it takes French legal origin countries 3.40

years to resolve debt enforcement, compared to 1.56 years for common law countries.

There is no difference in the transaction costs of the procedures. These results present a

clear finding, but also a puzzle: why do French legal origin countries take so long but still

fail to keep Mirage going? We try to shed light on this question in Section 5.

       The results of Tables 2 and 3 are summarized compactly in Table 4, which

presents cross-country regressions. In the first two columns, the dependent variable is the

efficiency of debt enforcement procedure; in the last two columns, the dependent variable

is a dummy equal to 1 if Mirage is preserved as a going concern. The independent

variables are the logarithm of per capita GDP, legal origin, and procedure types, with

common law and foreclosure omitted.          In the second and fourth columns, we add

interaction terms of procedure types and per capita income.

       The results confirm that richer countries have sharply higher efficiency scores and

are more likely to keep Mirage as a going concern. Compared to common law countries,

French and German legal origin countries are sharply less efficient; Nordic countries are

less efficient holding income constant, but this result is not statistically significant. There

are no statistically significant differences among procedures in either efficiency or

keeping Mirage as a going concern, except in the second regression the coefficient on

reorganization is sharply negative and statistically significant. Looking at the interaction

terms, we do find support for the idea that reorganization is a better procedure in richer

countries, but there are no statistically significant differences between foreclosure and




                                              25
liquidation. These results are supportive of the findings in Tables 2 and 3, except the

conclusions about the comparative advantage of alternative procedures are moderated.



5. Structural Characteristics of Debt Enforcement

         The results of Section 4 may seem a bit discouraging, in that they suggest that the

efficiency of debt enforcement is shaped by per capita income and legal origin – two

variables that cannot be quickly changed. In this section, we look instead at a number of

structural characteristics of debt enforcement procedures, and ask whether they explain

efficiency and its determinants. We also ask whether such explanatory power remains

even holding per capita income and legal origin constant. This may be too tough a test

since, as we show below, many structural characteristics of debt enforcement are

correlated with per capita income and especially legal origin. Nonetheless, some robust

suggestions for improving debt enforcement procedure may emerge as a result.

         Panel B of Table 1 presents 24 structural characteristics of debt enforcement

obtained from our respondents. We divide these characteristics into five groups: those

that pertain to all procedures (there is only one of those), those that pertain to foreclosure

only, those that pertain to all bankruptcy procedures (i.e., liquidation and reorganization),

those that pertain to liquidation only, and those that pertain to reorganization only.

These measures include both economic and legal characteristics of debt enforcement10.

         Table 5 presents the correlations of these characteristics with the logarithm of per

capita income, the civil law dummy, and Version A outcomes. We discuss the results by

procedure of relevance. In addition, Table 6 shows regressions of Version A efficiency


10
  Our data for the structural characteristics are almost but not entirely complete, in that we did not obtain
usable information for some of the countries from our respondents.


                                                      26
on legal origins, per capita income, and each of the structural variables taken one at a

time, organized again by procedure of relevance. We focus on the results in Table 5, but

also indicate whether they appear robust to Table 6 specifications.

       The only variable that applies to all procedures is the presence of statutory time

limits on appeals. These limits tend to be present in poorer countries and are negatively

correlated with both keeping Mirage as a going concern and efficiency. This negative

correlation disappears once income is controlled for in Table 6.

       The next three variables pertain to foreclosure. The first two – whether Bizbank

is allowed the out of court seizure and sale of collateral and whether Bizbank is allowed

to enforce its claim in an out of court procedure – are measures of raw creditor power in

foreclosure.   Both variables are characteristic of common law procedures, and are

strongly associated with a shorter time to complete foreclosure, with greater likelihood of

keeping Mirage as a going concern, and with higher overall efficiency.          The third

variable, floating charge, measures whether Bizbank can by law take the whole of

Mirage, as opposed to specific fixed assets, as collateral.        This variable too is a

characteristic of common law legal regimes, and is associated with shorter time, lower

cost, higher likelihood that Mirage is kept going, and higher overall efficiency. The

bottom line on foreclosure is clear: the common law way of doing foreclosure, which

allows floating charge debt contracts and gives the senior creditor enormous rights

without much protection of Mirage from courts, works very well for our case facts.

       These results may shed light on a puzzling feature of the data. Recall that, under

our case assumptions, Bizbank has the socially optimal incentives to deal with Mirage if

it can come to control it after the default. Why is it, then, that in Table 2, for both the




                                            27
rich and upper middle income countries, liquidation and reorganization yield higher

efficiency than foreclosure? Table 5 suggests a possible explanation: legal restrictions on

floating charge debt, which undermine Bizbank’s ability to take control of Mirage.

       To test this hypothesis, we present in Table 7 separately the average efficiency of

foreclosure for countries with and without floating charge. Our findings are consistent

with this hypothesis. In every income category, the average efficiency of foreclosure

with floating charge is higher than that of both liquidation and reorganization. Under our

case facts, floating charge foreclosure indeed comes closest to efficiency, although one

must be careful to note that these results might reflect some other benefit of common law.

These results are also broadly consistent with Franks and Sussman’s (2006) optimistic

empirical assessment of foreclosure with floating charge in the UK.

       The next round of variables deals with characteristics of bankruptcy procedures.

The first variable – whether bankruptcy is handled by a specialized court – shows that

such courts are sharply more prevalent in the richer and in the common law countries.

The handling of bankruptcy by a specialized court is associated with lower case time,

lower cost, higher likelihood that Mirage continues as a going concern, and a sharply

higher measure of overall efficiency. This result, however, does not survive in Table 6.

       The next six variables deal with specific aspects of the appeal process of

bankruptcy proceedings.     Three of them measure whether the case proceeds while

particular appeals are made; these variables directly capture the scope for delay. Three

parallel variables measure whether appeals are heard by the same judge as the one issuing

the initial order, or a different judge. These variables as well measure the scope for

delay, although less directly. Appeal variables are not strongly related to per capita




                                            28
income or legal origin. We see, however, that having the bankruptcy case proceed (rather

than be suspended) while particular rulings are appealed is strongly related to shorter

time and higher overall efficiency. In contrast, having appeals heard by the same judge

does not seem to influence time or efficiency.                     Interestingly, in the regression

specifications of Table 6, both types of appeals variables matter for efficiency11.

         The next variable captures the legal requirement that reorganization be attempted

before Mirage goes into liquidation. This requirement is more prevalent in poorer and in

civil law countries, and is associated with a lower probability that Mirage continues as a

going concern and lower efficiency (but not in the regression).                      The next variable,

automatic stay, measures whether Bizbank is prevented from enforcing its security when

bankruptcy proceedings commence. It is not correlated with our outcome measures.

Automatic stay on lawsuits measures whether lawsuits against Mirage are automatically

stayed when bankruptcy proceedings commence. It is also uncorrelated with outcomes.

         The next five variables cover the rules governing Mirage operations in bankruptcy

proceedings.      In some countries, Mirage ceases operations upon commencement of

bankruptcy. Not surprisingly, this rule makes it less likely that Mirage survives as a

going concern, and is associated with lower efficiency (in the regression as well). In

some countries, suppliers and customers may rescind contracts with Mirage without

penalty upon the initiation of bankruptcy proceedings. This rule, more prevalent in the

poorer countries, prolongs the case, prevents Mirage from continuing as a going concern,

and is associated with sharply lower efficiency (in the regression as well).                         Some

countries restrict dismissals by Mirage. Such restrictions reduce the likelihood that

11
  This finding is broadly consistent with Gamboa and Schneider (2006), who study the highly successful
bankruptcy reform in Mexico, and find that much of its benefits in terms of faster resolution of bankruptcy
and higher recovery rates for creditors derived from the curtailment of appeals.


                                                    29
Mirage survives as a going concern, and have an adverse, though not statistically

significant, effect on efficiency.    Finally, it does not appear to matter whether the

management team of Mirage remains in control of ordinary business during bankruptcy

proceedings. Again, this battery of variables yields a clear bottom line about what does

not work in bankruptcy: measures that disrupt Mirage operations during bankruptcy

(which may have some logic to them, such as reduction of tunneling), for our case facts

make it less likely that Mirage survives, and therefore reduce efficiency.

       The final group of all bankruptcy variables describes the control of the bankruptcy

process, and in particular the role of the creditors. The results in Tables 5 and 6 do not

provide consistent evidence that it matters whether Bizbank has the right to appoint or to

dismiss the bankruptcy administrator, or whether that administrator is paid based on the

market value of the estate.

       We have one structural variable that pertains to liquidation only, namely the

presence of an “automatic trigger,” such as a certain period of non-payment, for

liquidation. It is not correlated with efficiency.

       Finally, we have two structural variables that deal with reorganization only. It

appears beneficial for the cost, the likelihood of survival of Mirage, and overall

efficiency, that creditors vote directly rather than in a committee on the reorganization

plan. This means giving less voting power to unsecured creditors is better for efficiency,

in line with the theoretical prediction for Mirage. And it does not seem to matter whether

the law requires a proof of reorganization prospects before reorganization is attempted.

       We have already mentioned the regression results in Table 6, where we control

for both per capita income and legal origin, so here is just a brief summary. In virtually




                                              30
all regressions, French legal origin continues to exert an adverse influence on efficiency,

and per capita income a positive influence. There is no sense in which our structural

characteristics kill these enormously powerful effects. For foreclosure, Table 6 suggests

that out of court seizure and sale of assets, as well as floating charge debt contracts, are

conducive to higher efficiency.    For bankruptcy, Table 6 suggests that it is beneficial

from the standpoint of efficiency for the bankruptcy proceedings to continue during

appeal AND for the same judge who made an initial ruling to hear the appeal as well.

We also see that cessation of operations upon entering bankruptcy and allowing suppliers

and customers to rescind contracts are both associated with lower efficiency. Finally, the

results confirm that it is beneficial for creditors to vote directly rather than in a

committee, which means more power to Bizbank is good.

         In summary, while there are many suggestive results, there are four robust bottom

lines.   First, foreclosure works best with maximum creditor rights, minimum court

involvement, and floating charge debt contracts. Second, a robust strategy for reducing

the time and improving the efficiency of bankruptcy proceedings is to circumscribe the

appeals process. Third, bankruptcy rules that have the effect of stopping or curtailing the

operations of Mirage during bankruptcy are not conducive to efficiency. Fourth, voting

procedures that reduce the power of unsecured creditors work well in our case.



6. Robustness.

6a. Alternative Measures of Efficiency

         Recall that, in computing efficiency, we made two assumptions.           First, we

assumed that the costs of going through insolvency are paid at the end, and hence are




                                            31
discounted to the time insolvency is resolved in the computation of efficiency. To check

robustness, one can alternatively assume that these costs are incurred up front and are

therefore not discounted at all. This simple correction obviously reduces the efficiency

measure. The world-wide average efficiency drops to 47.85 (about 4 points), although

efficiency for the lower middle income countries falls all the way to 28.5. A few

countries, such as Venezuela and Angola, now have negative efficiency scores. The

basic orderings documented in Tables 2 and 3, as well as the diagonal result that richer

countries have a comparative advantage in more complex procedures, are preserved.

        The second assumption we made is that Mirage just covers its variable costs while

in bankruptcy, and generates no economic value. We can be more optimistic about

profitability in bankruptcy even if we maintain, as we have advised the respondents, that

the firm does not generate enough cash to pay back its debt. For example, we can assume

that while the proceedings are going on, Mirage generates profits at the same rate as it

does once the proceedings are completed, i.e., at the rate that justifies its ultimate

valuation. That assumption means that in the countries where Mirage remains a going

concern, it generates sufficient profits to justify the valuation of 100 even when in

bankruptcy, which implies that the delay associated with bankruptcy has zero cost. We

think that this is implausibly optimistic12.           Alternatively, we can assume that while

Mirage is in the insolvency proceedings, it generates enough cash to yield the valuation

of 70 (even if it is eventually preserved as a going concern).                   This is better than

generating no profits, but not as good as if bankruptcy were not costly at all.




12
  Gamboa and Schneider (2006), in their detailed study of Mexican bankruptcies, find that a tremendous
amount of value is lost during the proceedings, leading to extremely low recovery rates for creditors.


                                                  32
       The assumption that Mirage generates its liquidation value in bankruptcy yields

the following definition of efficiency:

                                          30 * EO − 100 * c
                              E = 70 +                                                  (2)
                                               (1 + r )t

       Under this definition, the world-wide average efficiency measure rises to 69.6,

and to 63.1 for the lower middle income countries. Efficiency now basically reflects the

cost of liquidating Mirage piecemeal rather than keeping it as a going concern. Lower

middle income countries almost never manage to keep Mirage as a going concern, so the

only cost of insolvency is the (discounted) transaction cost. Our feeling is that this view

is too optimistic, so we prefer our initial measure of efficiency.       Nonetheless, the

orderings of efficiency measures reported in Tables 2 and 3 are preserved under this

specification, except that the diagonal result that rich countries have a comparative

advantage at the more complex procedures is no longer statistically significant.



6b. Version B of the Case

       Our respondents also answered questions about Version B of the case, in which

selling Mirage piecemeal is efficient. We downplay this version for two reasons. First, it

was presented to the respondents as a secondary case, so we cannot be sure that they have

answered the questions with as much alacrity as those for version A. Second, our

instructions were somewhat confusing, in that we told respondents to “now assume that

Mirage will not recover from its downturn.” As a consequence, the respondents might

have assumed that piecemeal sale is inevitable and not considered the possibility that

Mirage lingers on as an inefficient going concern for a long time.




                                               33
       Tables 8A and 8B present the results for version B. In general, the results for

Version B are very similar to those for Version A, with one crucial exception. The

efficient outcome of selling Mirage piecemeal is now eventually obtained in all countries.

This finding is not entirely surprising, since in the case facts for Version B, Mirage by

assumption cannot recover from the downturn. Despite reaching the efficient outcome,

debt enforcement remains highly inefficient. World-wide time and cost averages for

ultimate resolution are now 2.66 years and 13% of the estate, compared to 2.64 years and

13.5% of the estate for Version A. But because the efficient outcome is obtained, world-

wide average efficiency rises from 52% to 65%.

       Compared to Version A, Mirage is now more likely to undergo liquidation or

foreclosure rather than try reorganization. This shift is particularly pronounced among

the richer countries and the common law countries. Richer countries continue to be

vastly more efficient at debt enforcement than poorer ones. Among legal origins, Nordic

countries are the most efficient, and French legal origins ones are by far the least. The

adverse French legal origin effect on efficiency remains highly significant in a regression.

At the same time, we lose the diagonal result that richer countries are comparatively

better at more complex procedures. With no benefit of saving Mirage, there is no

efficiency reason to try reorganization even in the countries that can execute it well.

Finally, the results for specific structural variables become weaker in the regression

context, although the result on appeals remains strong. Overall, the evidence on Version

B reinforces the view that debt enforcement looks a lot like other forms of public

regulation: it works least well in the poor and the French legal origin countries.




                                             34
6c. Priority

       A striking deviation from freedom of contract in debt enforcement proceedings is

violation of absolute priority, which is evidently common even in the U.S. (Franks and

Torous 1989, Weiss and Wruck 1998). In some countries, Tax Authorities, employees,

suppliers, or even shareholders by law have priority over Bizbank in their claims against

Mirage. Such violations of absolute priority may distort Bizbank’s incentive to dispose

of Mirage most efficiently, and have adverse consequences for the development of debt

markets. La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) use violation of absolute priority as one of the key

elements of their creditor rights index.     Our respondents provided information on

deviations from absolute priority in their countries’ laws, and here we examine these

patterns. We then use these data to examine an alternative measure of quality of debt

enforcement: the payoff to Bizbank rather than overall efficiency.

       The raw facts on deviations from absolute priority are striking. In the world as a

whole, 55% of countries deviate from absolute priority, while only 45% respect it.

Deviations from absolute priority occur in 33% of high income countries, 50% of upper

middle income countries, and 74% of lower middle income countries. They occur in no

Nordic countries, 25% of English legal origin countries, 52% of German legal origin

countries, and 74% of French legal origin countries. In this particular obstacle to debt

enforcement, the poor and the French legal origin countries again lead the way.

       For a more detailed analysis, we record the order of priority, P, in which claims

are paid. If Bizbank, the secured creditor, is paid first out of the proceeds from the

insolvency proceeding, then P = 1. If one claimant group—the Tax Authority, workers,

suppliers or shareholders—has priority over the secured creditor, ranking Bizbank 2nd in




                                           35
priority, then P = 2. If the secured creditor is ranked 3rd after two other claimant groups,

P = 3; if it is ranked 4th, P = 4.       One additional change is that, to compute Bizbank’s

recovery, the relevant time is no longer the time to resolve what happens with Mirage,

but rather the time it takes Bizbank to get paid, which we defined as Time to Payment.

The recovery rate for the secured creditor is then given by:

                       100 * EO + 70 * (1 − EO) − 12 * ( P − 1) − 100 * c
                  R=                                                                                (3)
                                              (1 + r ) t

        Tables 9A and 9B present the results for recovery in Version A. The world-wide

mean of the priority variable is 1.9. The world-wide mean of version A Bizbank’s

recovery is 47%, compared to the mean 52% for the efficiency measure. In other words,

an additional 6% of the estate is lost to the senior creditor, on average, because of

violations of absolute priority. The correlation between priority and recovery is -.5213.

        In our data, the correlation between the efficiency of debt enforcement and

Bizbank’s recovery rate is .97. Not surprisingly, the empirical correlates of the recovery

rate are essentially the same as those of efficiency. Most importantly, per capita income

and legal origin crucially shape both. The average recovery rate is 68% for common law

countries, 35% for French legal origin countries, 44% for German legal origin countries,

and 85% for Nordic countries. The structural variables highly correlated with efficiency

are also highly correlated with recovery. These results suggest that national priority rules

undermine debt enforcement even relative to the dire situation that would exist if priority

were respected, especially in the lower middle income and French legal origin countries.



13
  Davydenko and Frank (2005) estimate median bank recovery rates for samples of actual bankruptcies in
the UK, Germany and France. Their estimates are 92%, 67%, and 56% respectively, which is not too far
from our estimates of 91%, 56%, and 47% for the respective countries.


                                                   36
7. Debt Market Development

           Do our measures of efficiency of debt enforcement predict the development of

debt markets? In this section, following the work of La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) and

Levine (1999), we present some basic regressions addressing this issue.

           Table 10 presents the now relatively standard specification (La Porta et al. 1997,

Djankov et al. 2006) of the determinants of the ratio of private credit to GDP for the 84

countries with available data.             We control for total GDP, GDP per capita growth,

inflation, and contract enforcement days (a measure of the quality of the legal system).

In some specifications, we include the creditor rights index and a measure of whether a

county has a public or a private credit registry (information sharing).                              In other

specifications, we control for legal origin. All regressions use Version A efficiency.

           The results confirm the earlier findings that the level of GDP and contract

enforcement days are correlated with the ratio of private credit to GDP. Likewise, as in

earlier work, both the creditor rights index and information sharing predict the size of the

private debt market14. Neither GDP per capita growth nor inflation is significant in any

specification. Interestingly, in these specifications, there is no statistically significant

residual adverse effect of French legal origin on debt market development, although there

remains one of German legal origin, as compared to common law. Version A efficiency

has a highly statistically significant positive effect on the private debt to GDP ratio. A 10

point increase in efficiency is associated with a 5 to 6 point higher ratio of debt to GDP.

Since legal origin influences several independent variables in these specifications, we

cannot properly run instrumental variable regressions, and hence cannot claim that these



14
     See La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), Djankov et al. (2006), and Haselman, Pistor and Vig (2005).


                                                      37
effects are causal. At least for OLS, however, efficient debt enforcement is strongly

positively associated with private debt market development.

        Table 11 presents regressions using other dependent variables to measure debt

market development, which come from different sources. These include a measure of

non-performing loans from the IMF, Moody’s rating of financial risk for a country,

perceived efficiency of bankruptcy from the World Economic Forum, perceived access to

loans, perceived efficiency of credit markets, and perceived soundness of the financial

system. In all regressions, we control for contract enforcement days. The efficiency of

debt enforcement matters across specifications, consistent with the findings in Table 10.

These results are also confirmed using recovery rates rather than efficiency measures15.



8. A Suggested Interpretation

        We have presented a range of findings about debt enforcement around the world.

Some of these findings have dealt with specific characteristics of foreclosure and

bankruptcy procedures that might be conducive to their efficiency. These findings may

form a basis for thinking about reform of debt enforcement.

        But a broader theme also emerges from the analysis, namely the fundamental

similarity between debt enforcement and other aspects of public enforcement of rules and

public regulation of economic activity. Debt enforcement, like public enforcement and

regulation more generally, is much more efficient in the richer and the common law

countries, than in the poorer and the French civil law ones.                     Furthermore, in debt

enforcement, as in other forms of public enforcement and regulation, richer countries

15
  We also check, using data from Claessens and Klapper (2005), whether higher efficiency of debt
enforcement is associated with greater use of bankruptcy. There is a mild positive association, which
becomes insignificant once we control for per capita income and legal origin.


                                                    38
appear to have a comparative advantage in mechanisms requiring more public

supervision (rehabilitation of firms) and poorer countries in mechanisms requiring less

(foreclosure). Put simply, debt enforcement is more naturally seen as another kind of

public enforcement or regulation than as an activity specific to corporate insolvency.

       Table 12 presents the correlations between our measures of efficiency of debt

enforcement, the measures of creditor rights and information sharing from Djankov et al.

(2006), a variety of measures of public enforcement, regulation, and the quality of

government (La Porta et al. 1999), as well as French legal origin and per capita income.

The correlations between efficiency of debt enforcement and creditor rights or

information sharing are small. In contrast, the correlations between efficiency of debt

enforcement and such diverse measures of public sector performance as tax compliance,

formalism of judicial procedures, corruption, or infrastructure quality are huge.

       One way to think about these findings is suggested in Djankov et al. (2003a), who

argue that all types of government intervention involve a tradeoff between dictatorship

and disorder. Lighter intervention might lead to greater market failures and disorder;

heavier intervention might lead to greater scope for abuse of the private sector by

government officials, what the authors called dictatorship. For a given country or sector,

Djankov et al. (2003a) call the set of attainable pairs of dictatorship and disorder the

institutional possibility frontier (IPF). In their framework, richer countries generally have

their IPFs closer to the origin, since their higher levels of human and social capital allow

for more effective ways of dealing with both dictatorship and disorder.

       In Djankov et al. (2003a), efficient institutions optimize this tradeoff between

dictatorship and disorder by minimizing the total social costs of dictatorship and disorder.




                                             39
Since richer countries have their IPF’s closer to the origin, they have lower levels of both

dictatorship and disorder in equilibrium. Moreover, if richer countries do not face as high

a risk of public sector abuse of the private sector, they would optimally choose higher

levels of regulation. It follows that the transplantation of intervention-heavy mechanisms

of public administration from rich to poor countries leads to less efficient outcomes.

Regulatory strategies inspired by the French legal tradition would travel poorly to the

developing world. Ayotte and Yun (2006) argue in a related vein that sophisticated debt

enforcement procedures are inappropriate for countries with low judicial expertise.

       Cross-country empirical evidence is consistent with these predictions. An

examination of objective measures of public regulation, such as the regulation of entry

(Djankov et al. 2002), the regulation of labor markets (Botero et al. 2004), and the

formalism of the judicial system (Djankov et al. 2003b), as well as of the subjective

indicators of the quality of government (La Porta et al. 1999), consistently shows a

positive influence of per capita income, and a negative influence of French legal origin,

on the quality of government intervention. The current results on debt enforcement,

obtained using a new data collection methodology and covering a new area of public

regulation, fit into this broader pattern. Furthermore, the evidence on deviations from

absolute priority, which we have interpreted as an indicator of government intervention,

also fits into this broader pattern. Consistent with Djankov et al. (2003a), poor debt

enforcement reflects poor public enforcement more broadly, as well as problems resulting

from transplantation of interventionist models of social control into developing countries.




                                            40
9. Conclusion

        We have found that debt enforcement around the world is highly inefficient, even

in the relatively simple case we consider.         The inefficiency comes from high

administrative costs and long delays, but also from excessive piecemeal sales of viable

businesses. The inefficiency is linked to underdevelopment, which probably proxies for

poor public sector capacity of a country, and to French legal origin, which probably

proxies for excessive formalism of the debt enforcement process.      The inefficiency is

also related to such structural aspects of debt enforcement as ineffective collateral

systems, poorly structured appeals, business interruptions during bankruptcy, and

inefficient voting among creditors.     The inefficiency predicts underdeveloped debt

markets, consistent with the view that failures of debt enforcement discourage lending.

        The narrative that emerges from these findings is fairly straightforward.

Developing countries follow the rich ones and introduce elaborate bankruptcy

procedures, presumably designed to save and rehabilitate insolvent firms. In the rich

countries, although these procedures are time consuming and expensive, they typically

succeed in preserving the firm as a going concern. In the developing countries, in

contrast, these procedures nearly always fail in their basic economic goal of saving the

firm.   The long time and the high cost of bankruptcy notwithstanding, the firm is

eventually sold piecemeal. The odds of saving the firm are especially low in the French

legal origin countries, which have highly formal bankruptcy procedures.

        Although we must reiterate that ours is a very simple case, which abstracts from

many important aspects of debt enforcement, the evidence does suggest some strategies

for improving the available procedures. Perhaps the most basic message is that poor




                                           41
countries should avoid debt enforcement mechanisms that involve detailed and extensive

court oversight, since the administrative capacity of their courts may not tolerate such

proceedings. Simpler mechanisms, such as foreclosure with no or limited court oversight

and floating charge, might be preferred. Moreover, in a poor country, less formalistic

mechanisms might improve debt enforcement. For example, restricting appeals might

shorten the proceedings and improve efficiency. As countries become rich, the evidence

suggests that more elaborate proceedings, including reorganization, become appropriate.

But with debt enforcement, as with so many other aspects of public enforcement or

regulation, extensive public sector involvement ahead of public sector capacity fails.

       We are concerned that debt enforcement reforms might conflict with other legal

institutions of a country. In this case, changing some aspects of a procedure without a

broader – and possibly infeasible – legal reform might do little for efficiency. For

example, debt enforcement appears to be a victim of structural features of some civil law

regimes, such as extensive appeals, reversal of priority in bankruptcy, and restrictions on

“floating charge”. The latter problem is particularly noteworthy since our evidence

indicates that foreclosure with floating charge yields the highest levels of efficiency,

consistent with theoretical predictions for our case facts. These prevailing rules might be

rigidly fixed in the legal or political framework of a country because they have broader

social objectives than the efficiency of debt enforcement. This said, it seems plausible

that restricting appeals in bankruptcy proceedings and moving toward absolute priority,

or to floating charge debt, can be good ideas under civil law as well. The data support

this view. According to our evidence, many rather small changes in how debt

enforcement is organized might have positive social payoffs.




                                            42
                                      References

Aghion, Philippe, Oliver Hart, and John Moore (1992), “The Economics of Bankruptcy

       Reform,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 8, 523-546.

Asquith, Paul, Robert Gertner, and David Scharfstein (1994), “Anatomy of Financial

       Distress: An Examination of Junk-Bond Issuers,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 109, 625-658.

Ayotte, Kenneth, and Hayong Yun (2006), “Matching Bankruptcy Laws to Legal

       Environments,” working paper, Columbia Business School.

Baird, Douglas (1986), “The Uneasy Case for Corporate Reorganizations,” Journal of

       Legal Studies, 15, 127-147.

Baird, Douglas, and Robert Rasmussen (2002), “The End of Bankruptcy,” Stanford Law

       Review 55, 751-789.

Bebchuk, Lucian (1988), “A New Approach to Corporate Reorganizations,” Harvard

       Law Review 101, 775-804.

Berglof, Erik, Gerard Roland, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden (2003), “Optimal Debt

       Design and the Role of Bankruptcy,” Mimeo.

Bolton, Patrick, and David Scharfstein (1996), “Optimal Debt Structure and the Number

       of Creditors,” Journal of Political Economy 104, 1-25.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei

       Shleifer (2004), “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119,

       1339-1382.

Bris, Arturo, Ivo Welch, and Ning Zhu (2006), “The Costs of Bankruptcy: Ch. 7

       Liquidation versus Ch. 11 Reorganization,” Journal of Finance 61, 1253-1303.




                                          43
Chang, Tom, and Antoinette Schoar (2006), “The Effect of Judicial Bias in Chapter 11

       Reorganization,” MIT working paper.

Claessens, Stijn, and Leora Klapper (2005), “Bankruptcy around the World:

       Explanations of Its Relative Use,” American Law and Economics Review 7, 253-

       283.

Davydenko, Sergei, and Julian Franks (2005), “Do Bankruptcy Codes Matter? A Study of

       Defaults in France, Germany and the UK,” mimeo.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer (2006), “Private Credit in 129

       Countries,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and

       Andrei Shleifer (2003a), “The New Comparative Economics,” Journal of

       Comparative Economics 31, 595-619.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer

       (2003b), “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 453-517.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer

       (2002), “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.

Franks, Julian, and Walter Torous (1989), “Am Empirical Investigation of U.S. Firms in

       Reorganization,” Journal of Finance 44, 747-769.

Franks, Julian and Gyöngyi Lóránth (2004), “A Study of Bankruptcy and Financial

       Distress in an Emerging Market: the Case of Hungary”, working paper.

Franks, Julian, and Oren Sussman (2006), “Financial Distress and Bank Restructuring of

       Small and Medium Size UK Companies,” London Business School Mimeo.

Gamboa, Mario, and Frank Schneider (2006), “Bankruptcy as a Legal Process,” Mimeo.




                                           44
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Stefano Rossi (2006), “Bankruptcy Litigation and Debt

       Contracts,” Stockholm School of Economics Mimeo.

Gertner, Robert, and David Scharfstein (1991), “A Theory of Workouts and the Effects of

       Reorganization Law,” Journal of Finance 46, 1189-1222.

Gilson, Stuart, Kose John, and Larry Lang (1990), “Troubled Debt Restructurings: An

       Empirical Study of Private Reorganization of Firms in Default,” Journal of

       Financial Economics 27, 315-354.

Haselmann, Rainer, Katharina Pistor, and Vikrant Vig (2005), “How Law Affects

       Lending,” Columbia Law and Economics Working Paper No. 285.

Jackson, Thomas (1986), The Logic and Limits of Bankruptcy Law, Cambridge, MA:

       Harvard University Press.

Johnson, Simon, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer

       (2000), “Tunneling,” AER Papers and Proceedings 90, 22-27.

Lambert-Moglianski, Ariane, Constantin Sonin, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2006),

       “Capture of Bankruptcy: Theory and Evidence from Russia,” Mimeo.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer (1997),

       “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer (1998),

       “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer (1999),

       “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15,

       222-279.




                                          45
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Guillermo Zamarripa (2003), “Related

       Lending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 231-268.

LoPucki, Lynn (2003), “The Nature of the Bankrupt Firm: A Reply to Baird and

       Rasmussen’s The End of Bankruptcy,” Stanford Law Review 56, 645-671.

Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar (2005), “Does Legal Enforcement Affect Financial

       Transactions? The Contractual Channel in Private Equity,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 120, 223-246.

Levine, Ross (1999), “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth,” Journal of Financial

       Intermediation 8, 36-67.

Qian, Jun, and Philip Strahan (2006), “How Laws and Institutions Shape Financial

       Contracts: the Case of Bank Loans,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Stromberg, Per (2000), “Conflicts of Interest and Market Illiquidity in Bankruptcy

       Auctions: Theory and Tests,” Journal of Finance 55, 2641-2691.

Thorburn, Karin (2000), “Bankruptcy Auctions: Costs, Debt Recovery, and Firm

       Survival,” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 337-369.

Weiss, Lawrence, and Karen Wruck (1998), “Information Problems, Conflicts of Interest

       and Asset Striping: Chapter 11’s Failure in the Case of Eastern Airlines,” Journal

       of Financial Economics, 48 55-97.

White, Michelle (1989), “The Corporate Bankruptcy Decision,” Journal of Economic

       Perspectives 3, 129-151.




                                           46
                                                           Table 1: Description of the Variables

                                                                            Panel A: Main Variables
                      Variable                                                                                Description
Foreclosure                                   Equals 1 if Mirage is most likely to undergo a foreclosure or debt enforcement proceeding under the factual and procedural assumptions
                                              provided. Foreclosure is a security enforcement procedure aimed at recovering money owed to secured creditors. It is generally governed
                                              by laws separate from bankruptcy law. Foreclosure proceedings do not aim to recover money for unsecured creditors or other claimants,
                                              although in some cases any excess funds may be disbursed to other claimants.



Liquidation                                   Equals 1 if Mirage is most likely to undergo a liquidation proceeding under the factual and procedural assumptions provided. Liquidation is
                                              the procedure of winding up a company under judicial supervision. Liquidation results in the dissolution of the legal entity. The underlying
                                              busines may be sold as a going concern or piecemeal, generally by auction.

Reorganization                                Equals 1 if Mirage is most likely to undergo a reorganization proceeding under the factual and procedural assumptions provided.
                                              Reorganization is a court supervised procedure aimed at rehabilitating companies in financial distress. Reorganization proceedings
                                              generally provide for a statutory freeze on individual creditor enforcements and specify powers to bind dissenting creditors to a
                                              reorganization plan.

Time                                          The estimated duration, in years, of the time to resolve the insolvency case of Mirage under the factual and procedural assumptions
                                              provided. Time measures the duration from the moment of Mirage's default to the point at which the fate of Mirage is determined: i.e.,
                                              when Mirage is either sold as a going concern, sold piecemeal, or successfully reorganized.


Time to payment                               The estimated duration, in years, of the time from the moment of Mirage's default to the point at which the secured creditor to receives
                                              payment, under the factual and procedural assumptions provided.

Cost                                          The estimated cost of the insolvency proceeding for Mirage, reported as a percentage of the value of the insolvency estate, borne by all
                                              parties. Costs include court/bankruptcy authority costs, attorney fees, bankruptcy administrator fees, accountant fees, notification and
                                              publication fees, assessor or inspector fees, asset storage and preservation costs, auctioneer fees, government levies and other
                                              associated insolvency costs.

Efficient Outcome                             Equals 1 if the efficient insolvency outcome is achieved in the case of Mirage, 0 otherwise. In version A, the efficient outcome applies if
                                              Mirage continues operating as a going concern both throughout and upon completion of the insolvency process. In version B, the efficient
                                              outcome applies if Mirage discontinues operations and is sold piecmeal.

Lending rates                                 The bank lending rate to the private sector (IFS line 60P.ZF). Line 60P.ZF is defined as the "bank rate that usually meets the short and
                                              medium term financing needs of the private sector." In cases where lending rates are not reported in the IFS, we obtain data directly from
                                              central banks. Source: IMF International Financial Statistics online database.

Legal origin                                  A dummy variable that identifies the legal origin of the bankruptcy law of each country. The four origins are English, French, German and
                                              Nordic.

GDP per capita                                Logarithm of gross national income per capita (Atlas method), 2004. Source: World Development Indicators 2005.




                                                              Panel B: Characteristics of the Insolvency System
                      Variable                                                                                 Description
                                              Equals 1 if there are time limits that restrict the duration of any appeal of the judgment by any party. Equals 0 otherwise. Procedure of
Statutory time limits on appeals              relevance: all.

                                              Equals 1 if the secured creditor may seize and sell its collateral without court approval, judgment or enforcement. Equals 0 if court
Out of court seizure and sale                 approval, judgment or enforcement is required to enforce security. Procedure of relevance: foreclosure.

                                              Equals 1 if the secured creditor may enforce its security either in an enforcement court or out of court procedure, without first obtaining a
                                              judgment authorizing it to do so. Equals 0 if a court judgment is required before proceeding to enforcement. Procedure of relevance:
No judgment for enforcement                   foreclosure.

                                              Equals 1 if laws allow a secured creditor to take an entire business as collateral for a loan, including all present and future assets, tangible
                                              and intangible, and a changing pool of assets. Equals 0 if available security instruments restrict the secured creditor to taking only certain
                                              types of fixed assets as collateral--such as the land or the building--or otherwise do not allow the secured creditor to take the entire
Floating charge                               business as collateral. Procedure of relevance: Foreclosure.



                                              Equals 1 where the authority with jurisidiction in the case of Mirage is either a specialized bankruptcy court or a specialized bankruptcy
                                              administrative authority, 0 otherwise. A specialized bankruptcy court would generally have jurisdiction over liquidation and reorganization,
Specialized Court                             but not foreclosure/debt enforcement proceedings. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization

                                              Equals 1 if the insolvency case is not automatically suspended upon appeal of the order initiating the insolvency process or if the
                                              insolvency order cannot be appealed at all. Equals 0 if the case is suspended until resolution of the appeal. Procedure of relevance:
Case proceeds on appeal of insolvency order   liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if an appeal of the initiation of the insolvency case is handled by the same judge supervising the insolvency case. Equals 0 if the
Same judge for appeal of insolvency order     appeal is heard by a different judge in an appeals court. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.
                                                           Table 1: Description of the Variables
                                                          Panel B: Characteristics of the Insolvency System (cont.)
                      Variable                                                                                  Description
                                              Equals 1 if a sale in liquidation is executed even on appeal of the liquidation order or if the liquidation order cannot be appealed at all.
Case proceeds on appeal of liquidation sale   Equals 0 if the case is suspended until resolution of the appeal. Procedure of relevance: liquidation.

                                              Equals 1 if an appeal of the order to liquidate Mirage is handled by the same judge supervising the insolvency case. Equals 0 if the appeal
Same judge for appeal of liquidation sale     is heard by a different judge in an appeals court. Procedure of relevance: liquidation.



                                              Equals 1 if the insolvency case is not automatically suspended when a creditor disputes a claim amount or if the claim amount cannot be
Case proceeds on claim amount dispute         appealed at all. Equals 0 if the case is suspended until resolution of the appeal. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if an appeal of the amount of the claim is handled by the same judge supervising the insolvency case. Equals 0 if the appeal is
Same judge for claim amount dispute           heard by a different judge in an appeals court. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if by law Mirage must first attempt reorganization before proceeding to liquidation. Equals 0 if it is possible for Mirage to enter
Reorganization attempt required               liquidation first. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if the secured creditor may not enforce its security against Mirage upon commencement of the insolvency proceedings, 0
Automatic stay on enforcement                 otherwise. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

Automatic stay on lawsuits                    Equals 1 if lawsuits against Mirage are automatically stayed upon commencement of insolvency proceedings, 0 otherwise.

                                              Equals 1 if Mirage must cease operations upon commencement or during the insolvency proceedings, 0 otherwise. Procedure of
Firm must cease operating                     relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if suppliers and customers may rescind contracts with Mirage without penalty upon the initiation of insolvency proceedings, 0
Contracts may be rescinded                    otherwise. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if Mirage is restricted from dismissing employees upon the initiation of insolvency proceedings, 0 otherwise. Procedure of
Restrictions on dismissals                    relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if management remain in control of decisions in the ordinary course of business during the resolution of the insolvency
                                              proceeding. Equals 0 if management is automatically dismissed or must be supervised or seek approval from the insolvency administrator
Management remain                             or court for decisions in the ordinary course of business. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.



                                              Equals 1 if the secured creditor may appoint or must approve the appointment of the insolvency administrator. Equals 0 if only the court,
Creditor approves administrator               the debtor and/or other participants appoint the administrator. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if the secured creditor may dismiss or must approve the dismissal of the insolvency administrator. Equals 0 if only the court, the
Creditor dismisses administrator              debtor and/or other participants appoint the administrator. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.



                                              Equals 1 if the insolvency administrator is remunerated on the basis of the market value of the insolvency estate. Equals 0 if the insolvency
Administrator paid on market value            administrator is remunerated on the basis of the book value of assets or on a daily rate. Procedure of relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if an "automatic trigger" mechnanism can initiative insolvency. An automatic trigger is defined as a set of circumstances -- such
                                              as on the period of default or ratio of assets to liabilities -- under which Mirage must by law apply for insolvency proceedings. Procedure of
Automatic trigger for liquidation             relevance: liquidation/reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if Mirage must submit proof of reorganization prospects before reorganization proceedings may commence. Equals 0 if Mirage
                                              may commence reorganization proceedings without evidence that the procedure may be successful. Procedure of relevance:
Proof of reorganization prospects required    reorganization.

                                              Equals 1 if secured creditors vote directly on the reorganization plan. Equals 0 if secured creditors vote in committee or not at all.
Creditors vote directly                       Procedure of relevance: reorganization.
                                                               Table 1: Description of the Variables

                                                                                Panel C: Other Variables
                      Variable                                                                                      Description
Creditor rights                                   An index aggregating creditor rights, following La Porta et al. (1998). A score of one is assigned when each of the following rights of
                                                  secured lenders is defined in laws and regulations: First, there are restrictions, such as creditor consent or minimum dividends, for a
                                                  debtor to file for reorganization. Second, secured creditors are able to seize their collateral after the reorganization petition is approved, i.e.
                                                  there is no "automatic stay" or "asset freeze." Third, secured creditors are paid first out of the proceeds of liquidating a bankrupt firm, as
                                                  opposed to other creditors such as government or workers. Finally, if management does not retain administration of its property pending
                                                  the resolution of the reorganization. The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights). Source: Djankov,
                                                  McLiesh and Shleifer (2006).


Information sharing                               The variable equals 1 if either a public registry or a private bureau operates in the country, 0 otherwise. A public registry is defined as a
                                                  database owned by public authorities (usually the Central Bank or Banking Supervisory Authority) that collects information on the standing
                                                  of borrowers in the financial system and makes it available to financial institutions. A private bureau is defined as a private commercial firm
                                                  or non profit organization that maintains a database on the standing of borrowers in the financial system, and its primary role is to facilitate
                                                  exchange of information amongst banks and financial institutions. Source: Djankov, McLiesh and Shleifer (2006).



Private Credit/GDP                                Ratio of credit from deposit taking financial institutions to the private sector (IFS lines 22d and 42d) relative to GDP (IFS line 99b). Line
                                                  22d measures claims on the private sector by commercial banks and other financial institutions that accept transferable deposits such as
                                                  demand deposits. Line 42d measures claims on the private sector given by other financial institutions that do not accept transferable
                                                  deposits but that perform financial intermediation by accepting other types of deposits or close substitutes for deposits (e.g. savings and
                                                  mortgage institutions, post office savings institutions, building and loan associations, certain finance companies, development banks and
                                                  offshore banking institutions). Source: IMF International Financial Statistics database.



GDP                                               Logarithm of gross national product (current U.S. Dollars), average 2002-2004. Source: World Development Indicators 2005.



GDP per capita growth                             Average annual growth in gross domestic product per capita from 1980 - 2004. Source: World Development Indicators 2005.



Contract enforcement days                         The number of days to resolve a payment dispute through courts. The data are based on the methodology in Djankov et al. (2003) but
                                                  describe the number of calendar days to enforce a contract of unpaid debt worth 50% of the country's GDP per capita. The variable is
                                                  constructed as at January 2003. Source: Djankov et al. (2003).



                                                  The formalism index measures substantive and procedural statutory intervention in judicial cases at lower-level civil trial courts. The index
Formalism                                         ranges from 0 to 7 where 7 means a higher level of control or intervention in the judicial process. Source: Djankov et al. (2003).

                                                  An indicator of bureaucratic delays (red tape). Low ratings indicate lower levels of red tape in the
Bureaucratic delays                               bureaucracy of the country. Scale from 0 to 10. The index is published three times per year. The data are
                                                  the average of the years between 1972 and 1995. Source: La Porta et al. (1999).

                                                  Assessment of the “facilities for and ease of communication between headquarters and the operation, and
Infrastructure quality index                      within the country,” as well as the quality of the transportation. Average data for the years 1972 to 1995.
                                                  Scale from 0 to 10 with higher scores for superior quality. Source: La Porta and others (1999).




Corruption index                                  An indicator of corruption in government. Low ratings indicate “high government officials are likely to demand special payments” and “illega
                                                  payments are generally expected thought lower levels of government” in the form of “bribes connected with import and export licenses,
                                                  exchange controls, tax assessment, policy protection, or loans.” Scale from 0 to 10. Source: La Porta et al. (1999).

                                                  Assessment of the level of tax compliance. Scale from 0 to 6, where higher scores indicate higher
Tax compliance
                                                  compliance. Source: La Porta et al. (1999).

Non performing Loans (IMF)                        Bank nonperforming loans to total loans. Source: IMF Global Financial Stability Report 2005.

                                                  Moody’s Weighted Average Bank Financial Strength Index. Constructed according to a numerical scale assigned to Moody’s weighted
Moody's rating financial risk                     average bank ratings by country. “0” indicates the lowest possible average rating and “100” indicates the highest possible average rating.
                                                  Source: IMF Global Financial Stability Report 2005.

                                                  Assessment of the efficiency of bankruptcy law. Scale from 0 to 6, where higher scores indicate higher
Perceived efficiency of bankruptcy (WEF)
                                                  compliance. Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2005).

                                                  Assessment of the ease of accessing business loans. Scale from 0 to 6, where higher scores indicate higher
Perceived access to loans (WEF)
                                                  compliance. Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2005).

                                                  Assessment of the efficiency of credit markets. Scale from 0 to 6, where higher scores indicate higher
Perceived efficiency of credit markets (WEF)
                                                  compliance. Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2005).

                                                  Assessment of the soundness of the financial system. Scale from 0 to 6, where higher scores indicate higher
Perceived financial system soundness (WEF)
                                                  compliance. Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2005).

                                                  Assessment of the sophistication of the financial system. Scale from 0 to 6, where higher scores indicate higher
Perceived financial system sophistication (WEF)
                                                  compliance. Source: World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report (2005).
                                                     Table 2: Data by Procedure and Income Group (Version A)
                                                                Efficient Outcome: Going Concern
Income Group                                      Foreclosure                                               Liquidation                                             Reorganization                       Average by
                                                   Time     Cost    GC       Eff.                           Time     Cost    GC     Eff.                             Time    Cost    GC     Eff.       Income Group
1. High income           Singapore                   0.58      1%    1        96.1   Netherlands              1.42      1%    1      94.9   Japan                      0.58     4%    1     95.5
                         United Kingdom              0.50      6%    1        92.3   Sweden                   1.00      9%    1      86.0   Taiwan, China              0.83     4%    1     93.8
                         New Zealand                 0.67      4%    1        90.7   Austria                  0.92 18%        1      78.0   Canada                     0.75     4%    1     93.2            Time   1.51
                         Hong Kong, China            0.63      9%    1        88.3   Denmark                  2.50      9%    1      76.7   Finland                    0.92     4%    1     92.4            Cost    9%
                         Australia                   0.58      8%    1        87.8   Israel                   1.50 23%        1      66.2   Norway                     0.92     1%    1     91.8              GC    0.7
                         Kuwait                      4.00      1%    0        55.9   Germany                  0.92      8%    0      57.0   Belgium                    0.92     4%    1     90.8      Efficiency   77.3
                         Slovenia                    1.67      8%    0        52.3   Greece                   1.92      9%    0      53.8   Ireland                    0.42     9%    1     89.9
                         United Arab Emirates        4.96     38%    0        21.8                                                          Korea, Rep.                1.50     4%    1     88.1
                                                                                                                                            United States              2.00     7%    1     85.8
                                                                                                                                            Portugal                   2.00     9%    1     82.3
                                                                                                                                            Spain                      1.00 15%       1     82.0
                                                                                                                                            Puerto Rico                3.79     8%    1     77.4
                                                                                                                                             Switzerland               3.00     4%    0     60.4
                                                                                                                                             France                    1.89     9%    0     54.1
                                                                                                                                             Italy                     1.17 22%       0     45.3

                         Average                    1.70    0.09    0.63     73.13 Average                   1.45    0.11    0.71   73.21 Average                      1.45   0.07   0.80     81.52

2. Upper middle income   Oman                       2.75     4%     0      53.5      Botswana                1.33    15%     1       69.7 Mexico                       1.83   18%    1      72.6
                         Hungary                    1.88    15%     0      46.7      Poland                  2.00    22%     1       67.7 Argentina                    2.75   12%    0      35.8
                         Croatia                    1.92    15%     0      45.0      Slovak Republic         4.08    18%     1       58.9 Costa Rica                   3.50   15%    0      25.0            Time   2.88
                         Panama                     2.00    18%     0      43.0      Lithuania               1.25     7%     0       58.7                                                                   Cost   16%
                         Chile                      5.08    15%     0      40.9      Estonia                 2.00     9%     0       54.8                                                                     GC    0.2
                         Lebanon                    4.00    22%     0      29.0      Latvia                  2.75    13%     0       49.3                                                             Efficiency   44.9
                         Uruguay                    1.92     7%     0      28.6      Malaysia                2.25    15%     0       48.4
                                                                                     Czech Republic          6.00    15%     0       40.7
                                                                                     Saudi Arabia            2.71    22%     0       40.6
                                                                                      Venezuela, RB         3.96    38%      0      13.1

                         Average                    2.79    0.13    0.00     40.97 Average                   3.00    0.18    0.22   48.03 Average                      2.69   0.15   0.33     44.46

3. Lower Middle Income   Bosnia and Herzegovina     1.83     9%     1         76.1   Jordan                  3.25     9%     0       44.5   Colombia                   3.00    1%    1      64.8
                         Jamaica                    1.00    18%     1         69.0   Albania                 3.50    38%     1       42.0   Tunisia                    1.25    7%    0      56.6
                         Armenia                    1.58     4%     0         50.4   South Africa            1.92    18%     0       39.8   Thailand                   2.67   36%    1      54.9            Time   3.45
                         Sri Lanka                  1.42    18%     0         45.7   Russian Federation      3.67     9%     0       39.0   Algeria                    3.50    7%    0      48.1            Cost   16%
                         China                      1.79    22%     0         43.6   Syrian Arab Republic    5.42     9%     0       38.2   Bulgaria                   3.33    9%    0      46.0              GC    0.2
                         El Salvador                3.67     9%     0         37.8   Kazakhstan              2.83    18%     0       31.4   Namibia                    1.50   15%    0      45.2      Efficiency   35.0
                         Honduras                   2.88     8%     0         36.8   Egypt, Arab Rep.        4.08    22%     0       28.6   Morocco                    1.83   18%    0      41.9
                         Guatemala                  3.00    15%     0         36.5   Brazil                  3.67    12%     1       13.4   Peru                       3.08    7%    0      41.8
                         Georgia                    2.83     4%     0        30.8    Dominican Rep           3.33    38%     0       12.9   Iran, Islamic Rep.         4.50    9%    0      29.5
                         Paraguay                   3.92     9%     0        12.5                                                           Serbia and Montenegro      2.67   23%    0      28.3
                                                                                                                                            Macedonia, FYR             3.67   28%    0      27.3
                                                                                                                                            Indonesia                  5.50   18%    0      25.1
                                                                                                                                            Belarus                    5.75   22%    0      19.5
                                                                                                                                            Ecuador                    8.00   18%    0      19.4
                                                                                                                                            Ukraine                    2.92   42%    0      17.5
                                                                                                                                            Philippines                5.67   38%    0      17.5
                                                                                                                                             Romania                   4.58    9%    0      11.0
                                                                                                                                            Turkey                     5.88    7%    0       6.6
                                                                                                                                            Angola                     6.17   22%    0       1.2

                         Average                    2.39    0.12    0.20      43.9 Average                   3.52    0.19    0.22   32.20 Average                      3.97   0.18   0.11     31.70

Average by Procedure                                2.28    11%     0.28     52.44                           2.75    16%     0.36   49.38                             2.84    13%    0.41    52.93
                                                    Table 3: Data by Procedure and Legal Origin (Version A)
                                                              Efficient Outcomes: Going Concern

Legal Origin                                    Foreclosure                                             Liquidation                                             Reorganization                     Average by Legal
                                                 Time     Cost    GC     Eff.                            Time     Cost   GC     Eff.                              Time    Cost    GC     Eff.           Origin
English legal origin   Singapore                   0.58      1%    1     96.1    Israel                    1.50    23%    1     66.2    Japan                       0.58     4%    1     95.5
                       United Kingdom              0.50      6%    1     92.3    Botswana                  1.33    15%    1      69.7   Canada                      0.75     4%    1     93.2
                       New Zealand                 0.67      4%    1     90.7    Malaysia                  2.25    15%    0     48.4    Ireland                     0.42     9%    1     89.9           Time    1.56
                       Hong Kong, China            0.63      9%    1     88.3    South Africa              1.92    18%    0     39.8    Korea, Rep.                 1.50     4%    1     88.1            Cost   13%
                       Australia                   0.58      8%    1     87.8                                                           United States               2.00     7%    1     85.8             GC     0.8
                       Jamaica                     1.00     18%    1     69.0                                                           Puerto Rico                 3.79     8%    1     77.4      Efficiency   72.1
                       Sri Lanka                   1.42     18%    0     45.7                                                           Thailand                    2.67   36%     1     54.9
                                                                                                                                        Namibia                     1.50   15%     0     45.2
                                                                                                                                        Philippines                 5.67   38%     0     17.5

                       Average                    0.77    0.09    0.86   81.40 Average                    1.75   0.18    0.50   56.01 Average                      2.10   0.14    0.78     71.95

French legal origin    Kuwait                     4.00      1%    0      55.9    Netherlands              1.42    1%     1      94.9    Belgium                    0.92    4%     1      90.8
                       Oman                       2.75      4%    0      53.5    Greece                   1.92    9%     0      53.8    Portugal                   2.00    9%     1      82.3
                       Panama                     2.00     18%    0      43.0    Jordan                   3.25    9%     0      44.5    Spain                      1.00   15%     1      82.0           Time    3.40
                       Chile                      5.08     15%    0      40.9    Saudi Arabia             2.71   22%     0      40.6    Mexico                     1.83   18%     1      72.6            Cost   13%
                       El Salvador                3.67      9%    0      37.8    Russian Federation       3.67    9%     0      39.0    Colombia                   3.00    1%     1      64.8             GC     0.2
                       Honduras                   2.88      8%    0      36.8    Syrian Arab Republic     5.42    9%     0      38.2    Switzerland                3.00    4%     0      60.4      Efficiency   40.4
                       Guatemala                  3.00     15%    0      36.5    Egypt, Arab Rep.         4.08   22%     0      28.6    Tunisia                    1.25    7%     0      56.6
                       Lebanon                    4.00     22%    0      29.0    Brazil                   3.67   12%     1      13.4    France                     1.89    9%     0      54.1
                       Uruguay                    1.92      7%    0      28.6    Venezuela, RB            3.96   38%     0      13.1    Algeria                    3.50    7%     0      48.1
                       United Arab Emirates       4.96     38%    0      21.8    Dominican Rep            3.33   38%     0      12.9    Bulgaria                   3.33    9%     0      46.0
                       Paraguay                   3.92      9%    0      12.5                                                           Italy                      1.17   22%     0      45.3
                                                                                                                                        Morocco                    1.83   18%     0      41.9
                                                                                                                                        Peru                       3.08    7%     0      41.8
                                                                                                                                        Argentina                  2.75   12%     0      35.8
                                                                                                                                        Iran, Islamic Rep.         4.50    9%     0      29.5
                                                                                                                                        Indonesia                  5.50   18%     0      25.1
                                                                                                                                        Costa Rica                 3.50   15%     0      25.0
                                                                                                                                        Belarus                    5.75   22%     0      19.5
                                                                                                                                        Ecuador                    8.00   18%     0      19.4
                                                                                                                                        Romania                    4.58    9%     0      11.0
                                                                                                                                        Turkey                     5.88    7%     0       6.6
                                                                                                                                        Angola                     6.17   22%     0       1.2

                       Average                    3.47    0.13    0.00   36.03 Average                    3.34   0.17    0.20   37.91 Average                      3.38   0.12    0.23     43.63

German legal origin    Bosnia and Herzegovina     1.83      9%    1      76.1    Austria                  0.92   18%     1      78.0    Taiwan, China              0.83    4%     1      93.8
                       Slovenia                   1.67      8%    0      52.3    Poland                   2.00   22%     1      67.7    Serbia and Montenegro      2.67   23%     0      28.3
                       Armenia                    1.58      4%    0      50.4    Slovak Republic          4.08   18%     1      58.9    Macedonia, FYR             3.67   28%     0      27.3           Time    2.37
                       Hungary                    1.88     15%    0      46.7    Lithuania                1.25    7%     0      58.7    Ukraine                    2.92   42%     0      17.5            Cost   16%
                       Croatia                    1.92     15%    0      45.0    Germany                  0.92    8%     0      57.0                                                                      GC     0.3
                       China                      1.79     22%    0      43.6    Estonia                  2.00    9%     0      54.8                                                               Efficiency   50.0
                       Georgia                    2.83      4%    0      30.8    Latvia                   2.75   13%     0      49.3
                                                                                 Albania                  3.50   38%     1      42.0
                                                                                 Czech Republic           6.00   15%     0      40.7
                                                                                 Kazakhstan               2.83   18%     0      31.4

                       Average                    1.93    0.11    0.14   49.25 Average                    2.63   0.17    0.40   53.85 Average                      2.52   0.24    0.25     41.74

Nordic legal origin                                                              Sweden                   1.00    9%     1      86.0    Finland                    0.92     4%    1      92.4           Time    1.33
                                                                                 Denmark                  2.50    9%     1      76.7    Norway                     0.92     1%    1      91.8            Cost    6%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GC     1.0
                                                                                 Average                  1.75   0.09    1.00   81.33 Average                      0.92   0.02    1.00     92.13   Efficiency   86.7



Average by Procedure                              2.28    11%     0.28   52.44                           2.70    16%     0.38   50.16                              2.84   13%     0.41     52.93
       Table 4: Determinants of Efficiency and Going Concern, Version A


              Independent Variables                           Efficiency                         Going Concern
Log GDP per capita                                       13.482 a            9.511 a           0.154 a           0.123 b
                                                        (1.723)             (2.394)           (0.041)       (0.051)
French legal origin                                     -20.808 a          -21.243 a          -0.475 a       -0.477 a
                                                        (4.248)             (4.165)           (0.116)       (0.117)
German legal origin                                     -10.649 b          -11.601 a          -0.342 b       -0.345 b
                                                        (4.790)             (4.500)           (0.143)       (0.146)
Scandinavian legal origin                                -2.572             -5.365             0.007         -0.005
                                                        (4.191)             (5.208)           (0.091)       (0.129)
Liquidation                                              -5.179            -35.463             0.079         -0.011
                                                        (4.217)            (34.113)           (0.110)       (0.838)
Reorganization                                           -0.539            -57.463 b           0.111         -0.396
                                                        (4.132)            (26.985)           (0.081)       (0.566)
Log GDP per capita*Liquidation                                               3.589                               0.011
                                                                            (4.006)                         (0.096)
Log GDP per capita *Reorganization                                           6.611 b                             0.059
                                                                            (3.116)                         (0.065)
Constant                                                -50.603 a          -16.219            -0.727 c       -0.461
                                                       (16.377)            (21.040)           (0.422)       (0.493)
Obs                                                          88                 88                   88            88
R-sq                                                      0.653              0.669             0.445             0.450



Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                       Table 5: Correlations between Main Variables and Characteristics of the Debt
                                           Enforcement Procedure for Version A

                                                                                                                                               Firm continues
                                                          Procedure of          Log GDP per                                                       as going
                                                            relevance    Obs       capita       Civil Law       Time (years)   Cost (% estate)    concern       Efficiency
Statutory time limits on appeals                        All                84        -0.278 a       0.117            0.049             0.021         -0.213 b       -0.188   c
                                                                                    (0.010)       (0.291)          (0.659)           (0.849)        (0.052)        (0.086)
Out of court seizure and sale                           Foreclosure        24         0.093        -0.573   a       -0.575 a          -0.451 b        0.759 a        0.671   a
                                                                                    (0.664)       (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.027)        (0.000)        (0.000)
No judgment for enforcement                             Foreclosure        24         0.156        -0.497   a       -0.401 b          -0.011          0.497 a        0.394   c
                                                                                    (0.466)       (0.014)          (0.052)           (0.959)        (0.014)        (0.057)
Floating charge                                         Foreclosure        24         0.028        -0.590   a       -0.606 a          -0.429 b        0.590 a        0.603   a
                                                                                    (0.899)       (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.036)        (0.002)        (0.002)
Specialized Court                                       Liq/Reorg          63         0.490 a      -0.263   b       -0.311 a          -0.267 b        0.386 a        0.430   a
                                                                                    (0.000)       (0.037)          (0.013)           (0.034)        (0.002)        (0.000)
Case proceeds on appeal of insolvency order             Liq/Reorg          63         0.055        -0.131           -0.229 c          -0.136          0.117          0.233   c
                                                                                    (0.667)       (0.305)          (0.071)           (0.289)        (0.363)        (0.066)
Same judge for appeal of insolvency order               Liq/Reorg          63        -0.117         0.084           -0.056            -0.043          0.035          0.022
                                                                                    (0.360)       (0.514)          (0.661)           (0.736)        (0.787)        (0.866)
Case proceeds on appeal of liquidation sale             Liq/Reorg          63         0.180        -0.140           -0.337 a          -0.113          0.203          0.329   a
                                                                                    (0.159)       (0.273)          (0.007)           (0.379)        (0.110)        (0.009)
Same judge for appeal of liquidation sale               Liq/Reorg          63         0.006         0.260   b        0.077            -0.136          0.148          0.131
                                                                                    (0.962)       (0.040)          (0.551)           (0.287)        (0.248)        (0.307)
Case proceeds on claim amount dispute                   Liq/Reorg          63         0.170        -0.007           -0.254 b          -0.160          0.086          0.266   b
                                                                                    (0.183)       (0.958)          (0.045)           (0.211)        (0.503)        (0.035)
Same judge for claim amount dispute                     Liq/Reorg          63        -0.062         0.074            0.137            -0.112         -0.074         -0.065
                                                                                    (0.629)       (0.567)          (0.286)           (0.381)        (0.564)        (0.615)
Reorganization attempt required                         Liq/Reorg          60        -0.347 a       0.225   c        0.198             0.111         -0.285 b       -0.236   c
                                                                                    (0.007)       (0.085)          (0.130)           (0.399)        (0.027)        (0.070)
Automatic stay on enforcement                           Liq/Reorg          58         0.071         0.138           -0.066            -0.148          0.045          0.049
                                                                                    (0.599)       (0.301)          (0.623)           (0.268)        (0.735)        (0.714)
Automatic stay on lawsuit                               Liq/Reorg          60         0.066        -0.051           -0.001            -0.242 c       -0.126          0.078
                                                                                    (0.619)       (0.696)          (0.994)           (0.063)        (0.338)        (0.552)
Firm must cease operating                               Liq/Reorg          61        -0.095         0.108            0.262 b           0.138         -0.440 a       -0.349   a
                                                                                    (0.466)       (0.409)          (0.042)           (0.288)        (0.000)        (0.006)
Contracts may be rescinded                              Liq/Reorg          60        -0.226 c       0.162            0.310 b           0.208         -0.347 a       -0.367   a
                                                                                    (0.083)       (0.217)          (0.016)           (0.111)        (0.007)        (0.004)
Restrictions on dismissals                              Liq/Reorg          60        -0.069         0.130            0.152            -0.141         -0.211 c       -0.121
                                                                                    (0.600)       (0.324)          (0.245)           (0.282)        (0.105)        (0.358)
Management remain                                       Liq/Reorg          50        -0.117        -0.181           -0.022            -0.006          0.002          0.032
                                                                                    (0.417)       (0.208)          (0.882)           (0.968)        (0.991)        (0.827)
Creditor approves administrator                         Liq/Reorg          63        -0.015        -0.345            0.014             0.040         -0.045         -0.075
                                                                                    (0.909)       (0.006)          (0.916)           (0.759)        (0.724)        (0.557)
Creditor dismisses administrator                        Liq/Reorg          48         0.283 b      -0.079           -0.197            -0.127          0.350 a        0.322   b
                                                                                    (0.051)       (0.595)          (0.180)           (0.391)        (0.015)        (0.026)
Administrator paid on market value                      Liq/Reorg          63         0.274 b      -0.067           -0.106            -0.007          0.072          0.154
                                                                                    (0.030)       (0.599)          (0.408)           (0.956)        (0.577)        (0.229)
Automatic trigger for liquidation                       Liquidation        25        -0.142         0.100           -0.058            -0.120         -0.102         -0.142
                                                                                    (0.498)       (0.634)          (0.784)           (0.570)        (0.627)        (0.497)
Creditors vote directly                                 Reorganization     37         0.330 b      -0.124           -0.137            -0.406 a        0.572 a        0.455   a
                                                                                    (0.046)       (0.466)          (0.417)           (0.013)        (0.000)        (0.005)
Proof of reorganization prospects required              Reorganization     36        -0.163        -0.152           -0.062             0.100          0.169          0.100
                                                                                    (0.342)       (0.375)          (0.721)           (0.563)        (0.325)        (0.561)
P values in parentheses
Correlations are restricted to the relevant procedure
           Table 6: Structural Determinants of Version A efficiency




                                                  Dependent Variable: Version A efficiency

                              All Procedures                                 Foreclosure

                            Statutory time limits on Out of court seizure   No judgment for
                                    appeals               and sale           enforcement       Floating charge
Structural determinant                      1.222              15.892 a             -4.904            12.013 b
                                          (3.411)              (5.519)             (7.405)            (5.800)
Log GNI per capita                        14.126 a               7.519 a             6.563 b            7.738 a
                                          (1.670)              (1.908)             (2.877)            (2.777)
French legal origin                      -19.544 a            -24.027 a           -40.379 a          -26.246 a
                                          (4.247)              (6.353)             (9.806)            (8.453)
German legal origin                      -11.391 b            -15.057 b           -24.575 b          -16.420
                                          (4.805)              (6.698)             (9.341)          (10.116)
Scandinavian legal origin                 -5.011
                                         (4.817)
Constant                                -58.459 a              -2.811              24.690             -3.259
                                       (16.350)              (17.556)            (30.474)           (30.093)
Observations                                 84                    24                  24                 24
R-squared                                 0.660                 0.822               0.758              0.788
                                                      Table 6: Structural Determinants of Version A efficiency (continued)




                                                                                                Dependent Variable: Version A efficiency

                                                                                                        Liquidation / Reorganization

                                           Case proceeds on     Same judge for    Case proceeds on    Same judge for Case proceeds on    Same judge for
                            Specialized         appeal of          appeal of          appeal of          appeal of     claim amount       claim amount      Reorganization    Automatic stay on Automatic stay
                              Court         insolvency order   insolvency order    liquidation sale   liquidation sale     dispute            dispute      attempt required     enforcement       on lawsuit
Structural determinant          0.183             11.192 b              8.288 c            9.506 b         14.604 a           10.459             2.460              6.544             1.022           1.464
                               (6.228)            (4.538)             (4.546)             (3.995)          (5.404)            (6.954)          (4.577)             (5.959)           (4.656)         (4.289)
Log GNI per capita             15.801 a           15.936 a             16.015 a           15.029 a         15.051 a           15.102 a         15.733 a            16.571 a          16.328 a        15.921 a
                               (2.283)            (1.909)             (1.956)             (1.916)          (1.853)            (1.913)          (1.993)             (2.102)           (2.031)         (1.980)
French legal origin            -14.603 a          -12.990 a           -15.063 a          -13.355 a        -19.731 a          -14.455 a         -15.274 a          -16.466 a         -13.748 a       -14.484 a
                               (5.392)            (4.840)             (5.024)             (5.070)          (5.222)            (4.685)          (5.164)             (5.230)           (5.036)         (5.001)
German legal origin             -9.723 c           -8.187 c           -11.375 b            -8.970 c       -13.238 a          -11.696 b          -9.528 c          -10.904 b           -6.749         -9.050 c
                               (5.189)            (4.760)             (4.608)             (5.145)          (4.396)            (4.942)          (4.951)             (5.201)           (5.068)         (5.157)
Scandinavian legal origin       -4.065             -5.090              -3.072              -1.039          -2.901             -1.972            -3.026             -5.653             -3.659         -3.381
                               (5.315)            (5.113)             (5.518)             (4.677)          (5.164)            (3.876)          (6.025)             (5.539)           (5.847)         (5.624)
Constant                       -76.667 a          -88.125 a           -79.785 a          -76.126 a        -69.750 a          -79.064 a         -77.464 a          -83.093 a         -83.281 a       -79.215 a
                              (19.790)           (19.010)            (18.327)            (18.244)         (17.611)          (18.917)          (18.904)           (19.668)           (19.306)        (18.924)


Observations                       63                  63                  63                 63               63                 63                63                 60                58              60
R-squared                       0.662               0.688               0.679              0.693            0.707              0.681             0.664              0.667             0.663           0.666
                                                                    Table 6: Structural Determinants of Version A efficiency (continued)




                                                                                                           Dependent Variable: Version A efficiency

                                                                                  Liquidation / Reorganization                                                                Liquidation                 Reorganization

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proof of
                            Firm must cease   Contracts may be   Restrictions on                       Creditor approves         Creditor dismisses   Administrator paid Automatic trigger for   reorganization     Creditors vote
                                operating        rescinded        dismissals         Management remain   administrator             administrator       on market value       liquidation       prospects required      directly
Structural determinant            -12.220 b          -11.525 b           -4.041                  6.578                -9.063 b             6.873               -4.254               -0.634              12.870 b            12.664 c
                                   (4.920)           (5.362)            (4.535)                (5.085)               (4.346)             (4.549)              (4.458)              (5.969)             (6.297)              (6.852)
Log GNI per capita                 15.351 a           15.298 a          15.486 a               14.738 a              15.171 a             14.505 a            16.329 a             13.245 a             17.553 a            15.293 a
                                   (1.820)           (1.920)            (1.958)                (2.277)               (1.901)             (2.488)              (2.064)              (4.181)             (2.311)              (2.522)
French legal origin               -12.212 a          -12.939 a         -13.580 a               -15.173 a            -19.075 a            -16.271 a            -14.949 a           -13.288              -10.394             -14.236 a
                                   (4.869)           (4.663)            (5.060)                (5.630)               (4.822)             (5.758)              (4.754)              (9.300)             (6.259)              (5.113)
German legal origin               -10.458 c           -6.797             -8.424                 -4.856              -14.489 b             -7.378               -9.389 b             -4.377             -12.249              -8.764
                                   (5.226)           (4.991)            (5.176)                (6.642)               (5.765)             (6.818)              (4.525)              (7.119)            (10.233)              (9.543)
Scandinavian legal origin           -4.797            -3.640             -1.618                  0.833                -3.953              -3.033               -4.655               0.613                0.007              -3.539
                                   (5.252)           (5.280)            (5.890)                (6.649)               (5.414)             (6.090)              (5.339)             (10.919)             (9.519)              (4.940)
Constant                          -74.113 a          -71.629 a         -73.619 a               -70.166 a            -63.173 a            -65.548 a            -79.404 a           -58.986             -100.913 a           -79.576 a
                                  (17.597)          (17.900)           (18.383)               (21.796)              (18.978)            (23.496)             (18.712)             (37.072)            (23.099)             (22.892)


Observations                           61                 60                 60                     50                   63                   48                   63                   25                  36                  37
R-squared                          0.6921              0.694             0.657                   0.640                0.687                0.640                0.668               0.626                0.723               0.726
             Table 7: Main Variable Averages by Procedure and Income Group,
                       with and without floating charge (Version A)
                            Efficient Outcome: Going Concern

                                      Foreclosure - floating   Foreclosure- no                                             Average by
                     Variable               charge             floating charge   Liquidation        Reorganization       Income Group




    1. High income
                               Time                  0.59                 3.54             1.45                1.45               1.51
                               Cost                  5.5%                15.7%            11.0%                6.9%               7.7%
                                GC                   1.00                 0.00             0.71                0.80               0.81
                         Efficiency                 91.02                43.32            73.21               81.52              77.35

                     Observations                        5                   3                 7                 15                30
2. Upper middle




                               Time                  2.31                 2.98             2.83                2.69               2.80
                               Cost                  9.0%                15.2%            17.3%               14.8%              15.7%
    income




                                GC                   0.00                 0.00             0.30                0.33               0.27
                         Efficiency                 50.12                37.31            50.20               44.46              46.11

                     Observations                        2                   5                 10                    3             20
3. Lower Middle




                               Time                  1.92                 3.09             3.52                3.97               3.45
                               Cost                 10.1%                13.6%            19.2%               17.7%              16.7%
    Income




                                GC                   0.33                 0.00             0.22                0.11               0.18
                         Efficiency                 51.46                32.58            32.20               31.70              35.03

                     Observations                        6                   4                 9                 19                38

                               Time                  1.47                 3.16             2.70                2.84               2.64
                               Cost                  8.2%                14.8%            16.3%               13.1%              13.5%
    Total




                                GC                   0.54                 0.00             0.38                0.41               0.36
                         Efficiency                 66.47                37.24            50.16               52.93              51.97

                     Observations                      13                   12                 26                37                88
Table 8A: Main Variable Averages by Procedure and Income Group (Version B)
                    Efficient Outcomes: Piecemeal Sale

                                                                                                            Average by
                              Variable         Foreclosure        Liquidation        Reorganization       Income Group




             1. High income
                                        Time            1.47               1.51                1.72               1.56
                                        Cost            8.7%               7.1%                8.1%               8.0%
                                          PS            1.00               1.00                1.00               1.00
                                  Efficiency            83.49              85.56               85.35              84.74

                              Observations                   11                 10                    9             30

         2. Upper middle
                                        Time             2.79                2.90                3.29               2.90
                                        Cost           13.4%               17.0%               21.0%              16.1%
             income

                                          PS            1.00                1.00                1.00               1.00
                                  Efficiency            62.74               64.99               48.77              62.58

                              Observations                   7                  11                    2             20
         3. Lower Middle




                                        Time             3.15                2.88                4.10               3.40
                                        Cost           14.5%               11.8%               19.3%              15.4%
             Income




                                          PS            1.00                1.00                1.00               1.00
                                  Efficiency            54.75               55.26               44.79              51.25

                              Observations                   11                 13                14                38

                                        Time             2.43                2.48                3.18               2.66
                                        Cost           12.1%               12.1%               15.4%              13.0%
             Total




                                          PS            1.00                1.00                1.00               1.00
                                  Efficiency            67.58               67.32               59.71              65.24

                              Observations                   29                 34                25                88
Table 8B: Main Variable Averages by Procedure and Legal Origin (Version B)
                    Efficient Outcome: Piecemeal Sale

                                                                                                Average by
                   Variable         Foreclosure        Liquidation        Reorganization       Legal Origin

                             Time             1.77                1.68                2.06               1.80
                             Cost           12.1%               11.6%               13.1%              12.1%




         English
                               PS            1.00                1.00                1.00               1.00
                       Efficiency            79.16               75.98               79.55              78.13

                   Observations                   9                  7                     4                  20

                             Time             3.27                3.08                3.54               3.33
                             Cost           12.8%               11.5%               14.4%              13.1%
         French

                               PS            1.00                1.00                1.00               1.00
                       Efficiency            57.57               56.55               55.42              56.36

                   Observations                   12                 13                18                     43

                             Time             1.89                2.58                2.47               2.30
         German




                             Cost           10.9%               15.7%               24.5%              15.1%
                               PS            1.00                1.00                1.00               1.00
                       Efficiency            69.56               68.20               59.00              67.40

                   Observations                   8                  10                    3                  21

                             Time                                1.69                                    1.69
                             Cost                               5.6%                                    5.6%
         Nordic




                               PS                               1.00                                    1.00
                       Efficiency                               84.96                                   84.96

                   Observations                                      4                                        4

                             Time             2.43                2.48                3.18               2.66
                             Cost           12.1%               12.1%               15.4%              13.0%
         Total




                               PS            1.00                1.00                1.00               1.00
                       Efficiency            67.58               67.32               59.71              65.24

                   Observations                   29                 34                25                     88
Table 9A: Priority and Recovery Averages by Procedure and Income Group (Version A)
                          Efficient Outcome: Going Concern

                                                                                                             Average by
                                     Variable          Foreclosure      Liquidation      Reorganization    Income Group




                 1. High income
                                         Efficiency             73.13            73.21             81.52           77.35
                                            Priority             1.50             1.29              1.60            1.50
                                  Time to payment                2.14             2.13              1.45            1.79
                                         Recovery               68.31            68.10             77.02           72.61




             2. Upper middle             Efficiency             40.97            48.03             44.46           44.90
                 income                     Priority             2.29             1.50              2.33            1.90
                                  Time to payment                3.32             3.40              2.69            3.27
                                         Recovery               33.15            45.80             37.19           40.08
             3. Lower Middle




                                         Efficiency             43.90            32.20             31.70           35.03
                 Income




                                            Priority             1.90             2.22              2.26            2.16
                                  Time to payment                2.88             3.69              3.97            3.62
                                         Recovery               36.78            27.08             27.33           29.76



                                         Efficiency             52.44            49.38             52.93           51.97
                 Total




                                            Priority             1.88             1.69              2.00            1.88
                                  Time to payment                2.77             3.16              2.84            2.92
                                         Recovery               45.85            45.32             48.27           46.71
Table 9B: Priority and Recovery Averages by Procedure and Legal Origin (Version A)
                         Efficient Outcome: Going Concern

                                                                                                 Average by
                          Variable          Foreclosure      Liquidation      Reorganization    Legal Origin

                              Efficiency             81.40            56.01             71.95            72.07




             English
                                 Priority             1.57             1.50              1.22             1.40
                       Time to payment                1.30             2.40              2.10             1.88
                              Recovery               74.77            49.56             70.31            67.72



                              Efficiency             36.03            37.91             43.63            40.35
             French              Priority             2.36             2.10              2.32             2.28
                       Time to payment                3.83             3.44              3.38             3.51
                              Recovery               29.08            33.50             37.91            34.62



                              Efficiency             49.25            53.85             41.74            50.01
             German




                                 Priority             1.43             1.50              2.50             1.67
                       Time to payment                2.57             3.31              2.52             2.91
                              Recovery               43.31            48.99             33.77            44.20



                              Efficiency                              81.33             92.13            86.73
             Nordic




                                 Priority                              1.00              1.00             1.00
                       Time to payment                                 2.50              0.92             1.71
                              Recovery                                77.67             92.13            84.90



                              Efficiency             52.44            50.16             52.93            51.97
             Total




                                 Priority             1.88             1.69              2.00             1.88
                       Time to payment                2.77             3.16              2.84             2.92
                              Recovery               45.85            45.32             48.27            46.71
                               Table 10: Private Credit/GDP Regressions

            Independent Variables                    Dependent Variable: Private Credit/GDP (average 1999 - 2003)
GDP                                                          0.093 a                     0.083 a                    0.088   a
                                                           (0.018)                     (0.021)                    (0.019)
GDP per capita growth                                        0.011                       0.009                      0.009
                                                           (0.013)                     (0.010)                    (0.010)
Inflation                                                   -0.001                      -0.001                     -0.001
                                                           (0.001)                     (0.001)                    (0.001)
Contract enforcement days                                   -0.081 c                    -0.070 c                   -0.078   b
                                                           (0.043)                     (0.043)                    (0.036)
Creditor rights index (Djankov et al)                                                                               0.100   a
                                                                                                                  (0.030)
Information sharing                                                                                                 0.200   a
                                                                                                                  (0.066)
Efficiency - Version A                                       0.006 a                     0.006 a                    0.005   a
                                                           (0.002)                     (0.002)                    (0.002)
French legal origin                                                                     -0.109
                                                                                       (0.107)
German legal origin                                                                     -0.216 b
                                                                                       (0.099)
Scandinavian legal origin                                                               -0.190
                                                                                       (0.152)
Constant                                                    -1.577 a                    -1.276 b                   -1.790   a
                                                           (0.515)                     (0.560)                    (0.477)
Obs                                                             84                          84                         84
R-sq                                                         0.556                       0.584                      0.646



Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                                                                     Table 11: Efficiency and Credit Market Outcomes


                                                                                                                                           Perceived efficiency   Perceived financial    Perceived financial
                                              Non performing            Moody's rating       Perceived efficiency   Perceived access to     of credit markets     system soundness      system sophistication
         Independent Variables                 Loans (IMF)               financial risk      of bankruptcy (WEF)       loans (WEF)                (WEF)                 (WEF)                  (WEF)
Efficiency - Version A                                 -0.154 a                    0.722 a                0.029 a                0.020 a                0.011 a               0.022 a                  0.030 a
                                                      (0.036)                    (0.091)                (0.004)                (0.003)                (0.003)               (0.004)                  (0.005)
Contract enforcement days                              -0.028                      0.760                 -0.309 b               -0.153                 -0.054                -0.071                   -0.126
                                                      (1.629)                    (4.770)                (0.124)                (0.106)                (0.108)               (0.155)                  (0.150)
Constant                                               16.902                     -4.181                  4.815 a                3.223 a                3.850 a               4.418 a                  3.419 a
                                                     (10.749)                   (29.638)                (0.823)                (0.682)                (0.704)               (0.955)                  (1.013)
Obs                                                        65                         57                     73                     73                     73                    73                       73
R-sq                                                    0.288                      0.507                  0.600                  0.459                  0.163                 0.313                    0.466



Note: a=significant at the 1% level, b=significant at the 5% level, c=significant at the 10% level
                                             Table 12: Correlations between Efficiency and Other Institutional Variables

                                               Contract                                                Information
                          Efficiency         enforcement       Log GDP per        Creditor rights      sharing              French legal                       Bureaucratic      Infrastructure     Corruption
                          Version A              days          capita             (Djankov et al)      (Djankov et al)         origin         Formalism          delays           quality index       index
Contract enforcement              -0.565 a
days                             (0.000)

                                  0.737 a           -0.427 a
Log GDP per capita              (0.000)            (0.000)

Creditor rights                   0.082             -0.036              0.122
(Djankov et al)                 (0.449)            (0.741)            (0.261)

Information sharing               0.144             -0.083              0.301 a              0.000
(Djankov et al)                 (0.183)            (0.443)            (0.005)              (1.000)

                                 -0.447 a            0.213 b           -0.239 b             -0.310 a              0.099
French legal origin             (0.000)            (0.048)            (0.025)              (0.004)              (0.360)

                                 -0.522 a            0.436 a           -0.400 a             -0.125                0.039             0.537 a
Formalism                       (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.247)              (0.717)           (0.000)

                                  0.695 a           -0.610 a            0.810 a              0.313 b             -0.239 c           0.494 a         -0.523 a
Bureaucratic delays             (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.027)              (0.094)           (0.000)          (0.000)

Infrastructure quality            0.670 a           -0.599 a            0.857 a              0.220               -0.272 c           0.407 a         -0.448 a           0.925 a
index                           (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.125)              (0.056)           (0.003)          (0.001)           (0.000)

                                  0.693 a           -0.481 a            0.793 a              0.108               -0.182             0.512 a         -0.531 a           0.814 a            0.804 a
Corruption index                (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.361)              (0.124)           (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)

                                  0.572 a           -0.524 a            0.525 a              0.384 a             -0.260 c           0.472 a         -0.551 a           0.647 a            0.614 a          0.536 a
Tax compliance                  (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.009)              (0.081)           (0.001)          (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)

P values in parentheses
