NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING THE IMPACTS OF FDI IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE
Robert E. Lipsey
Working Paper 12808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12808

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2006

I am indebted to Jing Sun for excellent research assistance. This paper was originally prepared for
the Conference on European Integration: The Changing Landscape of FDI in Europe, sponsored by
the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in
Vienna, November 20-21, 2006. A shorter version will be published in a conference volume to be
issued by Edward Elgar Publishing. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2006 by Robert E. Lipsey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Measuring the Impacts of FDI in Central and Eastern Europe
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER Working Paper No. 12808
December 2006
JEL No. F21,F23
ABSTRACT
The impacts of inward FDI on host countries are frequently studied using balance-of-payments based
measures of flows and stocks. These are unreliable for the purpose because, while theories of the effects
of investment are based on FDI production and employment in the host country, these measures are
often distorted approximations of the location of real activity. The mismeasurement is particularly
important if trade openness, often associated with FDI, is treated as a control variable.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe, a very minor object of US direct investment, have, since
1990, become a major location for FDI from Europe, especially from Germany. The investments from
both the US and Germany are, on average, very labor-intensive, and are heavily concentrated in Motor
Vehicles. One result has been a shift in the export comparative advantage of these countries toward the
machinery and transport equipment sector.
Microdata studies in the CEE countries have found that foreign participation is associated with higher
productivity in the affiliates themselves. Spillovers to indigenous firms are more spotty, clearer to
upstream suppliers than to firms in the same industries as the affiliates.
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu

Measuring the Impacts of FDI in Central and Eastern Europe
Robert E. Lipsey*
Introduction
In one sense the issue of the desirability of inward FDI for host countries seems to have
been decided. Policy making has come to ignore the ambiguous and inconclusive academic
literature and, in most countries, has shifted away from measures restricting and discouraging
inward FDI. Many countries have not only reduced or eliminated such restrictions, but also
moved toward encouraging FDI with tax and other incentives. UNCTAD’s compilations of
regulatory changes by host countries since 1991 show that they have been overwhelmingly
favorable to inward FDI, although recent years have seen more unfavorable changes, up to 20
percent in 2005, the highest share in the compilation. The unfavorable changes were
concentrated in extractive industries and in Latin America (UNCTAD, 2006, pp. 24-25).
Something must have happened to influence so many countries’ policies. I think I know
what that something is. It is the success that a few countries have apparently had in achieving
rapid economic growth after moving from virtual prohibition of direct investment to active
encouragement of it. Ireland and China are two notable and conspicuous examples of countries
that reversed a long standing antipathy toward foreign investors and have achieved rapid growth
in which foreign-owned firms have played a very large part.
An aspect of the role of FDI that I think is almost beyond dispute is that much of the
world’s stock of technological knowledge is possessed by multinational firms. That can be seen
partly in the fact that labor is so much more productive in these firms than outside them;
*

I am indebted to Jing Sun for excellent research assistance. This paper was originally prepared for the Conference
on European Integration: The Changing Landscape of FDI in Europe, sponsored by the Oesterreichische
Nationalbank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in Vienna, November 20-21, 2006. A
shorter version will be published in a conference volume to be issued by Edward Elgar Publishing.

1

multinationals probably produce more than 10 percent of the world’s output, but employ only 1
or at most 2 percent of the world’s labor. Whenever comparisons are made within countries, it
appears that not only are foreign multinationals more productive than domestic firms in general,
as measured by labor productivity or TFP, but among domestically-owned firms, those that are
multinational are more efficient than non-multinational firms, even within the same industries
and taking account of other factors affecting efficiency.
What is it that we want to know about the impacts of FDI? Quite often the issue is put in
the context of the use of subsidies or other incentives specific to foreign-owned firms and the
question posed is whether these subsidies are worth while. I think that that is the wrong context,
and distorts the issue. The most important measures favorable to inward FDI in my view, are to
remove prohibitions against it, to remove other measures that discriminate against foreign firms,
to reduce or remove impediments to trade and open markets, and to improve governance.
One of the main technological advantages of foreign-owned firms is their knowledge of
international markets and the ability to judge and compare the costs of different locations for
production, particularly locations for fragments in long lines of production that extend across
several countries. Subsidies and other preferential arrangements can distort the choices of
locations, leaving uneconomic white elephants after the preferential arrangements end. In some
of the most successful cases of growth through exploiting foreign investment, the foreign firms
have been able to look past host countries’ current comparative advantages in exporting and to
see potential comparative advantages that exploit the combination of the host country’s resources
with the technology and other knowledge of the foreign firms.
Many studies have asked whether attracting foreign firms will make a recipient country
grow faster than it would without foreign investment or with only portfolio investment. Another

2

economy-wide question that used to absorb a lot of attention was the long-run effect of inward
FDI on the host country’s balance of payments, but that is a topic that I rarely see mentioned
now. We seem to have decided that there are other factors that determine a country’s balance of
payments surpluses or deficits over long periods.
There is little reason to expect that the effects of inward investment should be the same
for all host countries. A country with a long history of forbidding or discouraging inward
investment, that then opens up to it, may have an industrial structure with large gaps in newer or
more technologically advanced industries that investors can fill, while a country that has been
open to investment may present a much more competitive milieu. A country that is open to trade
may attract elements of firms’ worldwide production that are combined with those in other
countries before becoming final products, while a country that restricts trade or hinders it by
inefficiency or corruption may not attract such investment. More generally, countries that
provide reliable and predictable legal systems and efficient public administration may receive
more investment and profit more from it than countries with poor governance.
FDI flows very unevenly to the various sectors of an economy. As more disaggregated
data became available, one could ask about the effects of FDI inflows on particular industrial
sectors or regions, particularly the industries or regions receiving the investment, but also others
that buy from or sell to those sectors. These questions have not usually been studied with
balance of payments data, because their sectoral detail is poor in most countries and often is not
closely related to the sectoral breakdown of employment, sales, physical capital stock, or
production. Instead, these questions have been studied using data from production censuses in
recipient countries, often confined to the manufacturing sector, or manufacturing and mining.

3

Not only are sectors affected differently, but not every firm within a sector is likely to be
affected in the same way by the entrance or expansion of foreign-owned firms. The firms with
the most up-to-date technologies may respond differently from those that were laggards. Large
firms may fare differently from small firms. Exporting firms may respond differently from
completely domestic firms. All these questions require a different kind of data for research. The
questions can be reliably answered only with the use of firm or establishment microdata, in
which individual firms’ attributes can be related to their subsequent performance. With these
individual firm data, we can now sometimes ask what happens to a particular domesticallyowned firm that becomes foreign-owned or to a foreign-owned firm that becomes domesticallyowned, and to other firms in the same industry or location.
The latest development, still at an early stage, is that we are beginning to get data on
individual workers within the individual firms. With such data we can begin to see what
happens to workers of different types, different skills, experience, and education, when their
employers become foreign-owned, or cease to be so.

Impacts of Inward FDI on Host Country Growth
There have been many attempts over the years to test whether any general relationship
could be found between inflows of FDI to a host country and host country economic growth.
The only data on such inflows, or the resulting stocks of direct investment capital, covering
many countries and long periods, are those based on financial flows, as recorded in balances of
payments and national accounts.
In contrast, most theories about how FDI might accelerate growth in a host country rely
on the effects of foreign-owned production taking place there. Production by foreign

4

multinationals might raise the level of competition in the host economy, bring superior
technology that could be used by the foreign-owned producer or imitated by domestic firms,
train host country workers in more efficient production methods, which they would use in
working for the foreign firm or carry with them to other firms, etc. I don’t want to catalogue all
the possible channels of transmission, but to emphasize that they depend on a foreign presence
that involves production in the host country.
Data on such FDI exist for only a few countries, mostly for short periods. Where they do
exist, such as for the United States, we can compare them with the FDI flow and stock data. Are
the balance of payments and national accounts data good indicators of the extent of FDI
production, capital stock, or employment in a country? The short answer is that they are very
rough, but not wholly inaccurate, measures of the country distribution of FDI production,
employment, and fixed capital at any one time, but very poor measures of changes over time.
Thus, when we use the balance of payments measures to proxy for FDI production or
employment changes, we are observing the latter through a thick fog. A couple of examples
make the point. Hong Kong is the largest outward investor among developing countries, but half
of Hong Kong’s stock of outward FDI was in four tax havens, the British Virgin Islands,
Bermuda, Panama, and the Cayman Islands, according to UNCTAD (2004, p. 26). I think we
can be sure that the productive activity involved, if there was any, was not in those locations.
Luxembourg was reported to be the world’s largest recipient of FDI in 2002, accounting for 19
percent of all the world’s inflows “…because it offers favorable conditions for holding
companies and for corporate HQ, such as certain tax exemptions” (UNCTAD 2003, p. 69). We
can be sure that if any production was being financed, it did not take place in Luxembourg. The
BEA reported (Koncz and Yorgason, 2005, p. 45) that the share of holding companies in the U.S.

5

investment position abroad reached more than a third in 2004, concealing both the location and
the industry composition of any associated production.
A recent and sophisticated analysis of this type of data by Carkovic and Levine (2005)
concluded that “…the exogenous component of FDI does not exert a robust, positive influence
on economic growth” and that “…there is no reliable cross-country empirical evidence
supporting the claim that FDI per se accelerates economic growth” (p. 197). The negative
conclusion is expressed cautiously: “…after controlling for the joint determination of growth
and foreign capital flows, country-specific factors and other growth determinants, the data do not
suggest a strong, independent impact of FDI on economic growth” (p. 198). The policy
indications drawn are that the study’s analyses “do not support special tax breaks and subsidies
to attract foreign capital…sound policies encourage economic growth and also provide an
attractive environment for foreign investment” (p. 198).

Finally, “…the results are inconsistent

with the view that FDI exerts a positive impact on growth that is independent of other growth
determinants” (p. 219).
In his comments on these results, Melitz (2005) challenged part of the interpretation,
pointing out that the results that do not include controls for trade openness, but do control for
many other country characteristics, show a positive relation of FDI to growth. Melitz noted that
vertical FDI implies trade, and that both are determined by country policy toward trade and
investment. In that case, controlling for trade openness wipes out the relationship between the
combination of trade and investment and economic growth.
A different interpretation of the role of trade openness is that the combination of FDI
with trade tends to distinguish what I am tempted to call “genuine” FDI stocks, that is, FDI
stocks associated with production, from financial FDI stocks that have no production attached to

6

them. The connection between the benefits from inward FDI and the trade policy of the host
country echoes an earlier suggestion by Bhagwati (1978), confirmed to some extent by
Balasubramanayan, Salisu, and Sapsford (1996), that growth effects of FDI could be positive or
negative, with negative effects associated with import-substitution policies. Carkovic and
Levine do use an interaction term between openness to trade and FDI in some formulations and
report that it is significant in some panel regressions but not in others, a result that they report as
a finding that the connection is “not robust” (p. 211).
One lesson that Carkovic and Levine draw from their study is that the results “…do not
support special tax breaks and subsidies to attract foreign capital” (p. 198). In one sense this
conclusion does not clash with the comment by Melitz. Inward FDI attracted by an open trade
regime may conform to existing or potential comparative advantages in trade, but FDI attracted
by tax breaks or subsidies, especially if protection is part of the incentives, may be more likely to
fit badly with the host country’s comparative advantages and may be less likely to be associated
with enlarged trade. Moran’s (2005) paper in the same volume gives many examples of such illfitting foreign investments.
A recent strand in these multicountry studies has been to suggest that well developed
financial markets in host countries are the key to host country productivity benefits. Some of
this literature and empirical studies along the same lines, mostly pointing to productivity gains in
upstream industries, are discussed in Alfaro, Chanda, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Sayek (2006).
All of these analyses assume that the balance of payments data on FDI really do measure
the amount of foreign-owned production in a host country. In fact, they do not, for many
reasons. Even if they are correctly measured, by the principles laid down by the IMF (1993), and
many countries’ reports do not, the data do not measure either output or input in the host country.

7

For one thing, the reported country of location of FDI represents only the first stop on what may
be a long trek from the originating country to the location where production takes place, a stop
determined by tax or other financial considerations rather than suitability as a production
location. Furthermore, since a large part of the exported FDI capital may by intangible, or
intellectual, capital, it has no discernable geographical location. Its only real location is its
ownership within the multinational firm. The parent firm can choose a nominal geographical
location, usually for tax minimization, but use the asset in production anywhere in the world.
In view of the ambiguity in the meaning of the location of financial flows and stocks of
FDI, a better summary of the results of analyzing these data might be that the conventional
measures of flows and stocks of FDI do not appear to unambiguously determine or affect host
country economic growth, but that the combination of FDI and open trade policy serves to
distinguish those flows or stocks of FDI that are associated with production in a country from
those that are just passing through or represent an internal allocation of intangible property to
that country without any link to local production. These flows or stocks, or these combined with
open trade policy, do seem to promote host country growth. I might note also that even the
studies that take a skeptical view of this relationship rarely find a negative effect of FDI.
One study of FDI inflows and aggregate economic growth based on balance-of-payments
FDI data was confined to the CEE countries and those of the former Soviet Union. That scope
was justified by the argument that the backwardness of these countries meant that the FDI there
represented more of a pure case of technology transfer than FDI elsewhere (Campos and
Kinoshita, 2002). The conclusion in that case was that for these countries, the relationship was
“…positive, significant, and robust” (p. 417).

8

Given the defects of the balance of payments data, and the lack of a clear connection with
FDI production, my conclusion is that, for large groups of countries, they are a dead end for
research on the effects of FDI and are not worth further pursuit or efforts at refinement. Aside
from the deficiencies of the data I have described, my suspicion is that, despite the efforts of the
IMF to push for uniform standards of reporting, the FDI data are deteriorating, rather than
improving, because they are dependent on firms’ bookkeeping, and firms are becoming more
adept at manipulating the bookkeeping for tax minimization purposes.
If we accept the idea that little can be learned from studies in which FDI is represented
by balance of payments flows and stocks, we are led to studies that measure FDI by production,
sales, labor input, or capital input. These variables are available for much smaller groups of
countries, but they have the advantage that they can be subdivided by industry. In some cases,
they can be subdivided also into individual firms or establishments, or into groupings of firms
based on their individual characteristics. I review here a few of these industry and firm studies
concentrating on Central and Eastern European countries in the EU or about to enter. These are
all cases where the individual countries have had the common experience of moving from
economies based on central planning, with little foreign involvement and little trade, to various
degrees of private enterprise, encouragement of inward investment, and more open trade.

The Countries of Central and Eastern Europe as Locations for FDI
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) are very recent arrivals in the FDI
landscape. They are, along with China and Ireland, interesting laboratories in which to observe
the impact of inward FDI. For the most part, they had not been recipients of FDI to any
important degree before 1990 (the conversion of Ireland to welcoming FDI had come much

9

earlier). In 1990, the CEE countries were far below the average country with respect to inward
FDI stocks, considering their size. For example, if we fit a log equation explaining the reported
inward FDI stock across about 150 countries in 1990 by real (purchasing power adjusted) gross
output, it explains about 60 percent of the variance across countries. Most of the CEE countries
did not report any inward FDI at all, and the ones that did, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and
Poland, reported stocks that were 40 percent of the predicted value (Czechoslovakia) or much
less.
After 1990, the CEE countries lowered the barriers to FDI to varying degrees. Of course,
many other developments were taking place at the same time: increasing openness to trade,
privatization of previously government-owned production, and many other changes as these
countries moved in various degrees from socialist to market economies and democratic
governments. By 2003, the last year for which we have a full set of countries reporting inward
FDI stocks, a similar log equation explained about two thirds of the variance in inward FDI
stocks, and all of the CEE countries reported some amounts. The equation predicted inward FDI
levels far higher than those predicted for 1990, four to six times as high, but by that time the
inward stocks in the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, and the Slovak Republic far
surpassed the predicted levels (Table 1). FDI in Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, and Slovenia was
close to the predicted values and only FDI in Bulgaria was well below, as was FDI in China,
despite the huge flows to that country.

10

Table 1: Inward FDI Stocks and Stocks Predicted From Country Real
Gross Product, CEE Countries and China, 2003 [Millions of USD]
(Log FDI Stock)=-1.7487+0.9505×(Log RGDP)
Country
China
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia

Actual FDI Stock

a

Predicted FDI Stock

228,371

546,708

5,082
45,287
6,511
48,320
3,282
4,960
55,268
12,815
11,864
4,446

6,848
16,127
2,140
13,973
2,892
4,453
34,729
14,193
6,285
4,319

Note:
a). Adj. R-squared = 0.6694; Prob. F = 0.0000; No. of obs. = 154
Source:
Penn World Table 6.2 by Heston, Summers and Aten (Sept. 2006).
UNCTAD Foreign Direct Investment Database (downloaded on Nov. 3rd, 2006).

Many studies of the location of FDI now include measures of governance or other
institutional quality that are not readily quantifiable but seem to influence corporate decisions.
The World Bank has been issuing governance indicators covering almost a decade now, and
these provide some picture of the changes taking place in the CEE countries in this respect.
A striking change for the CEE countries has been the improvement in all their measures
of governance since the first ones in 1996. For the six governance measures calculated by the
World Bank (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi, 2006), the average score for the CEE countries
in 1996 was only 22 percent of the average of the 15 pre-1995 EU members (Table 2). By 2005,
the ratio had reached 48 percent. Some of the CEE countries scored higher than Italy or Greece
in 2005, but only the Czech Republic had scored higher than both of them in 1996. The

11

Table 2: World Bank Average of Governance Ratings, 1996 and 2003,
and Global Competitiveness Rankings, 2005
Country

Governance
Scores

Global Competitiveness
Rankings

1996

2003

2005

China

-0.33

-0.50

48

EU-15

1.44

1.42

18

Spain

1.03

1.17

28

Portugal

1.21

1.25

31

Italy

0.74

0.83

38

Greece

0.64

0.79

47

0.32
-0.25
0.77
0.58
0.62
0.11
0.16
0.52
-0.29
0.28
0.74

0.67
0.20
0.78
1.01
0.89
0.76
0.81
0.63
-0.04
0.67
1.00

40
61
29
26
35
39
34
43
67
36
30

CEE Countries
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia

Source:
Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2006).
World Economic Forum (2006).

improvement in governance may have helped to attract inflows of FDI, but it could also be that
the hope of attracting FDI led to the improvements in governance.
Another rating of the economic environment in each country is provided by the overall
competitiveness rankings of the Global Competitiveness Reports (World Economic Forum,
2006). For 2006, the average ranking of the CEE countries was 43, where 1 represented the
highest rank. The average among the EU-15 was 19. Estonia, followed by the Czech Republic,
followed by Slovenia, were the leaders among the CEE countries, not far behind the EU average,
but some of the CEE countries ranked much lower. In this ranking, the more attractive CEE
countries outranked both Greece and Italy, and were close to Portugal and Spain.

12

Most of the progress in the governance ratings for CEE countries since 1996 took place
between 1996 and 2003. Since then, the average has been roughly constant, even slipping back a
little. It may be no coincidence that these countries applied for EU membership between 1994
and 1996 and most of them entered the EU in 2004. The improvement in governance, intended
to facilitate or permit EU entry, may have had the secondary effect of encouraging inward FDI.
That reflects a persistent problem of analysis; the effects of joining the EU or of receiving inward
FDI are mixed with the effects of actions aimed at achieving EU membership or encouraging
inward investment.
If we add the World Bank governance scores (in arithmetic form, since they can be
negative) to the prediction of the level of inward FDI, the percent of variance in FDI levels
explained rises from 67 to 77 percent, and the predicted values for most countries listed are
higher (Table 3), a little closer to the actual values, but still below them, except in Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania, and Slovenia, four of the smallest countries. That discrepancy points to nonlinearity in the relation of inward investment to host country GDP.
Table 3: Equation Predicting Inward FDI Stock From Host Country
Real Output and Governance, 2003 [Millions of USD]
a

(Log FDI Stock)=-0.6311+0.8399×(Log RGDP)+0.9681×Governance
Country
China

Actual FDI Stock
228,371

Predicted FDI Stock
180,979

Bulgaria
5,082
7,437
Czech Republic
45,287
27,830
Estonia
6,511
5,797
Hungary
48,320
27,158
Latvia
3,282
5,973
Lithuania
4,960
9,146
Poland
55,268
47,040
Romania
12,815
11,198
Slovak Republic
11,864
10,868
Slovenia
4,446
10,747
Source:
Penn World Table 6.2 by Heston, Summers and Aten (Sept. 2006).
UNCTAD Foreign Direct Investment Database (downloaded on Nov. 3rd, 2006).
Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2006).

13

Outward FDI data from U.S. surveys provide the fullest information on what foreign
affiliates actually do, but the CEE countries have never been a major destination for U.S.
investment. In 2003, they accounted for about 2.7 percent of the employment in U.S. affiliates,
0.4 percent of assets, and 1.5 percent of net property, plant, and equipment (US, BEA Web
site). What we can see from the data that do exist, dominated by the Czech Republic, Hungary,
and Poland, is that for U.S. multinationals, the attraction of these countries is for labor-intensive
activities. The average assets per worker of U.S. affiliates in the CEE countries in 2003 were
around $150,000, lower than the ratio in Latin America, at a little over $200 thousand, and much
lower than that in Developing Asia, at about $430 thousand. The average for affiliates in the
pre-1995 EU was around $1.3 million (Table 4). The U.S. investments were concentrated in
manufacturing and, within manufacturing, in Transport equipment, plus, Electrical machinery in
Hungary and Foods in Poland (Mataloni, 2005).

Table 4: Characteristics of U.S. FDI in CEE Countries and Other Locations, 2003
[Millions of USD]
Compensation Per
Assets Per
Compensation
Employee
Employee
Relative to Sales
World
0.035
0.893
0.102
EU-15
0.050
1.295
0.125
China
0.008
0.131
0.057
Latin America
0.016
0.207
0.096
1
Developing Asia
0.016
0.431
0.056
2
CEE
0.013
0.148
0.081
Bulgaria
0.007
0.059
0.142
Czech Republic
0.012
0.148
0.083
Estonia
0.011
0.098
0.101
Hungary
0.015
0.178
0.075
Latvia
0.018
0.263
0.060
Lithuania
0.015
0.127
0.111
Poland
0.014
0.162
0.081
Romania
0.007
0.066
0.083
Slovak Republic
0.013
0.107
0.086
Slovenia
0.020
0.187
0.126
Note:
1. Asia and Pacific, except Australia, Japan, and New Zealand.
2. For employment data, if an interval is given in the source, the midpoint is used for calculation.
Source: BEA Website

14

For Germany, in contrast to the United States, the CEE countries were a major location
for FDI. In 2004, they accounted for over 16 percent of the employment in German firms’
affiliates, but for only 3 percent of assets. That large difference reflects the low capital intensity
of these investments. The average assets per employee in 2003, 1.2 million euros worldwide, 1.5
million euros in the United States, and 1.8 million Euros in the 15 pre-1995 EU area, were only
about 200 thousand euros in the CEE countries as a group. That was above the 170 thousand
levels in Latin American affiliates and the 160 thousand in China, but far below that in Other
Developing Asia, at over 600,000 euros (Table 5).
Table 5: Total Assets Per Employee of German FDI in CEE
Countries and Other Locations, 2003 [Millions of USD]
Total Assets Per Employee
World
1.209
EU-15
1.814
China
0.161
Latin America
0.168
1
Developing Asia
0.635
2
CEE
0.207
Bulgaria
0.134
Czech Republic
0.222
Estonia
0.113
Hungary
0.259
Latvia
0.090
Lithuania
0.106
Poland
0.226
Romania
0.054
Slovak Republic
0.163
Slovenia
0.213
Note:
1. Asia and Pacific, except Australia, Japan, and New Zealand.
2. For employment data, if an interval is given, the average is used for calculation.
Source: Deutsche Bundesbank (2006)

German manufacturing investment in the CEE countries was remarkably concentrated in
Motor vehicles, even in 1992-94, in the two countries for which we have data by industry (Table
6). By 2002-2004, the concentration in that industry had increased, and was quite general across
the CEE countries. By then, two thirds of the German investment was in Motor vehicles and it
15

was the leading industry group for German FDI in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and
Slovakia. Romania was the exception, with Electrical machinery the leading sector, followed by
Motor vehicles, Chemicals, and Non-electrical machinery.
Table 6: Industry Distribution of German Direct Investment In Manufacturing In CEE Countries, 1991-2004
[%]
Total
CEE
Poland Slovakia Czech Republic Hungary Romania
1992 -1994
Chemicals
7
12
Non-Electrical Machinery & Equip.
15
12
Electrical Machinery
18
11
Motor Vehicles
60
45
2002-2004
Chemicals
Non-Electrical Machinery & Equip.
Electrical Machinery
Motor Vehicles

10
10
12
68

24
13
11
53

6
16
3
74

7
9
20
64

6
8
7
78

21
21
31
27

Source: Deutsche Bundesbank (1997) and (2006).

One probable result of the industry concentration of German FDI in these countries can
be seen in the changes that took place in the revealed export comparative advantages of the
countries. In 9 of the 11 countries during the 1990s, the comparative advantage in Machinery
and transport equipment increased or the comparative disadvantage decreased.
A few observations are suggested by the aggregate inflows from balance of payments
data. One is that there was a clear positive relationship between countries’ average governance
scores and per capita FDI inflows over the 1990s. Bulgaria and Romania had the lowest
governance scores and the lowest inflows of FDI per capita. The Czech Republic, Hungary, and
Estonia had the highest governance scores and the highest inflows per capita. The main outlier
was Slovenia, with the highest governance score but only average FDI inflows per capita.

16

Governance scores did not have as clear a relation to the ratio of inflows to nominal GDP,
although the relationship was mostly positive, except again for the Slovenia outlier.

Studies Based on Firm and Industry Data
There have been quite a few studies based on firm microdata of FDI in the CEE
countries. The periods covered are usually short for observing the effects of foreign ownership,
some of which may require a long-term perspective.
All the CEE countries have received some attention, but the more important FDI
destinations have received more attention than the smaller ones. An impressive degree of care
has been given to problems of dealing with short panels, unbalanced panels, endogeneity, the
clustering of observations and its effect on measures of standard errors, and different ways of
dealing with panel data. Studies have examined effects of foreign investment on the recipient
firm, spillovers of productivity to indigenous firms, and the entry and exit of indigenous firms.
These studies find most definitively that foreign participation increases the productivity
of the affiliate itself (for example, Evenett and Voicu (2001) for the Czech Republic, Hannula
and Tamm, 2002, for Estonia, Damijan, Knell, Majcen, and Rojec, 2003, for 10 countries). In a
study concerned with the effects of privatization in two CEE countries(Hungary and Romania)
and Russia and Ukraine, Brown, Earle, and Telegdy found that privatizations to foreigners led to
growth in the privatized firms’ total wage bills. In the two CEE countries, the growth consisted
of both increases in employment and increases in average wage levels. The wage gains reflected
gains in productivity in these privatizations.
There is weaker and more complex evidence from the same studies for intra-industry
productivity spillovers from foreign-owned to domestically-owned firms. As usual,

17

characteristics of the foreign and host-country firms and industries are significant determinants
of spillovers. Javorcik and Spatareanu (2003) found evidence for intra-industry spillovers from
wholly-owned foreign firms, but not joint ventures, in Romania. In another study of Romania,
Altomonte and Pennings (2005) found positive intra-industry effects on domestic firms’
productivity from initial foreign investments in an industry and region, but weaker effects and
eventually negative ones as the foreign share grew.

In a study mainly devoted to the question

of “crowding out” of domestically-owned firms by foreign-owned ones, Kosová (2005) found
evidence of intra-industry technology spillovers in the Czech Republic. She also found evidence
that the entry of foreign-owned firms initially increased the exit rate of domestically-owned
firms in the same industry, but that after the initial setback, higher growth of foreign-owned
firms represented domestic demand creation that increased both the growth rates and the survival
of domestically-owned firms.

As in other host countries, indigenous firms that exported,

performed R&D, and led their industries in productivity were more likely to gain from FDI.
Javorcik and Spatereanu (2003) found that joint ventures produced positive upstream
spillovers to suppliers, while wholly-owned foreign firms produced negative upstream spillovers,
probably because joint ventures tended to continue long-standing relationships with suppliers
while wholly-owned foreign firms, using more advanced technology, require more sophisticated
suppliers from abroad. It might also be, although that is not suggested by the authors, that
wholly-owned firms are more likely to be part of multinationals’ internal supply chains and
therefore more likely to depend on associated firms in other countries for intermediate products,
although that may not be an important aspect of supplier choices for affiliates in the CEE
countries. An earlier paper by Javorcik (2004), this one for Lithuania, had also found evidence

18

of spillovers to upstream industries but not intra-industry, and also, as in the Romanian study, for
joint ventures but not for firms that were wholly foreign-owned.
There have been quite a few recent studies attempting to explain what attracts FDI, or
particularly, German FDI to the CEE countries. A paper by Bellak and Leibnecht (2005) studied
FDI inflows into eight CEE countries from seven home countries, arguing that for those
countries, FDI flows are “…a reasonable proxy of the annual change in property, plant, and
equipment…” (p. 8). Since six of the seven home countries are in Europe, the coefficient of the
distance variable, sometimes significant and sometimes not, may be strongly influenced by U.S.
investment flows. As expected, host country size was positively related to the inflow and the
actual, rather than the statutory, bilateral tax rate was negatively related. Another paper using
balance of payments measures, in this case the inward FDI stock, but including also the countries
of the former Soviet Union, Kinoshita and Campos (2003), referred to these as forming “a
unique situation akin to a natural experiment…” (p.1). Since the data were not bilateral, distance
was measured from Brussels for all host countries. The results pointed to institutions,
specifically rule of law and quality of bureaucracy, low labor costs, trade openness, progress
towards economic reform, and past FDI, interpreted as agglomeration advantages. No tax
variable was included.
Another gravity model paper, Borrmann, Jungnickel, and Keller (2005) explained
German FDI production, rather than bilateral financial flows, but with no tax variable. It found
that German FDI production in “core” CEE countries already exceeded “normal” levels in 2001,
but was reluctant to describe this high level as “overshooting” that would imply future reductions
or even a slowing of growth.

19

Although German affiliates in the CEE countries are clearly more labor intensive than
those in the rest of Europe, Buch and Kleinert (2006) find that market access, and not only low
production cost, is a major incentive to invest in the CEE countries. Low parent labor intensity
is associated with outward FDI in general, in the West as well as in the East.
The issue of what determines the choice of locations among the CEE countries is less
important for political and policy discussions in home countries than the choice between home
production in Germany and production in the CEE countries. Becker and Mündler (2006)
calculate the effects of changes in wages in Germany and in the CEE countries on the allocation
of employment by German multinational firms. The effects are on the establishment of new
foreign locations, the locations of which then tend to be stable, and on the allocation of jobs
between home and existing foreign locations. They find significant effects on a firm’s location
of employment from wage changes both at home and abroad, which they describe as “…a salient
impact on multinational labor substitution…” (p. 44).
The omission of tax rates from many studies was something of a surprise. However, in
response to a call for papers for a workshop on studies of FDI based on microdata, we received
many proposals for papers dealing with the influence of tax rates, including proposals dealing
with European FDI. That seems to suggest that the issue is becoming more important for
European countries.
Despite my belief that microdata are the road to progress in understanding FDI, there are
some general issues that I think should be kept in mind.
One issue in studies comparing domestically-owned and foreign-owned plants or firms is
whether the differences that are observed are the consequence of foreign ownership, with its
accompanying superior technology and efficiency, or are only the result of differences in the size

20

of plants, their use of intermediate inputs, their dependence on imported intermediate inputs,
their capital intensity, or other measurable differences in their structure. If all these differences
are taken into account, it is presumably possible to know, provided that there is substantial
overlap between domestic and foreign plants in their characteristics, and that they are producing
the same goods or services, of the same quality, whether foreign- owned and domesticallyowned plants produce on different production functions.
My impression is that usually these conditions are not met. Industrial data rarely are
detailed enough to permit comparisons of quality, domestically-owned plants are usually much
smaller on average than foreign-owned plants (that is true in the United States as it is in
developing countries), inputs of intermediate products are often proprietary and not available to
domestically-owned firms, and the technology needed to operate a large plant may be
unavailable to a domestic producer. My conclusion is that we should not confine our interest to
differences between foreign-owned and domestically-owned plants that can be unequivocally
attributed to foreignness. We should study also differences that are associated with foreign
ownership but cannot be attributed unequivocally to that foreign origin.
Another general problem is how to draw conclusions about the economy as a whole from
microdata. For example, a finding that a rise in wages at home leads multinationals to substitute
X jobs in its foreign affiliates for jobs at home tells us what will happen to that firm’s
employment at home but does not tell us what the effect on aggregate home employment will be,
if any, or whether the effect will be on home wages or the distribution of employment among
firms or the composition of home production. It is difficult to go from the effects on the firm,
which are in the microdata set, to broader impacts that may be outside the data. When a state or
locality in the United States offers incentives to a large new foreign manufacturing operation, it

21

may be hoping for, and/or fearing, impacts on agriculture and retail trade, as farm and retail
workers shift to better paying manufacturing jobs, and on wages in these industries as well as in
manufacturing. There may also be impacts on local and state government budgets, as subsidy
costs compete with traditional government activities, and changes in the population and labor
force in response to the industrial changes. It is a challenge to keep in mind, and preferably to
explore, these broader consequences of industrial change.

22

References
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek (2006), “How Does
Foreign Direct Investment Promote Economic Growth? Exploring the Effects of
Financial Markets on Linkages,” NBER Working Paper 12522, Cambridge MA,
September.
Altomante, Carlo, and Enrico Pennings (2005), “Testing for Marginal Spillovers from Foreign
Direct Investment,” Amsterdam and Rotterdam, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper TI
2005-101/4
Balasubramanyan, V.N., M. Salisu, and David Sapsford (1996), Foreign Direct Investment and
Growth in EP and IS Countries,” Economic Journal, Vol. 106, pp. 92-105.
Becker, Sascha O. and Marc-Andreas Mündler (2006), “Margins of Multinational Labor
Substitution,” Frankfurt am Main, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, Series 1:
Economic Studies No. 24/2006.
Bellak, Christian, and Markus Leibrecht (2005), “Do low corporate tax rates attract FDI?
Evidence from Eight Central and East European Countries,” Nottingham, Leverhulme
Centre Research Paper 2005/43.
Bhagwati, Jagdish N, (1978), Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes.
Special Conference Series on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development, Vol.
11, Cambridge, MA, Ballinger.
Borrmann, Christine, Rolf Jungnickel, and Dietmar Keller (2005), “What gravity models can tell
us about the position of German FDI in Central and Eastern Europe,” Hamburg, HHWA
Discussion Paper 328.

23

Brown, J. David, John S. Earle, and Ámos Teledgy (2006), “Does Privatization Hurt Workers?
Lessons from Comprehensive Manufacturing Panel Data in Hungary, Romania, Russia,
and Ukraine,” Kalamazoo, MI, Upjohn Institute Staff Working Paper 05-125, February.
Buch, Claudia M., and Jörn Kleinert (2006), Who Goes East? The Impact of Enlargement on the
Patterns of German FDI,” Tübingen, Institute für Angewandte Wirtschaftsforschung,
IAW-Diskussionspapiere 24.
Campos, Nauro F., and Yuko Kinoshita (2002), “Foreign Direct Investment as Technology
Transferred: Some Panel Evidence from the Transition Economies,” The Manchester
School, Vol. 70, No. 3, June, pp. 398-419.
Carkovic, Maria, and Ross Levine, ”Does Foreign Direct Investment Accelerate Economic
Growth?” in Theodore H. Moran, Edward M. Graham, and Magnus Blomström, Does
Foreign Direct Investment Promote Development?, Washington, D.C., Institute for
International Economics, April, pp.195-220.
Damijan, Joze P., Mark Knell, Boris Majcen, and Matija Rojec (2003), “Technology Transfer
through FDI in Tpp-10 Transition Countries: How Important are Direct Effects,
Horizontal and Vertical Spillovers?’ William Davidson Working Paper Number 549, Ann
Arbor, MI., February.
Deutsche Bundesbank (1997), Kapitalverflechtung auf den Ausland, Statistische
Sonderveröffentlichung 10, May.
__________________ (2006), Kapitalverflechtung mit dem Ausland, , Statistische
Sonderveröffentlichung 10, April.
Hannula, Helena, and Katrin Tamm (2002), “Restructuring and Efficiency in the Estonian
Manufacturing Industry: The Role of Foreign Ownership,” Tartu, Tartu University Press.

24

International Monetary Fund (IMF) (1993), Balance of Payments Manual, Fifth Edition, 1993,
Washington, DC, International Monetary Fund.
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska, (2004), “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity
of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 3, June, pp. 605-627.
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska, and Mariana Spatareanu, (2003), “To Share or Not To Share: Does
Local Participation Matter for Spillovers from Foreign Direct Investment?” Development
Economics Research GroupResearch, The World Bank, July.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi (2006), “Governance Matters V:
Aggregate and Individual Governance Indicators for 1996-2005,” Washington, DC, The
World Bank, September.
Kinoshita, Yuko, and Nauro F. Campos (2003), “Why Does FDI Go Where IT Goes? New
Evidence from the Transition Economies,” Ann Arbor, MI, William Davidson Institute
Working Paper Number 573, June.
Koncz, Jennifer L. and Daniel R. Yorgason (2005), “Direct Investment Positions for 2004:
Country and Industry Detail,” Survey of Current Business, Vol. 85, No. 7, July.
Kosová, Renáta (2005), “Do Foreign Firms Crowd Out Domestic Firms? Evidence from the
Czech Republic,” Washington, D.C., The George Washington University.
Lipsey, Robert E. (2000), “Inward FDI and Economic Growth in Developing Countries,”
Transnational Corporations, Vol. 9, No. 1, Geneva, UNCTAD, April, pp. 67-96..
______________ ((2003), “Foreign Direct Investment, Growth, and Competitiveness in
Developing Countries,” in Peter K. Cornelius, Editor, The Global Competitiveness
Report 2002-2003, New York and Oxford, Oxford University Press, pp. 295-305.

25

______________ (2004), “Home- and Host-Country Effects of Foreign Direct Investment,” in
Robert E. Baldwin and L Alan Winters, Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the
Economics, Chicago and London, University of Chicago Press, pp. 333-379.
Lipsey, Robert E., and Fredrik Sjöholm (2005), “The Impact of Inward FDI on Host Countries:
Why Such Different Answers?” in Moran, Graham, and Blomström, Editors (2005).
Mataloni, Raymond J., Jr. (2005), “U.S. Multinational Companies: Operations in 2003,” Survey
of Current Business, Vol. 85, No. 7, July, pp. 9-29.
Melitz, Marc J., “Comment,” in Moran, Graham, and Blomström (2005), pp.273-277.
Moran, Theodore H.(2005), “How Does FDI Affect Host Country Development? Using Industry
Case Studies to Make Reliable Generalizations,” in Moran, Graham, and Blomström
(2005), pp. 281-313.
Moran, Theodore H., Edward M. Graham, and Magnus Blomström, Editors (2005), Does Direct
Investment Promote Development? Washington, D.C., Institute for International
Economics.
UNCTAD (2003), World Investment Report, 2003, United Nations, New York and Geneva
________ (2004), World Investment Report, 2004, United Nations, New York and Geneva..
________(2006), World Investment Report, 2006, United Nations, New York and Geneva.
Wolff, Guntram B. (2006), “Foreign direct investment in the enlarged EU: do taxes matter and to
what extent?” Frankfurt am Main, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, Series 1,
Economic Studies No. 13/2006.

26

