                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              IMMIGRATION AND THE SURVIVAL OF SOCIAL SECURITY:
                        A POLITICAL ECONOMY MODEL

                                            Edith Sand
                                            Assaf Razin

                                       Working Paper 12800
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w12800


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2006




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2006 by Edith Sand and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Immigration and the Survival of Social Security: A Political Economy Model
Edith Sand and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 12800
December 2006
JEL No. F22,H55

                                             ABSTRACT

In the political debate people express the idea that immigrants are good because they can help pay
for the old. The paper explores this idea in a dynamic political-economy setup. For this purpose we
develop an OLG political economy model of social security and migration. We characterize sub-game
perfect Markov equilibria where immigration policy and pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social security system
are jointly determined through a majority voting process. The main feature of the model is that immigrants
are desirable for the sustainability of the social security system because the political system is able
to manipulate the ratio of old to young and thereby the coalition which supports future high social
security benefits. We demonstrate that the older is the native born population the more likely is that
the immigration policy is liberalized and the social security system survives.

Edith Sand
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978,
ISRAEL
edit@post.tau.ac.il

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
Economic analysis of the inter-generational and intra-generational aspects of
the sustainability of social security has had a revival of sorts in recent time.
The analytical underpinnings of a political-economy equilibrium model in which
migration and taxes interact focusing on the inter-generational aspect of social
security, is yet to be worked out.
    The net present value of costs and benefits from a pay-as-you-go social se-
curity are negative for the young people and positive for the elderly, in any
pay-as-you-go social security system. If people all vote their economic interest,
there will be a pivotal age such those who are younger, will favor smaller social
security benefits and those who are older will favor larger benefits. Browning
(1975) points out that if a single once-and-for-all election were held to deter-
mine the level of social security, then a coalition of persons of median age and
higher would select an inadequate pension plan that benefits the current elderly
at the expense of all future generations. The issue of social security levels that
is frequently visited by voters, is however less clear. Cooley and Soares [1999]
and Boldrin and Rustichini [2] study the interaction between capital accumula-
tion and social security in general equilibrium models of a closed economy with
constant population growth rates where levels of social security payments are
determined periodically by majority voting. Prescott and Rios-Rull (2000) ar-
gue that a necessary feature for equilibrium is that beliefs about the behavior of
other individuals (current and future) are rational. In stationary OLG environ-
ments this implies that any future generation in the same situation as the initial
generation must do as well as the initial generation did in that situation. They
conclude that the existing equilibrium concepts in the literature do not satisfy
this condition. They then propose an alternative equilibrium concept, organi-
zational equilibrium, that satisfies this condition. They show that equilibrium
exists, it is unique, and it improves over autarky without achieving optimality.
Moreover, the equilibrium can be readily found by solving a maximization pro-
gram. Razin, Sadka and Swagell (2001, 2002b) develop an OLG model where
the extent of taxation and redistribution policy is generally determined as a
political-economy equilibrium by a balance between those who gain from higher
taxes/transfers and those who lose. In a stylized model of migration and hu-
man capital formation, they show — somewhat against the conventional wisdom —
that low-skill immigration may lead to a lower tax burden and less redistribution
than would be the case with no immigration, even though migrants (naturally)
join the pro-tax/transfer coalition. The model captures two conflicting effects
of migration on taxation and redistribution. On the one hand, migrants who
are net beneficiaries of the welfare state will join forces with the low income


                                        2
native-born voters in favor of higher taxes and transfers. On the other hand,
redistribution becomes more costly to the native-born as the migrants share the
redistribution benefits with them. But the governments transfers, in this model,
accrued uniformly to young and old. Thus the intra-generational transfer is the
trigger for the so-called fiscal leakage from the median voter to the net benefi-
ciaries of the welfare system, but not the inter-generational transfer as in a pure
social security model.
    ‘A slower growth of the population implies a smaller labor force. It also
slower the growth of national saving rate, because the proportion of the pop-
ulation of individuals who are dissavers rises relative to the proportion of the
population of individuals who are savers. If a low birth rate leads to slow popula-
tion growth, it is easy to see that an exogenous increase in immigration of young
will reduce the average age of the population and increase population growth.
Immigration does not provide in itself a full-fledged long-term solution to falling
birth rates and an ageing population, but it is one of the available tools within
a broader policy mix. Feldstein (2006) states:"...the common prescription of
increased immigration would do little to reduce the future fiscal burden" of cur-
rent tax-financed systems of social pensions. Instead of considering migration
as determined at the source, and workers entering the "open doors to heaven"
(Borjas 1999), the question who is allowed into a country depends on active im-
migration policy on part of the receiving countries. Countries more often than
not enact quotas, point systems, and the like, in order to select those immigrants
whom they deem most desirable. This view presupposes that the country under
consideration is attractive for potential immigrants. In the US immigration de-
bate the vast majority of citizens favor much tougher immigration rules. This
could be due to congestion in public goods and/or dislike of foreigners (mostly
mexicans). However, immigration survives unchecked because henceforth it has
not been a salient issue in elections and there is a large business lobby keeping
it in place. Thus, immigration is an endogenous policy variable in the general
equilibrium-political economy system, as much as the level of social security it-
self. When the population ages, the median voter is likely to be more favorable
to immigration. At the same time immigration can bring out political economic
forces that would affect the size of the pay-as-you-go social security system.
    The main purpose of the present paper is to highlight the interactions be-
tween migration policy and social security system, in a political economy setup.
To focus on the pure intergenerational aspects of the social security sustainabil-
ity issue we completely abstract from intra-generational income transfers. There
is a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social security system, which employs payroll taxes


                                        3
(at a flat rate) on a representative working young in order to finance a uniform
benefit to the aged population. We are able to characterize subgame-perfect
Markov equilibrium paths for different patterns of population growth among
the native-born and the immigrants populations. The tax-migration policy is
endogenously determined by the conventional effect on wages, savings, etc. But
it is also driven by strategic considerations concerning the effect of the cur-
rent tax-migration policy on the next period tax-migration policy. The current
young would like to influence the old-young composition of next period voters
through the current migration policy and taxes. We demonstrate that the older
are the native-born population the more likely is that the immigration policy is
liberalized and that the social security system will survive.
    The model generates different types of equilibrium paths. When the cur-
rent migration policy is the only state variable, the Markov sub-game perfect
equilibrium is characterized by a "demographic switching" strategy, where the
young decisive voter admits a limited number of immigrants, in order to change
the decisive voter’s identity from young to old in the next period. The aim is to
maximize his social security benefits when old in the next period. When next
period capital per (native-born) worker is an additional state variable, there
is another channel of influence of the current period policy variables through
savings. Thus, the young decisive voter can have another possible strategy,
a "demographic steady" strategy, where she admits the maximum amount of
immigrant, and in so doing she renders a majority of young every period. In
this case, both "demographic switching" and "demographic steady" strategies
are incorporated in the same equilibrium creating other possible equilibria. To
understand strategic voting of this kind we begin with a base line model, with
no private saving traded assets, in which next periiod policy variables are influ-
enced only by the current migration policy. The extended model with private
savings and capital accumulation includes also an equilibrium path in which
both the "demographic switching" and "demographic steady" strategies are at
play.
    The main prediction of both the base-line and the extended models is that
immigrants are desirable for the sustainability of the social security system
because the political system is able to manipulate the ratio of old to young and
thereby the coalition for future high social security benefits.
    The paper is organized as follows. We survey the literature background for
our paper in Section 2. Section 3 provides analysis of a base line model, where
there is no private savings, the economy does not accumulate capital, and factor
prices are exogenous. Section 4 extends the base line model to include private


                                        4
saving, capital accumulation and the endogenous determination of the factor
prices. Section 5 considers the effect of aging in the extended model. Section 6
concludes.


2    Literature Background
Standard theory of the determinants of the size of the government in a direct
democracy highlight the relationship between the scope of redistribution, i.e.
the extent of the welfare state, and pre-tax income inequality. Two interpreta-
tions have been suggested to explain this dependence: Lovell (1975) emphasizes
the size of the government as a provider of public goods, while others such as
Meltzer and Richard (1981) emphasize the role of the government in redistrib-
uting income. See Persson and Tabellini (1999) for a survey. As Razin, Sadka
and Swagel (2002a; 2002b) have recently pointed out, a third potential channel
is the leakage of welfare benefits to groups such as immigrants or the elderly.
    The analysis of the inter-generational and intra-generational aspects of the
sustainability of social security, has had a revival of sorts in recent time. There
are few economic explanations to the sustainability of the social security system
in a political economy equilibrium context. Early papers put an emphasis on dy-
namic inefficiency, where social security may improve the welfare if the implicit
rate of return from social security is larger than the real rate of return from
capital accumulation (Samuelson (1958)). Others argue that because the me-
dian voters in future generations, treat their past contributions as a sunk cost,
they must find it in their interest to preserve the system until their retirement
(Browning (1975), Sjoblom (1985)). Another idea is that social security sys-
tems are favorable from intergenerational redistribution motives, either because
of direct within-cohort redistribution reasons (Persson and Tabellini (2000)) or
for intergenerational redistribution reasons due to crowding out effect of social
security schemes on capital accumulation, leading to a reduction of real wages
and increase in the real returns to capital (Boldrin and Rustichini (2000) and
Cooley and Soares (1999)). See also Galasso and Profeta (2002) for a survey.
    The ongoing demographic changes have also far-reaching implications on
PAYG social security systems. From an empirical investigation the effect of
the proportion of elderly people in the population on the size of social security
benefit per retiree turn out not to be significant (Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin
(1999)) or even negative (Razin, Sadka and Swagell (2002a)). Some explanation
has been offered to try and explain this very fact. Cooley and Soares (1999)
and Boldrin and Rustichini (2000) show that an increase in the proportion


                                        5
of elderly in the population raises, on the one hand, the median voter’s age,
and thus increases the size of the system. But on the other hand, an increase
in the proportion of elderly raises the dependency ratio, thereby decreasing
per capita benefits. The overall effect on the per capita pension benefit is
thus ambiguous, since more resources are shared among more retirees. Boldrin
and Rustichini (2000) model PAYG social security systems as the outcome of
majority voting within a OLG model with production. When voting, individuals
make two choices: pay the elderly their pensions or default, which amount
to promise themselves next period. Under general circumstances, there exist
equilibria where pensions are voted into existence and maintained. Bergstrom
and Hartman (2005) estimate the expected present value of benefits and costs to
US voters of each age and sex for a small permanent increase in social security
benefits. They reach the conclusion that as the population ages maintaining
social security will become more expensive but at the same time, the median
age of voters will also rise leading to a majority of selfish voters who favor
maintaining current benefit levels. See also Hassler, Mora, Storesletten and
Zilliboti (2003).
    From the point of view of the sustainability of PAYG social security, immi-
gration may come to the rescue of PAYG social security systems. Razin and
Sadka (1999, 2004) make an argument that highlights the importance of mi-
gration in enlarging the labor force in OLG models with pay-as-you-go fiscal
system, for current and future generations of native-born. They consider an
overlapping-generations model, where each generation lives for two periods. In
each period a new generation with a continuum of individuals is born. Each
individual possesses a one unit of labor-schooling time endowment in the first
period, when young. There is a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) pension system, which
employs payroll taxes (at a flat rate ) on the working young in order to finance
a uniform benefit to the aged. in an infinite-horizon, overlapping generations
economy, this net burden is perfectly consistent with a net gain to the native-
born population. The additional obligation of the fiscal system to pay pension
benefits to the incoming migrants, when they retire, could be shifted forward,
in effect, indefinitely. If, hypothetically, the world would come to a stop at a
certain point of time in the future, the young generation at that point would
bear the deferred cost of the present migration. But in an ever-lasting economy,
the migrants, by supplying work and helping the financing the pension benefit
of period zero to native-born retirees, are a boon to the host country popula-
tion: old, young, and future generations. Storesletten (2000) and Lee and Miller
(2000) calibrate a general equilibrium overlapping generations model to investi-


                                       6
gates whether a reform of immigration policies could resolve the fiscal problems
associated with the aging. Storesletten find that selective immigration policies,
involving increased inflow of working-age high and medium-skilled immigrants,
can remove the need for a future fiscal reform. Lee and Miller on the other hand
reach the conclusion that since immigrants have lower education and higher fer-
tility rates than that of the native-born, a higher amount of immigrant admitted
into the economy will east temporarily the projected fiscal burden of retiring
baby boomers in few decades although its overall fiscal consequences would be
quite small. Feldstein (2006) analyses ways in which governments can respond
to the budget problems implied by aging. In particular, the paper address the
question whether the use of increased immigration can offset the slow growth of
capital or the decline in the native labor force which reduces the tax base. He
argues that the common prescription of increased immigration would do little to
reduce the future fiscal burden, and that the only alternative is to shift from a
pure tax-financed system to a mixed system that supplements the tax financed
benefits with benefits based on increased saving financial investment.
     Despite the strong implications of immigration policy and a lively political
debate, surprisingly few studies addressed the political economy of immigration
policy. The first paper which studied immigration policy in a political economy
setup was the paper by Benhabib (1997). He examines the determination of im-
migration policies that impose capital and skill (human capital) requirements on
heterogeneous immigrants through majority voting process. Dolmas and Huff-
man (2004) and Ortega (2005) add another angle to the political debate and
model the joint decisions over immigration quotas and redistributive tax policy.
Both address the voting process in a dynamic set-up, where the native-born
voters’ preferences over immigration are influenced by the prospect that immi-
grants will be voting over future tax policy. The paper of Dolmas and Huffman
refers to the decisions over immigration quotas and redistributive tax policy
in subsequent three periods model with different degree of international capital
mobility. The latter paper considers a infinite horizon general equilibrium model
of immigration and redistribution policies, with a heterogeneously skilled pop-
ulation who chooses an immigration policy by majority vote while anticipating
that immigration affects the skill premium and the skill composition of the elec-
torate. Razin, Sadka and Swagell (2002b) show in a stylized model of migration
and human capital formation that low-skill immigration may lead to a lower
tax burden and less redistribution than would be the case with no immigration,
even though migrants (naturally) join the pro-tax/transfer coalition. This is due
to two conflicting effects of migration on taxation and redistribution. On the


                                       7
one hand, migrants who are net beneficiaries of the welfare state will join forces
with the low income native-born voters in favor of higher taxes and transfers.
On the other hand, redistribution becomes more costly to the native-born as
the migrants share the redistribution benefits with them. These models clearly
dials with intra-generational transfer, and not the inter-generational transfer as
in a pure social security model.


3     A Base Line Model
The economy is populated by overlapping generations of identical individuals.
Individuals live for two periods. When young, the representative individual
works and makes labor-leisure. Underdeveloped capital markets do not allow
any private savings. Social security is therefore the only means of intertemporal
transfers. When old, the individual retires, and receives social security benefits.
The tax-transfer system is "pay as you go" where in every period the government
levies a flat tax on the young’s wage income, which fully finances the social
security benefits paid to the old. Immigrants enter the economy when young,
and gain the right to vote only in the next period, when old. They have the same
preferences as those of the native-born, except from having a higher population
growth rate. Immigrants are fully integrated into the social security system
upon arrival into the country. Offsprings of immigrants are like native-born in
all respects (in particular, they have the same rate of population growth).
    We assume that the utility of the representative young individual is loga-
rithmic 1 , given by:

                                                              ltΨ+1
            U y (wt , τ t , bt+1 ) = Log[wt lt (1 − τ t ) −         ] + βLog[bt+1 ]    (1)
                                                              Ψ+1
                                         U o (bt ) = bt                                (2)

where U y and U o are the utility functions of young and old individuals, β ∈ [0, 1]
is the discount factor, and Ψ > 0 a disutilty parameter (also equals to the labor
supply elasticity with respect to the wage rate). The transfer payments to the
old at period t, bt , are financed by collecting a flat income tax rate, τ t ∈ [0, 1],
from the young individual’s wage income at the same period, wt lt , where lt
denotes the hours worked.
    Labor is a single input in the production of a homogenous final good. The
production function is linear:
  1 Note that this type of utility function implies that there are no income effects on the

demand for leisure (Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988)).


                                                8
                                         Yt = Nt                                     (3)

where Yt and Nt are period t output and labor supply, respectively. Com-
petitive equilibrium wage rate, equals to the marginal productivity of labor, is
constant and normalized to unity. A worker can be either native-born or immi-
grant, perfectly substitutable, and with equal productivities. The immigration
quotas is expressed as a certain percentage of the number of young individuals
in the native-born population, γ ∈ [0, 1] 2 . Labor supply is given by:

                                   Nt = Lt lt (1 + γ t )                             (4)

where Lt is the number of young individuals in the native-born population (old
people do not work).
    Immigrants have the same preferences as the native-born population, but
different population growth rates. We assume that the native-born population
has a lower population growth rate, n ∈ [−1, 1], than that of the immigrant
population, m ∈ [−1, 1], so that, n < m. We also assume that the immigrant’s
descendants are completely integrated into the economy and therefore have the
same population growth rate as the native-born population does. The number
of young native-born individuals at period t can be written as follows,

                        Lt = Lt−1 (1 + n) + γ t−1 Lt−1 (1 + m)                       (5)

   In addition, immigrants are also assumed to contribute to, or benefit from,
the social security system in the same way as the native-born. Because the social
security system redistributes income from the young to the old, the balanced
government budget constraint implies:

                   bt+1 Lt (1 + γ t ) = τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 Lt+1 (1 + γ t+1 )            (6)

Re-arranging the expression yields:

                        τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 [(1 + n) + γ t (1 + m)](1 + γ t+1 )
               bt+1 =                                                                (7)
                                             (1 + γ t )
Labor-leisure decisions of young individuals are derived, as usual, from utility
maximization, taking the prices and policy choices as given:

                                    ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )                              (8)
  2A  ceiling for γ is set equal to one, which means that the number of immigrants cannot
surpass the number of native born.


                                             9
Substituting for bt , bt+1 and lt in equations (7) and (8) into equation (1), the
indirect utility functions of the young individual can be written as:


                                         Ψ
V y (wt , τ t , τ t+1 , wt+1 ) = Log[         wt lt (1 − τ t )] +                      (9)
                                      Ψ+1
                                        τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 [1 + n + γ t (1 + m)](1 + γ t+1 )
                                  βLog[                                                   ]
                                                                (1 + γ t )

such that,

                                      ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )                             (10)
                                   Ψ
                                  lt+1 = wt+1 (1 − τ t+1 )                            (11)

Substituting for bt in equations (7) into equation (2), yields the indirect utility
functions of the old individual:

                               τ t wt lt [(1 + n) + γ t−1 (1 + m)](1 + γ t )
                 V o (bt ) =                                                          (12)
                                                 (1 + γ t−1 )
    Note that the old individual prefers that the immigration quotas will be as
large as possible, because more immigration would raise the total amount of tax
collected, and thus the social security benefits she receives. The old preferable
tax rate is the "Laffer point" tax rate, where the tax revenues, and therefore
the social security benefits, are maximized. The tax rate at that point is equal
     Ψ
to Ψ+1  .
    The young individual prefers naturally that the current tax rate is as low as
possible, namely zero. Concerning immigration quotas, the young preferences
are ambiguous. On one hand, a larger quotas increases next period social se-
curity benefits per old individual. This is due to the fact that larger quotas
increases the number of young in the next generation (some of these are off-
spring of the current immigrants) more than it increases the number of the old
(who happen to be the current young) in the next period. This is due to the
assumption that immigrants have a higher population growth rate than that of
the native-born (m > n). Thus, the number of next period old recipients of
social security increases but the total sum of next period social security benefits
increases even more. This means that next period social security benefits per
old individual (bt+1 ) are higher the larger is the immigration quotas.
    On the other hand, larger immigration quotas also influence the identity of
next period decisive voter. A higher current immigration quota would raise the
ratio of next period old to young voters. This result from the assumption that


                                              10
immigrants gain the right to vote in the second period of their life, when old.
A larger current immigration quotas increases the number of next period young
voters by more than the number of next period old voters (since we assumed
m > n). Thus, the current young voter which will be old in the next period,
will favor the largest possible quotas. This changes next period decisive voter’s
identity from young to old in the next period in order to lead to a majority of
old in the next period.

3.0.1   A Political-Economic Equilibrium

We employ a subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium of perfect foresight, as our
equilibrium concept (see Krusell and Rios-Rull (1996)):

Definition 1 A subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium is defined as a vector of
policy decision rules, Ψ = (T, G), where T : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1], is the taxation
policy rule, T (γ t−1 ), and G : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1], is the immigration quotas policy
rule, G(γ t−1 ), such that the following functional equation holds:
         t−1 ) = arg maxπt V i (γ t−1 , π t , πt+1 ) subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t ), where
    1. Ψ(γ
πt = (τ t , γ t ) is defined as the vector of policy platform, and V i is the indirect
utility of the current decisive voter.
    2. The fixed-point condition requires that if next period policy outcome is
derived by the vector of policy decision rules- Ψ, the maximization of the indi-
rect utility of the current decisive voter will reproduce the same law of motion,
 t−1 ) = Ψ(γ t−1 ).
Ψ(γ

    The subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium notion states that the expected
policy function, which depends on the current state variables , must be self-
fulfilling. The policy variables which are the tax rate, τ t , and the immigration
quotas, γ t , have to maximize the decisive voter’s indirect utility function, while
taking into account that next period decision rules depend on the state variable
i.e. the current immigration quotas.
    The subgame-perfect Markov equilibrium is characterized by a "demographic
switching" strategy. The assumption is that immigrants enter the country while
young and gain the right to vote only in the next period when they are old, voters
take into account the effect of admitting a certain number of immigrants on the
composition of voters and their voting preferences in the next period. Moreover,
when the number of young exceed the number of old in the population, the young
decisive voter admits a limited number of immigrants, in order to change the
decisive voter’s identity from young to old in the next period and maximize the
next period benefits she receives.

                                          11
    The equilibrium path depends on the native-born and immigrant’s popula-
tion growth rates. If the population growth rates of the native-born and immi-
grants are both positive, there is a steady state with no taxation/social security
benefits. If alternatively, the sum of the population growth rates is negative,
there is also a steady state, but with a certain level of taxation/social security
benefits (the "Laffer point" tax rate) and full openness to immigration. Other-
wise, the sum of the population growth rates can be positive and the native-born
population’s population growth rate negative. In this case, there is a "demo-
graphic switching" equilibrium path where some quotas on immigration always
prevails while there is an alternate period by period taxation/social security pol-
icy, depending on the identity of the decisive voter. In a given period there is a
certain amount of taxation/social security benefits (the "Laffer point" tax rate)
and a maximum migration quota, while in the next there is no taxation/social
security benefits and a more restrictive policy towards immigration.
    . Since immigrants gain the right to vote only in the second period of their
life in the host economy, the next period ratio of old to young voters in the
native-born population, denoted by ut+1 , is given by:

                                           (1 + γ t )
                            ut+1 =                                            (13)
                                     (1 + n) + γ t (1 + m)
Assuming that in case of a tie the old will be the decisive, the condition, ut+1 <
1, assures a majority of young individuals in the next period, while the condition,
ut+1 ≥ 1, assures a majority of old individuals. Therefore, the state variable of
the economy, affects the next period ratio of young to old voters, ut+1 , which
sets the profile of the next period decisive voter.
    The Markov Perfect political equilibrium of the baseline model and its pos-
sible equilibrium paths, which depend on the population growth rates of the
native-born and immigrant populations, can be formalized as follows:

Proposition 2 There exists an equilibrium with the following feature :
                        
                            τt = 0       if      ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
           T (γ t−1 ) =          Ψ
                                                                              (14)
                          τ t = Ψ+1  otherwise
                            
                                       n
                                γt = − m       if    ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
              G(γ t−1 ) =                                                     (15)
                                 γt = 1    otherwise
where γ t is restricted to be between zero and one. Under the assumption that
the native-born population growth rate is lower than that of the immigrant’s,
there are three possible equilibrium paths, depending on the population growth


                                           12
   τ t-tax rate
    1
   τ*


                                    ut - ratio of old to young voters
       0        ut = 1          1


                                    Figure 1:

   γ t -openness rate
   1

   γ*


                                     ut - ratio of old to young voters
       0        ut = 1          1


                                    Figure 2:


rates of the native-born and immigrant population, as follows: 1. if n > 0,
there is no taxation/social security benefits; 2. if m + n < 0, tmigration quota
is set at its maximum, and there is a positive level of taxation/social security
benefits (the "Laffer point" tax rate). 3. if n < 0 and m + n > 0, there is
a "cycling" equilibrium path, where some positive level of immigration always
prevails while there is an alternate taxation/social security policy; in periods
where the decisive voter is old, the economy is fully opened to immigration and
there is a positive level of taxation (the "Laffer point" tax rate); whereas in
periods where the current decisive voter is young, there is no taxation/social
security benefits and a more restrictive policy towards immigration.

   The proposition is proved in the appendix.
   The interpretation of the proposition is as follows.

                                       13
    If the old-young ratio is smaller than one (ut < 1), the decisive voter in the
current period is a young voter. The young decisive favors naturally a zero tax
rate but iot has two conflicting considerations regarding the desired immigration
quotas. One one hand, if there is full openness towards immigration: there will
be more young working people in period t + 1, and therefore, the tax revenue
that which will be collected from a larger work force and needed to support
retirement benefits, will increase. The young decisive voter in period t, who
will be old in period t + 1, would benefit from the more generous social security
benefits. On the other hand, if the immigration policy is excessively large, the
decisive voter in period t + 1 will be a young voter. This voter will want to see
the tax rate in period t + 1 reduced to zero; hence no social security benefits
whatsoever in period t + 1. There is a threshold level of immigration quotas,
γ t = −n/m, which is exactly the level of the immigration policy that would
equate the number of old and the number of young in period t + 1. Thus, by
choosing the immigration quotas at this level, the decisive voter in period t would
finely balance the two conflicting forces on period t + 1 social security benefits,
so as to maximize these benefits. Observe that this young voter’s preferable
immigration quotas is chosen strategically, aimed to influence the identity of the
decisive voter in the next period from young voter to old.
    If the old-young ratio is higher or equal to one (ut ≥ 1), the decisive voter in
the next period is an old voter. This voter will naturally vote for the most liberal
immigration policy possiblem, because only the current social security benefits
matter to this voter. Ii ut ≥ 1 the immigration quotas is therefore equals to
its maximum level (i.e., one). Also the tax revenue is set at the "Laffer point",
                                  Ψ
where the tax rate is equal to Ψ+1   . Because this way the current social security
benefits are maximized.
    There are three possible equilibrium paths depending on the population
growth rates of the native-born and immigrant populations.
    The first equilibrium path is the one where the population growth rate of
the native-born and theimmigrant growth rate are both positive; that is, n,
m > 0. In this case, the level of social security benefits is zero. This is due to
the fact that for every level of immigration, the number of next period young
voters exceeds the number of next period old voters. Therefore, the decisive
voter in the current and all the following periods is the young voter, and her
preferences are for zero labor tax. The young voter is indifferent concerning the
level of immigration because it has no influence on her current income, nor on
the next period decisive voter’s identity. The resulting equilibrium path is one
in which there is a majority of young voters, and the social security system is


                                        14
dismanteled, for ever.
    If the sum of the native-born and immigrant population growth rates is
negative, m + n < 0, the number of next period old voters always exceeds
the number of next period young voters. Thus, along the equilibrium path a
majority of old will always prevail, which validates a permanent existence for
the social security system and a maximum flow of immigrants. The current
decisive voter is using the immigration quota as a means to affect the identity
of the next period decisive voter through the mix of old and young voters in the
next period. This is the second equilibrium type.
    The third equilibrium type obtains if the native-born and immigrant pop-
ulations growth rates are: n < 0, and m + n > 0 . This equilibrium path is
characterized by an alternate taxation/social security policy overtwo consecu-
tive periods. Some positive level of immigration always prevails. This is due
to a "demographic switching" strategy of the current and next period young
voters.The reason is that when there is a majority of old, their preferable immi-
gration quotas is the at the maximum and the tax rate is at the "Laffer point".
Because m + n > 0 and the old decisive voter allows as much as possible im-
migrants, the number of next period young voters exceed the number of next
period old voters. Thus, in the next period the decisive voter must be the young.
This voter opts for a zero tax rate, and does vote strategically on immigration
levels. This means setting immigration at the threshold level , γ t = −n/m. The
identity of the next period decisive voter will change from young to old. (A pos-
siblity of such demographic changes exists because the native-born population
growth rate is negative while the immigrant population growth rate is positive.
) This creates a cycling effect of an alternate taxation/social security policy,
with a certain level of immigration, depending on the identity of the decisive
voter.


4    The Extended Model: Private Saving, Capital
     Accumulation and Endogenous Factor Prices
The base line model assumes zero private savings; hence no capital accummu-
lation ate all. In this section, we intruduce private saving. This means that
intertemporal transfers are both through private savings and through the social
security system. The aggregate savings of the current young population gener-
ates next period aggregate capital. The latter is used as a factor of production,
along with the labor input in the next period. The production function exhibits



                                       15
constant return to scale. Another feature of the extended model is the wage
rate, as well as the rate of interest, are endogenously determined along the equi-
librium path. Social security benefits are financed, as before, by a payroll tax
in a pay-as-you-go system.
    The utility of the representative young individual, as before, is logarithmic.


                                                           ltΨ+1
U y (wt , τ t , st , rt+1 , bt+1 ) = Log(wt lt (1−τ t )−st −     )+βLog(bt+1 +(1+rt+1 )st )
                                                          Ψ+1
                                                                                    (16)
                                 U o (bt ) = bt + (1 + rt )st−1                     (17)

where rt is the interest rate, and st is the savings of the young at period t.
   The production function is a Cobb-Douglas production function which is
assumed to use both labor and capital as its factors of production:

                                         Yt = Nt1−a Ktα                              (18)

where Kt is the aggregate amount of capital and Nt is defined as in the previ-
ous section. The wage rate and interest rate are determined by the marginal
productivity conditions (capital is assumed to depreciate completely at the end
of the period):

                               wt = (1 − a)(1 + γ t )−a lt−a ktα                     (19)

                              rt = α(1 + γ t )1−a lt1−a ktα−1 − 1                    (20)

where kt is capital per (native-born) worker. The balanced government budget
constraint is derived as in the previous section:

                          τ t+1 wt+1 lt+1 [(1 + n) + γ t (1 + m)](1 + γ t+1 )
                 bt+1 =                                                              (21)
                                               (1 + γ t )
   The saving-consumption decision of young individuals are made by maxi-
mizing their utility while taking the prices and policy choices as given, and the
labor-leisure decision is given as in the previous section:
                                                                   
                          1         Ψ                        bt+1
                  st =          β       wt lt (1 − τ t ) −                   (22)
                       1+β        Ψ+1                      1 + rt+1


                                        ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )                          (23)

The market clearing condition requires that the net domestic saving generates
net domestic investment:


                                                16
                                                                    
                                              1 + n + γ t (1 + m)
                              st = kt+1                                                   (24)
                                                   (1 + γ t )
Solving for bt+1 from equations (21) and (22), and substituting bt+1 in equations
(14) , the utility indirect function of the young can be written as follows:
                                                                                      
                                               1  Ψ
    V y (wt , τ t , rt+1 , τ t+1 ) = Log 1+β     Ψ+1 w t lt (1 − τ t )(1 + βf (τ t+1 ))
                                                                                       (25a)
                    β   Ψ
    +βLog 1+β                w
                       Ψ+1 t t  l (1 − τ t )(1 + βf(τ t+1 ))(1 + r t+1 )

                      1−α 1
                       α 1+β τ t+1
where f(τ t+1 ) =    1− 1−α 1          , such that,
                         α1+β τ t+1


                          β   Ψ (1 + γ t )wt lt (1 − τ t )(1 − f (τ t+1 ))
               kt+1 =                                                                     (26)
                         1+β Ψ+1          1 + n + γ t (1 + m)

                                        ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )                               (27)
                                     Ψ
                                    lt+1 = wt+1 (1 − τ t+1 )                              (28)

and substituting bt from equation (21) and kt from equation (24), in equations
(17), the utility indirect function of the old can be written as follows:

                                                τ t wt lt [(1+n)+γ t−1 (1+m)](1+γ t )
              V o (γ t−1 , kt , wt , rt , τ t ) =              (1+γ t−1 )             +
                                                                                        (29)
                               1+n+γ t−1 (1+m)
              (1 + rt )kt          (1+γ        )
                                       t−1

such that,

                                        ltΨ = wt (1 − τ t )                               (30)

    As in the previous analysis, the old individual favors a positive level of tax
                                 Ψ
rate at a "Laffer Point" (τ ∗ = Ψ+1 ), and the largest immigration quotas.
    The preferences of the young, which will be discussed in the next section,
differ from the baseline model as they are influenced by capital accumulation
and endogenous factor prices effects.

4.0.2    Political-Economic Equilibrium Paths

The Markov sub-game Perfect equilibrium definition for the extended model is
as follows:

Definition 3 A Markov perfect political equilibrium is defined as a vector of
policy decision rules, Ψ = (T, G), and private decision rule, S, where T :
[0, 1] −→ [0, 1], is the tax policy rule, τ t = T (γ t−1 , kt ), and G : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1],


                                                 17
is the immigration policy rule, γ t = G(γ t−1 , kt ), and S : [0, ∞)− > [0, ∞), is
the saving decision rule, kt+1 = S(πt , kt ), such that the following functional
equations hold:
         t−1 , kt ) = arg maxπt V i (γ t−1 , πt , πt+1 ) subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t , S(πt , kt )).
    1. Ψ(γ
                      β    Ψ (1+γ t )wt lt (1−τ t )(1−f (τ t+1 ))
    2. S(πt , kt ) = 1+β Ψ+1          1+n+γ t (1+m)               , with τ t+1 = T (γ t , S(π t , kt )).
    3. The fixed-point condition requires that if next period policy outcome is
derived by the vector of policy decision rules- Ψ, the maximization of the indirect
utility of the current decisive voter subject to the law of motion of the capital
stock, will reproduce the same law of motion, Ψ(γ          t−1 , kt ) = Ψ(γ t−1 , kt ), as in
1.

    Policy variables have to maximize the decisive voter’s indirect utility func-
tion, while taking into account the law of motion of capital and the fact that
next period decision rules depend on the state variables i.e. the current period
immigration quotas and next period capital per (native-born) worker; as for
the definition of equilibrium in the base line model. Equilibrium paths depend
on the native-born and immigrant population growth rates (as in the baseline
model) and on the initial stock of capital per (native-born) worker.
    There are three types of equilibrium paths.
    The first type, is characterized by a "demographic switching" strategy, sim-
ilarly to the base-line model,. When the decisive voter is young, she admits a
finely tuned number of immigrants in order to change the decisive voter’s iden-
tity from young to old in the next period; similarly to the base-line model, The
additonal effect caused by the existence of savings and the endogenety of factor
price determination, is only quantitative.
    The two other equilibria types are however different from the base-line model.
    The additional state variable, the stock of capital per (native-born) worker,
plays now a crucial role. Rational voters take into account that the current
policy variables can affect next period policy variables not only through the
composition of old to young voters, but also through the effect on next period
capital per (native-born) worker; the additional state variable. There is another
possible strategy of the young, where the decisive voter chooses to admit the
maximum amount of immigrants. In so doing the voter renders a majority for
the young in every period; a "demographic steady" strategy, Equilibria which
combine strategies concerning both the old-young composition in the popula-
tion, and the level of capital, exist for a range of values of the capital per
(native-born) worker, for which the "demographic steady" strategy dominates.
There are now tow types of equilibrium paths in which the "demographic steady"
strategy prevails. Ithe first, the equilibrium tax rate is a decreasing function of

                                                18
the capital per (native-born) worker. In the second, the equilibrium tax rate is
an increasing function of the capital per (native-born) worker.
   In the first type of Markov sub game Perfect equilibrium (referred to by
"demographic switching strategy" equilibrium) policy rules do not depend on
the capital per (native-born) worker state variable.

Proposition 4 There exists an equilibrium with the following feature:
                                
                                      τt = 0         if        ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
                 T (γ t−1 ) =               Ψ
                                                                                        (31)
                                    τ t = 1+Ψ otherwise
                        
                                                 n
                             γ t = Min[γ ∗ , − m   ]       if        ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
           G(γ t−1 ) =                                                                  (32)
                                       γt = 1         otherwise
                                           Ψ
                 
                     S(πt, kt , τ t+1 = 1+Ψ  ) if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1           n<0 ∩
                 
                  S(π k , τ                                            if
                           t, t    t+1 = 0) otherwise                        m+n >0
    S(πt, kt ) =
                 
                 
                                          Ψ
                    S(πt, kt , τ t+1 = 1+Ψ )                            if m + n < 0
                 
                 
                    S(πt, kt , τ t+1 = 0 )                              otherwise n > 0
                                                                                        (33)
                                                                   ∗
where γ t is restricted to be between zero and one, and γ is given explicitly in the
appendix. The equilibrium paths depends on the population growth rates and on
the initial amount of capital per (native-born) worker the economy is endowed
with. There are three main types of equilibrium paths which are similar to the
previous section:1. if n > 0, there is no taxation and social security benefits
and some restrictions on immigration. 2. if m + n < 0, there is full openness
to immigration and a positive level of taxation (the "Laffer point" tax rate).
3. if n < 0 and m + n > 0, there is a "cycling" equilibrium path, where
some level of immigration always prevails and there is an alternate taxation
policy: in periods where the decisive voter is old, the economy is fully opened
to immigration and there is a positive level of taxation (the "Laffer point" tax
rate); and in periods where the decisive voter is young, there is no taxation and
there are some restrictions on immigration.

   The intuition is the same as in section 2. Because the decision rules in
type one equilibrium do not depend on the capital per (native-born) worker,
the Markov sub game Perfect equilibrium of the base line model is essentially a
reduced form of this equilibrium. The equilibrium paths depend on the native-
born and immigrant’s population growth rates as in the baseline model, but
naturally are also quantitatively influenced by the amount of initial stock of
capital per (native-born) worker. The larger the initial stock of capital, the
higher is the amount of capital accumulated every period.

                                            19
  The second and third types of Markov Perfect equilibrium of the extended
model (referred to as "combined strategy" equilibria)are specified as follows:

Proposition 5 Under several conditions on the parameters of the model, which
are specified in the appendix, there exist two other equilibria types, i = 1, 2, with
the following features:
                     
                     
                        τ i (kt ) if          kt ∈[F (τ ), F (τ i )]
     i                                                                  if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
   T (γ t−1 , kt ) =     0         otherwise
                     
                      Ψ
                       1+Ψ                                            otherwise
                                                                                     (34)
                     
                     
                            1                   if               kt ∈[F (τ ), F (τ i )]
                                                                                           if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
Gi (γ t−1 , kt ) =                       n
                             Min[γ ∗ , − m ]     otherwise
                     
                     
                         1                                                 otherwise
                                                                                                   (35)

     S i (π t, kt ) =
     
     
             S i (π t, kt , τ t+1 = τ i (kt+1 ) ) if kt ∈[F (τ ), F (τ i )]
     
                                                                            if ut (γ t−1 ) < 1
     
             S i (π t, kt , τ t+1 =    Ψ
                                          otherwise
                                       1+Ψ )                                                          m+n >0
     
                                                                                                 if
     
               i
             S (π t, kt , τ t+1 = τ i (kt+1 )) if kt ∈ [g i (F (τ i )), g i (F (τ ))]                 ∩ n<0
                                                                                     otherwise
             S i (π t, kt , τ t+1 = 0) otherwise                                                            (36)
     
     
     
          i
          S (πt, kt , τ t+1 = 1+Ψ )Ψ
                                                                                              if m + n < 0
     
     
     
          S i (πt, kt ,τ t+1 = τ i (kt+1 )) if kt ∈[F (τ ), F (τ i )]
     
     
                                                                                        otherwise n > 0
           S i (πt, kt , τ t+1 = 0) otherwise

where x = 1+ (1+Ψ)αβ            Ψ(1+β)+α
                  Ψ+α , τ = Ψ(1+β)+α+β and gi (F ) and F (τ ) are functions given
in the appendix. The two equilibrium, i = 1, 2, differ essentially in the implicit
functions of the tax rate denoted by τ i (kt ), which are defined in the appendix.
In the first type of equilibrium, τ 1 (kt ) is a decreasing function in kt , while in
the second type τ 2 (kt ) is an increasing function in kt . The equilibrium paths,
depends on the native-born and immigrant population growth rates and on the
initial capital the economy is endowed with: 1. if n > 0 and kt ∈ [F (τ), F (τ i )],
there is a positive tax rate which depends on the capital per (native-born) worker
state variable and full openness to immigration. If kt ∈   / [F (τ ), F (τ i )], there are
at least few periods in which there is no taxation and some restriction on immi-
gration. 2. if m + n < 0, there is fix and positive tax rate (the "Laffer point"
tax rate), and a full openness to immigration. 3. if n < 0 and m + n > 0,
there is a range of kt , for which there is a positive tax rate which depends on
the capital per (native-born) worker state variable and full openness to immi-
gration. If kt is not in this range, there are at least few periods in which there

                                                   20
is a "demographic switching" equilibrium path, where some level of immigration
always prevails and there is an alternate taxation policy: in periods where the
decisive voter is old, the economy is fully opened to immigration and there is a
positive level of taxation (the "Laffer point" tax rate); and in periods where the
decisive voter is young, there is no taxation and there are some restrictions on
immigration.

    The proposition is proved in the appendix.
    The additional equilibrium paths in the extended model are characterized
by different optimal strategy of the young depending on the values of the capital
per (native-born) worker : for a range of values of the capital per (native-born)
worker state variable the decision rules of the young decisive voter do not change
the next period decisive voter’s identity, while for other values of the capital per
native-born work force the "demographic switching" strategy is still optimal.
When the "demographic steady" strategy is optimal, the tax rate is positive
and depends on the amount of capital per (native-born) worker and there are
no restrictions on immigration. The reason for the additional strategy result
from the additional state variable- the capital per (native-born) worker, which
influences next period policy variables. The decisive young voter do not have
to engage in a strategy of influencing next policy variables only by changing
next period decisive voter’s identity through immigration quotas (meaning by
admitting a limited amount of immigrants), as both current policy variables, the
tax and the migration quota, both influence the amount of capital per (native-
born) worker. This, in turn,influences next period policy variables.
    The difference between the two "combined strategy " equilibrium tax rates,
as a function of capital per (native-born) worker, is due to conflicting forces of
the effect of the next period tax rate on next period capital per native-born
workers. On one hand, a higher tax rate in the next period raises future social
security benefits. Larger benefits, tend to reduce current savings. This would
cause a reduction in next period capital per native-born work force ("Effect
One"). On the other hand, a higher next period tax rate tend to decrease the
amount of hours worked next period which lowers the next period interest rate
and social security benefits. The consequent fall in the current young future
income induces more savings. This tends to increase next period capital per
(native-born) worker ("Effect Two").
    In the "combined strategy " equilibrium, where the tax rate is decreasing
in the amount of capital per (native-born) worker, "Effect One" is stronger




                                        21
than "Effect Two" 3 . There are no restriction on immigration since larger im-
migration quotas has an additional positive effect on the indirect utility of the
young. When "Effect One" is stronger than "Effect Two", larger immigration
quotas increases next period tax rate (since it decreases next period capital per
(native-born) worker4 ), which raises next period future social security benefits.
This additional positive effect of immigration quotas on the indirect utility of
the young raises the preferable immigration quotas leading to no restriction on
immigration.
    In the second equilibrium, where the tax rate is increasing in the amount of
capital per (native-born) worker, "Effect One" is weaker than "Effect Two". In
that case also, there are no restriction on immigration since larger immigration
quotas has an additional positive effect on the indirect utility of the young, but
from another reason. When "Effect One" is weaker than "Effect Two", larger
immigration quotas decreases next period tax rate (since it decreases next period
capital per (native-born) worker) which increase the amount of hours worked
next period and raises the young future income. This additional positive effect
of immigration quotas on the indirect utility of the young raises the preferable
immigration quotas leading to no restriction on immigration.
    Equilibrium paths depend on the population growth rates and the amount
of capital per (native-born) worker:
    1. The population growth rates of the native-born and immigrant popula-
tions are positive, n, m > 0. In this case, the number of next period young
voters exceeds the number of next period old voters, which means that the deci-
sive voter is always young. Therefore, if the capital per (native-born) worker is
in the range [F (τ), F (τ i )], than the optimal strategy of the young is always to
vote for no restrictions on immigration and a positive tax rate which depends
on the capital per (native-born) worker. If the initial capital is not in the range
[F (τ ), F (τ i )], zero tax rate and a positive immigration quotas, below the ceil-
ing, are chosen by the young. Capital evolves in a way that it is possible to
have a period where the amount of capital per (native-born) worker enters the
range [F (τ ), F (τ i )]; if it does, from then on the current young again vote for
no restrictions on immigration and a tax rate which depends on the capital per
(native-born) worker.
   3 The equilibrium property of the tax function in the first equilibrium, is already noted by

Forni (2005).
   4 A larger immigration quotas increases the number of young who save leading to higher

aggregate capital accumulation in the next period. But since we assumed that m > n,
immigration quotas increases even more the number of next period young. Thus the amount
of next period capital per native-born work force decreases.



                                              22
    2. If the sum of the population growth rates is negative, then the number
old voters always exceeds the number of young voters. This means that the
decisive voter is always young. In that case the old sets the tax rate at the
"Laffer point", and no restrictions on immigration.
    3. If the sum of the population growth rates is positive, but the native-
born population growth rate is negative, there are two possible equilibrium
path types. If the capital per (native-born) worker is in the relevant range5 , the
optimal strategy of the young is to set a tax rate that depends on the capital per
(native-born) worker, and to set no restrictions on immigration. If the capital
per (native-born) worker is outside this range, there is a "cycling" equilibrium
path where some level of immigration always prevails and there is an alternate
taxation policy. Capital evolves over time in a way that there could be a period
where the capital per (native-born) worker enters the relevant range; Once in
this range, the optimal strategy of the young is to set a tax rate that depends on
the capital per (native-born) worker, and to set no restrictions on immigration.


5      The Effect of Aging
We are now in position to conduct a comparative dynamics across demographic
regimes. We analyze the effect of aging of the native and the immigrant popu-
lations on the size of the social security system and on immigration restrictions.
Aging of the population is specified by a reduction in the population growth
rate of the population (life expectancy is assumed to be exogenously fixed).

Proposition 6 1. Aging of both populations can move the system to an equilib-
rium with a certain level of taxation/social security benefits (the "Laffer point"
tax rate) and no restrictions on immigration.
    2. The aging of the native-born (immigrants) population enlarge (reduce)
immigration quotas set by the young in the "cycling" equilibrium paths.
    3. In the "combined strategy" equilibrium types, aging can move the system
from a "demographic switching" equilibrium path to an equilibrium path where
the tax rate is positive and depends on the capital per (native-born) worker,
τ t = τ (kt ), whereas the immigration quotas is at the ceiling level, γ t = 1, or
vise versa.
    5 The  relevant range for kt is as follows: If the decisive voter is young, and kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )],
the optimal decision rules are π t = (τ i (kt ), 1), from that period and on. If the decisive voter
is old and kt ∈ [gi (F (τ i )), g i (F (τ ))], than next period decisive voter is young and kt+1 ∈
[F (τ ), F (τ i )]. Thus, in that case also, the optimal decision rules are π t = (τ (k), 1) from that
period and on.



                                                    23
    The intuition of the result is as follows. Both the aging of native-born and
immigrants populations, can move the system to an equilibrium where the sum
of the population growth rates are negative, n + m < 0. In this case, the old
are in the majority every period. The old set the tax rate at the "Laffer point"
, and liberalize immigration policy as much as possible.
    Aging of the native-born (immigrants) population enlarge (reduce) the im-
                                       n
migration quotas, γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m   ], in the "cycling" equilibrium path when
there is a majority of the young. The effect of aging on the immigration policy
results from the fact that aging changes the ratio of young to old individuals
in the next period6 . Larger immigration quotas increases more the number of
next period young (some of these are offspring of the current immigrants) than
it increases the number of current young which are next period old, since the
immigrants population growth rate is higher. Thus, aging of the native-born
which decreases the number of next period native-born descendant, will enlarge
the preferable immigration quotas. The aging of immigrants will have the oppo-
site result. Larger immigration quotas will increase less the ratio of next period
young to old, since it increases less the number of offspring of current immi-
grants the lower is m. Thus, aging of the immigrant population will reduce the
preferable immigration quotas.
    Aging affect the capital per (native-born) worker, and thus can move the
system from a cycling equilibrium path, where kt ∈       / [F (τ ), F (τ i )], to another
equilibrium path where the tax rate is positive and depends on the capital per
(native-born) worker, τ t = τ (kt ), and the immigration quotas is maximal γ t = 1,
or vise versa.


6          Conclusion
In the political debate people express the idea that immigrants are good because
they can help pay for the old. We flash out the political economy mechanism
whereby immigration strengthens the social security system in the presence of
ageing. That is, the older are the native-born and immigrant populations the
more likely is that the immigration policy is liberalized and that the social
security system will survive. But when there exists some restriction on immi-
    6 In                        n
       the case where γ t = − m    , the ratio effect the openness rate through the number of
young to old voters next period, and in the case where γ t = γ ∗ , the ratio effect the openness
rate through its capital per native born in the next period (more old individual in the next
period, increases the total amount of capital, but more young in the next period, decreases
the per capital per native born work force).




                                              24
gration, aging of the native-born population enlarges immigration quotas, while
the aging of immigrants reduces them.
    For this purpose we develop an OLG political economy model of social se-
curity and migration to explore how immigration policy and a pay-as-you-go
(PAYG) social security system are jointly determined. The social security sys-
tem is a pay-as-you-go, which employs payroll taxes on the working young in
order to finance a social-security benefit to the aged. Immigrants enter the
economy when young, and gain the right to vote only in the next period, when
old. Except from having a higher population growth rate, they have the same
preferences and contribute to and benefit from the welfare state in the same way
as the native-born. Their offspring are assumed to be completely integrated into
the country and have the same population growth as the native-born.
    The model is a political economy model where the political decisions regard-
ing labor taxation and immigration quotas are taken simultaneously, through
majority voting. Markov sub-game perfect political equilibria of the game fea-
ture a dynamic of repeated voting where individuals have a forward looking
property, in the sense that they take into account the effect of their current
voting on the next period voting decisions. The Markov sub-game perfect types
of equilibria depends on the state variables included in the model. When the
immigration quotas is the only state variable, voters engage in a "demographic
switching" strategy in the sense that under the assumption that immigrants gain
the right to vote only in the next period when they are old, voters take into
account the effect of admitting a certain number of immigrants on the composi-
tion of voters and their voting preferences in the next period. Moreover, when
the number of young exceed the number of old in the population, the young
decisive voter admits a limited number of immigrants, in order to change the
decisive voter’s identity from young to old in the next period and maximize her
next period benefits. When there is an additional state variable- the stock of
capital per (native-born) worker, there is another channel of influence on next
period policy variables. Thus, there can be another possible strategy of the
young, a "demographic steady" strategy, where she chooses to admit the max-
imum amount of immigrant, and in so doing she renders a majority of young
every period. In this case, both "demographic switching" and "demographic
steady" strategies are incorporated creating other possible equilibria.
    An interesting extension could be to introduce heterogeneity within the
native-born and the immigrants population in terms of labor productivity. This
would bring into the current model intra-generational distribution aspects. In
addition it would also creates other possible types of representative voters i.e


                                      25
old native-born/ immigrants and young native-born/ immigrants voters, which
can create interesting interaction and different strategies in the voting process.


7     Appendix
7.1    Proposition I:
Proof. We must show that the vector of policy decision rules, Ψ = (T, G), as
defined in the proposition, satisfies the equilibrium
    conditions:
         t−1 ) = arg maxπt V i (γ t−1 , π t , πt+1 ) subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t ).
    1. Ψ(γ
          t−1 ) = Ψ(γ t−1 ).
    2. Ψ(γ
    If ut ≥ 1 than the decisive voter is old. Substituting for lt from equation (8)
into (12), the utility of the old can be rewritten as:
                                      1
              o
                         τ t (1 − τ t ) Ψ [(1 + n) + γ t−1 (1 + m)](1 + γ t )
            V (γ t−1 ) =                                                          (37)
                                               (1 + γ t−1 )

    It is straightforward to show that V o (γ t−1 ) is maximized by setting γ t = 1
             Ψ
and τ t = Ψ+1   .
    If ut < 1 than the decisive voter is young. From equation (9), the utility of
the young voter subject to πt+1 = Ψ(γ t ) is given by:
                                                          Ψ+1
                                            Ψ
                                       Log[ Ψ+1 (1 − τ t ) Ψ ]                            if    ut+1 < 1
  y
V (γ t−1 )=                          Ψ+1           2  Ψ
                                                          (1−  Ψ
                                                                  )
                                                                    1
                                                                    Ψ [1+n+γ (1+m)]
              Log[    Ψ                             Ψ+1      Ψ+1           t
                      Ψ+1 (1 − τ t )
                                      Ψ ] + βLog[                                   ] otherwise
                                                                 (1+γ t )
                                                                                      (38)
                     y                                                   n
    In that case V (γ t−1 ) is maximized by setting γ t = − m and τ t = 0. It
should be noted that in the case where the population growth
    rates are positive, than for every immigration quota there is a majority of
young in every period, and thus the young decisive
    voter in every period will indifferent between all possible immigration quotas.



7.2    Proposition II:
Proof. As in the previous proposition, we must show that the vector of policy
decision rules, Ψ = (T, G), as defined in the proposition,
   satisfies the equilibrium conditions:
        t−1 ) = arg maxπt V i (γ t−1 , π t , πt+1 ) subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t ).
   1. Ψ(γ
         t−1 ) = Ψ(γ t−1 ).
   2. Ψ(γ

                                           26
                        β  Ψ (1+γ t )wt lt (1−τ t )(1−f(τ t+1 ))
   3. S(π t , kt ) = 1+β  Ψ+1         1+n+γ t (1+m)              , with τ t+1 = T (γ t ).
   Consider first the case where there is a majority of old in period t, i.e. ut ≥ 1.
Using the fact that,
                                                      Ψ+α
                                                        1+Ψ
                                                                          1−α
                   wt lt = (1 − α)ktα (1 + γ t )−α             (1 − τ t ) Ψ+α             (39)
                                                                                1−α
                            1 + rt = α (1 − α)kt−Ψ (1 + γ t )Ψ (1 − τ t )       Ψ+α
                                                                                                     (40)
      the utility of the old voter can be rewritten as:
                                                     1+Ψ         1−α
                           τ t ((1−a)(1+γ t )−a ktα ) Ψ+α (1−τ t ) Ψ+α [(1+n)+γ t−1 (1+m)](1+γ t )
     V o (γ t−1 , kt ) =                                   (1+γ t−1 )
                                                       1−α                                         (41)
                         −Ψ            Ψ               Ψ+α        1+n+γ t−1 (1+m)
     +α (1          − α)kt (1 + γ t ) (1 − τ t )            kt       (1+γ t−1 )

    It is can be proved that V o (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by setting γ t = 1 and
         Ψ
τ t = Ψ+1      .
    Consider next the case where there is a majority of young in period t, i.e.
ut < 1. Substituting for wt lt (1 − τ t ) and 1 + rt+1 from
    equations (39) and (40), the utility of the young voter subject to πt+1 =
Ψ(γ t ), can be written in the Lagrangian form, in the
    following way:
                     
                                                                              n
                        L(kt ) with τ t+1 = 0, and γ t+1 = M in[γ ∗ , − m       ]        if         ut+1 < 1
L(γ t , τ t , kt ) =                                  Ψ
                             L(kt ) with τ t+1 = Ψ+1 , and γ t+1 = 1               otherwise
                                                                                            (42)
                                                                                 1−α
                                    β     Ψ
    where A = (1+β)Log 1+β              Ψ+1  (1 −   α)  +βLog      α ((1  − α))  Ψ+α
                                                                                      , λ  1 is  the
Lagrangian multiplier, and L is defined as
    follows:
                                                               Ψ+α
                                                                  1+Ψ
         
                                      α           −α
         
                A  + (1 + β)Log[    kt  (1 + γ t )   (1 − τ t )      (1 + βf (τ t+1 )]
                                                                       1−α
   L=                      +βLog kt+1  −Ψ
                                           (1 + γ t+1 )Ψ (1 − τ t+1 ) Ψ+α                       (43)
         
         
         
         
                                                                         1+Ψ
          −λ (k − β Ψ (1+γ t )((1−α)kt (1+γ t ) (1−τ t ))
                                                     α       −α          Ψ+α (1−f(τ t+1 )
                   1 t+1 1+β Ψ+1                        1+n+γ (1+m)                       )
                                                                       t

    As a first step it is easy to prove that the indirect utility of the young subject
to constant next period policy variables, is
    maximized by setting γ t = γ ∗ and τ t = 0, where γ ∗ ∈ [0, 1] and is defined
as follows:
                           β(1 − α)Ψ(n − m) + α(1 + Ψ)(1 + n)x
                   γ∗ =                                                           (44)
                                     −α(1 + Ψ)(1 + m)x
                                                                              n 7
      We will prove that V y (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m ] .
     7 If   the poppulation growth rates are both positive, than it is straightforward to see that
    y (γ                                            n
V                 is maximized by γ t = Max[γ ∗ , − m
           t−1 , k t )                                ], τ t = 0.


                                                       27
               n
    If γ ∗ ≤ − m  than it is sufficient to prove that the indirect utility of the young
                                             Ψ
is higher by setting γ t+1 = 1, τ t+1 = Ψ+1     than by setting
               ∗
    γ t+1 = γ , τ t+1 = 0. It is easy to see that the higher is next period
immigration quotas the higher is the indirect utility of the young
    as it increases next period interest rate. Regarding next period tax rate, it
is sufficient to prove that:
                                                        1+β         β Ψ+α
                                                                          1−α
                           1+β                      Ψ               Ψ
  0 = Log[(1 + βf(0))            ] ≤ Log[ 1 + βf (     )        1−            ]
                                                   Ψ+1             Ψ+1
                                                                             (45)
   since,
                                                                   −Ψβ Ψ+α
                                                                         1−α
                                      1−α
                                  −Ψβ Ψ+α                      Ψ
         0 = Log[(1 − f(0))                 ] ≤ (Log[ 1 − f (     )          ]    (46)
                                                              Ψ+1
                                                    1+β           β Ψ+α
                                                                        1−α
                                                 Ψ                Ψ
   Define the function: D(Ψ) = Log[ 1 + βf ( Ψ+1    )        1 − Ψ+1        ]. The
derivative of D(Ψ) is the following expression:
                                                             β−1     
            Ψ+α+β−αβ                            (Ψ+α)(1+β)
        1       Ψ+α           (α − 1)β(1 + β)2 Ψ+α+β+αβ+αβΨ
                                                                  1
                                                                         (47)
     Ψ+1                   (Ψ(1−α)(Ψ+α)+(Ψ+1)(Ψ+α+β+αβ+αβΨ)Log( Ψ+1  ))
                                                        2
                                               (Ψ+α+β+αβ+αβΨ)


   Since the derivative of D(Ψ) is positive for every Ψ > 0, and D(Ψ = 0)= 0,
than D(Ψ) is positive for every Ψ > 0.
                         n
   Otherwise, if γ ∗ > − m , we must prove that the following holds,
                                                                           β Ψ+α
                                                                               1−α
                  Ψ+α
                    1+Ψ
                        (1+β)
                                                           1+Ψ
               −α                     (1+γ ∗
                                             )( (1+γ  )  )
                                                     ∗ −α Ψ+α
                                                                       n  Ψ
 Log (1 + γ ∗ )               + Log (     1+n+γ ∗ (1+m)        )−Ψ (1− m )
                                                    1+Ψ
                                            n −α Ψ+α         Ψ
                     ≤ (1 + β)Log[(1 −      m)       (1
                                                      + βf( Ψ+1 )]+
                                                                    1−α
                      n
                  (1− m )((1− m ) )
                                    1+Ψ
                              n −α Ψ+α          Ψ
                                        (1−f ( Ψ+1 ) −Ψ Ψ
                                                                   β Ψ+α
                                                                Ψ
            Log (           1+n− n (1+m)            ) 2 1− Ψ+1
                                     m

                                                                                   (48)
                                                          ∗    n
   As D(Ψ) is positive for every Ψ > 0, and for γ >           −m   the following holds,
                           1+Ψ                                  n    Ψ+α
                                                                         1−α
                 1 + γ ∗ −α Ψ+α                            1+Ψ 1−
                                           1 + γ ∗ −Ψ(1−α) Ψ+α     m Ψ
(1 + β)Log[ (         n )         ]+βLog (      n )            (     )       ≤0
                 1− m                      1− m                  2
                                                                           (49)
   it is sufficient to prove that,
                        n           −Ψ Ψ+α
                                         1−α                       −Ψ Ψ+α
                                                                        1−α
                1+n− m     (1 + m)                             Ψ
    βLog                                       ≤ βLog 1 − f (     )               (50)
                1 + n + γ (1 + m)
                          ∗                                   Ψ+1

                                               28
   Substituting γ ∗ from equation (44) into equation (49), we can rewrite the
inequality in the following way,
                                         
                          1−α 1      Ψ         β(1 − α)Ψ
                       1+                   ≥           1                (51)
                            α 1+β Ψ+1         α(1 + Ψ)x m

  Since this expression is positive, it completes the proof that V y (γ t−1 , , kt ) is
                                        n
maximized by setting γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m ] and
  τ t = 0.


7.3    Proposition III:
Proof. The proof will consist of two parts. The first part will prove that when
there is a majority of young voters the policy decisions for
    the tax rate and immigration quotas stated maximizes the young indirect
utility function, under the assumption that next period
    decisive voter is young. The second part will complete the proof and show
that under certain conditions on the models
    parameters, the vector of policy decision rules as defined in the proposition,
satisfies the equilibrium conditions (for
    equilibrium i = 1, 2) .
    The first part of the proof:
    We follow the proof of Forni (2004) to obtain the policy variables. The policy
variables are obtained by using as a constrain the
    first derivative with respect to the policy variables of the logarithm of the
capital accumulation equation. The policy variables
    are the following:
                                 1+β
                    1−α                               β(1−α)
                 1+     τ t (kt )      (1 − τ t (kt )) Ψ+α = kt−x c                (52)
                     α

                                        γt = 1                                     (53)

    where x =  1+ (1+Ψ)αβ
                    Ψ+α ,and     c is a positive constant of integration. The policy
decision rule of the immigration quotas is at its
    maximal value, and the policy decision rule of the tax rate is implicitly given
in equation (52).Define this implicit function by
                                      β(1−α)
                                                − x1
    F (τ ) = (1 + 1−α
                    α  τ )1+β
                              (1 − τ )  α+Ψ 1
                                              c       . The function F (τ) is decreasing
                                 Ψ(1+β)+α
in τ for τ ∈ [0, τ], where τ = Ψ(1+β)+α+β  , and
    increasing in τ for τ ∈ [τ , 1]. Thus, according to equation (52), for every
value of capital per (native-born) worker,kt , there are


                                          29
     two solutions for τ t (kt ) in the range [0, 1]. The first solution, denoted by
τ 1 (kt ) which is the policy taxation rule in the first
     equilibrium of the proposition i = 1,is decreasing in kt where kt ∈ [F (τ), F (0)];
while the second solution, denoted by
     τ 2 (kt ) ∈ [0, τ ], which is the policy taxation rule in the first equilibrium of
the proposition i = 1,is increasing in kt where kt
     ∈ [F (τ ), F (1)].
     The solution for the policy variables given in equations (52) and (53), will
be proved to satisfy the first order conditions of the
     problem. Substituting for wt lt (1 − τ t ) and 1 + rt+1 from equations (39) and
(40), the young voter’s indirect utility function under
     the assumption that next period decisive voter is young which set the next
period policy decision rules for the tax rate and
     immigration quotas to be τ t+1 = τ t+1 (kt+1 ),and γ t+1 = 1 respectively, can
be written in its Lagrangian form as follows:

                                               1+Ψ
 L = A + (1 + β)Log ktα (1 + γ t )−α (1 − τ t ) Ψ+α + (1 + β)Log[(1 + βf (τ t+1 (kt+1 ))
        −Ψ Ψ                      1−α
 +βLog kt+1  2 (1 − τ t+1 (kt+1 )) Ψ+α
                                                           1+Ψ
                                     α
                    Ψ (1+γ t )((1−α)kt (1+γ t )       t )
                                               −α (1−τ ) Ψ+α (1−f (τ
                β                                                    t+1 (kt+1 ))
 −λ1 (kt+1 −   1+β Ψ+1                      1+n+γ t (1+m)                         )
 −λ2 (τ t − 1) − λ3 (−τ t ) − λ4 (γ t − 1) − λ5 (γ t )
                                                                                      (54)
   The Kuhn-Tucker conditions are:
              ∂L       1+Ψ 1+β          1 + Ψ kt+1
                   =−               −λ1                −λ2 +λ3 = 0                (55)
              ∂τ t     Ψ + α 1 − τt     Ψ + α 1 − τt
                                                                    
∂L        1+Ψ 1+β            kt+1         n−m                1+Ψ
     = −α              +λ1                                −α            −λ4 +λ5 = 0
∂γ t      Ψ + α 1 + γt      1 + γ t 1 + n + γ t (1 + m)      Ψ+α
                                                                                  (56)
                                                         
 ∂L                 β(1 + β)               λ1 kt+1          ∂f (τ t+1 ) ∂τ t+1 (kt+1 )
        =                          −
∂kt+1         1 + βf(τ t+1 (kt+1 )) 1 − f (τ t+1 (kt+1 ))    ∂τ t+1         ∂kt+1
                                                                              
              β(1 − α)         1       ∂τ t+1 (kt+1 )     1         Ψ(1 − α)
            −                                         +        −β                −λ1(57)
                                                                                       =0
               Ψ + α 1 − τ t+1 (kt+1 )     ∂kt+1        kt+1         Ψ+α
                       β   Ψ (1 + γ t )wt lt (1 − τ t )(1 − f(τ t+1 (kt+1 ))
            kt+1 =                                                                    (58)
                      1+β Ψ+1            1 + n + γ t (1 + m)
                         τ t − 1 ≤ 0, λ2 ≥ 0 and λ2 (τ t − 1) = 0                     (59)
                            −τ t ≤ 0, λ3 ≥ 0 and λ3 (−τ t ) = 0                       (60)
                         γ t − 1 ≤ 0, λ4 ≥ 0 and λ4 (γ t − 1) = 0                     (61)

                                                30
                             −γ t ≤ 0, λ5 ≥ 0 and λ5 (γ t ) = 0                              (62)

   Substituting for λ1 in equation (56) in equations (54) and (55), they can be
rewritten as:
                               ∂L
                                   = −λ2 +λ3 = 0                           (63)
                              ∂τ t
                                                 
               ∂L (1 + β)           −n + m
                   =                                −λ4 +λ5 = 0            (64)
               ∂γ t 1 + γ t 1 + n + γ t (1 + m)
     Since we have assumed that m > n from equation (64) we derive that γ t has
to be a corner solution where γ t = 1.The other
     constraint regarding τ t , may be bounding or not, meaning that τ t = τ t (kt ) ∈
[0, 1].
     The optimal solutions should also satisfy the second order sufficient condi-
tions, meaning that the bordered Hessian of the
     Lagrangian should be negatively defined. Since the solution of the immigra-
tion quotas is a corner solution where the largest
     immigration quotas maximizes the young voter’s indirect utility function,
the bordered Hessian of the Lagrangian is equal to:
                                                                       
                    ∂2L            ∂2L                   ∂2 L        ∂2L
          −gτ gτ 2        − gk                + gk gτ            − gk 2          (65)
                   ∂ kt+1        ∂kt+1 ∂τ t           ∂τ t ∂kt+1     ∂ τt

   where gτ and gk are the derivatives of the capital per (native-born) worker
constraint, from equation (57), with respect to τ t
   and kt+1 respectively. The bordered Hessian can be rewritten in the following
way:
                                                      2 1−α             2
                         2x2 (1 + 1−α      2
                                    α τ t ) (1 − τ t )
 −(1 + β)2 +                                            α
                                                        2                                   (66)
                     1−α           β(1−α)       1−α                         1−α 1        2
              (1 + β) α (1 − τ t )− Ψ+α (1 + α τ t ) (1 +                    α 1+β τ t )

    This expression is positive for values of the tax rate, τ t , which satisfies the
following inequalities:
                                   √
                                     2x(1 + 1−α  α τ t )(1 − τ t )
                                                                         1−α
                                                                            α
  0 ≤ −(1 + β) +                                                           
                                               β(1−α)
                     (1 + β) 1−α
                               α (1 −   τ t )−  Ψ+α     (1 +   1−α
                                                                 α    τ t )   (1 + 1−α  1
                                                                                    α 1+β τ t )

                                √                                                            (67)
                                 2x(1 + 1−α   α  τ t )(1 − τ t )   1−α
                                                                      α
 0 ≥ (1 + β) +                                                                             (68)
                                           β(1−α)
                 (1 + β) 1−α
                          α   (1 − τ t )−    Ψ+α    (1 +  1−α
                                                           α    τ t )    (1 + 1−α    1
                                                                                 α 1+β τ t )

   Thus, τ t ∈ [τ 1 , τ 2 ] is the range for which the bordered Hessian of the La-
grangian is negatively defined, where τ 1 and τ 2 denotes


                                               31
    the solutions of these equations respectively8 . The solution of the tax rate
in the first equilibrium, τ 1 (kt ), is optimal in
    the range kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ 1 )], and the solution of the tax rate in the second
equilibrium, τ 2 (kt ), is optimal in the range kt
    ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ 2 )].
    The second part of the proof:
    As in the previous proposition, we must show that the vector of policy deci-
sion rules, Ψ = (T, G), as defined in the proposition,
    satisfies the equilibrium conditions:
        t−1 , kt ) = arg maxπt V i (γ t−1 , kt , πt , π t+1 ) subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t , kt ).
    1. Ψ(γ
         t−1 , kt ) = Ψ(γ t−1 , kt ).
    2. Ψ(γ
                          β  Ψ (1+γ t )wt lt (1−τ t )(1−f(τ t+1 ))
    3. S(π t , kt ) = 1+β   Ψ+1         1+n+γ t (1+m)              , with τ t+1 = T (γ t , kt ).
    Proposition III refers to the both equilibrium i = 1, 2 .The first equilibrium
i = 1, is the case where F (τ) is decreasing in τ for
    τ ∈ [τ 1 , τ] . Thus, the solution in this case which is denoted by τ 1 (kt ), is
decreasing in kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ 1 )]. The second equilibrium
    i = 2, is the case where F (τ ) is increasing in τ for τ ∈ [τ 1 , τ ] . Thus, the
solution in this case which is denoted by τ 2 (kt ), is
    decreasing in kt ∈ [F (τ), F (τ 2 )].
    Consider first the case where there is a majority of old in period t, i.e. ut ≥ 1.
The utility of the old voter is the same as in the
    previous proposition and thus V o (γ t−1 , kt ) is maximized by setting γ t = 1
              Ψ
and τ t = Ψ+1    . But unlike the previous proposition the
    saving of the young in period t also set next period policy variables.
    In the case of a majority of old, the policy decision rules are set by γ t = 1
              Ψ
and τ t = Ψ+1    . In order for the next period policy
    decision rules to be set according to the decision rules: γ t+1 = 1 and
τ t+1 = τ i (kt+1 ), the next period capital per (native-born)
    worker, kt+1 , should be in the range: [F (τ), F (τ i )] where kt+1 is defined by
the following equation:
                                                           Ψ+α
                                                             1+Ψ
          β    Ψ        2               α −α        Ψ
kt+1 =                          (1 − α)kt 2 (1 −         )       (1 − f (τ i (kt+1 )))
        1+β Ψ+12+n+m                              Ψ+1
                                                                                (69)
   The derivative of kt+1 by kt when the policy decision rules are set by γ t = 1
            Ψ
and τ t = Ψ+1 and next period tax rate is set
   8 Sincethese equations are second order polynomials, [τ 1 , τ ] and [τ , τ 2 ], τ 1 is the minimal
solution according to the first polynomial equation and τ 2 is the maximal solution according
to the second polynomial equation.


                                                 32
    according to τ i (kt+1 ), is negative in the first case for τ ∈ [τ 1 , τ ] and positive
in the second for τ ∈ [τ, τ 2 ]. Thus, the range of kt
    for which kt+1 ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )] is kt ∈ [g1 (F (τ 1 )), g1 (F (τ ))] in the first case
and kt ∈ [g2 (F (τ )), g2 (F (τ 2 ))] in the second, where
    gi (y) is defined by9 :
                                                                1+Ψ −1
                                                                            α(1+Ψ)
                                                                              Ψ+α
                                                                Ψ+α
             β   Ψ   2                                      Ψ
gi (y) =                (1 − f (τ i (y))) (1 − α)2−α (1 −     )          y
            1+β Ψ+12+n+m                                   Ψ+1
                                                                                             (71)
    Otherwise, if kt ∈ / [g1 (F (τ 1 )), g1 (F (τ))] in the first case or kt ∈/ [g2 (F (τ )), g2 (F (τ 2 ))]
in the second, then in order to obtain the
    condition kt+1 ∈   / [F (τ ), F (τ 1 )], also for kt+1 as defined by the following
equation:
                                                                           Ψ+α
                                                                             1+Ψ
               β     Ψ           2                    α −α          Ψ
    kt+1 =                                 (1 − α)kt 2 (1 −              )       (1 − f (0))
              1+β Ψ+12+n+m                                        Ψ+1
                                                                                             (72)
    we have to require for the first equilibrium that if kt > g1 (F (τ 1 )) =⇒ kt+1 >
F (τ ) and if kt < g1 (F (τ)) =⇒ kt+1 < F (τ 1 ), while for
    the other equilibrium that if kt > g2 (F (τ )) =⇒ kt+1 > F (τ) and if kt <
g2 (F (τ 2 )) =⇒ kt+1 < F (τ 2 ).
    Consider next the case where there is a majority of young in period t, i.e.
ut < 1.
    If kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )], we must prove that the indirect utility of the young
voter subject to πt+1 = Ψ(γ t , kt ), is maximized by
    γ t = 1 and τ t = τ i (kt ). Substituting for wt lt (1 − τ t ) and 1 + rt+1 from
equations (39) and (40), the young voter’s indirect utility
    function subject to π t+1 = Ψ(γ t , kt ), can be written in its Lagrangian form
as follows:

      Li (π t , kt , γ t−1 ) =                                                                                  (73)
      
              i
       L (kt , ) with π t+1 = Ψ(τ i (kt+1 ),1) if kt+1 ∈[F (τ), F (τ i )]                      if         ut+1 < 1
           Li (kt ) with π t+1 = Ψ(0, M in[γ ∗ , − m
                                                   n
                                                     ])      otherwise
      
                               i                       Ψ
                               L (kt ) with πt+1 = Ψ( Ψ+1 ,1)                              otherwise
   9 Ifthe sum of the fertilitity rates are negative, n + m < 0, than the identity of the decisive
voter is always old, which means that next period capital per native born labor force always
equal:
                                                                   1+Ψ
              β      Ψ          2                            Ψ       Ψ+α           Ψ
    kt+1 =                              (1 − α)ktα 2−α (1 −       )      (1 − f (      ))    (70)
             1+β Ψ+1 2+n+m                                  Ψ+1                   Ψ+1



                                                33
    where Li is as defined in equation (54) after substituting for τ t+1 = τ i (kt+1 ).
The previous part of the proposition, proved that if
    next period decision rules are set by τ t+1 = τ i (kt+1 ),and γ t+1 = 1, the
optimal solution for the young is to set τ t = τ i (kt ),and γ t = 1.
    In addition, we have shown that under the assumption that next period
policy decision rule are given according to equations
    (31) and (32), the young voter’s indirect utility function is maximized by
                   n
γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m ] and τ t = 0.Therefore we must show
    that if kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )], the value of the young voter’s indirect utility
function is higher under the following decision rules: τ t = τ i (kt ),
    and γ t = 1. Since the value of the young voter’s indirect utility function
under the first decision rules is constant in kt , and the
    value of the young voter’s indirect utility function under the second decision
rules is increasing in kt , the first condition on the
    parameters of the model is to require that both values of the indirect utility
of the young should equate at kt = F (τ i ):10
                                           −(1+β)                     β(1−α)
                                                                                     
                                2      β  Ψ               Ψ                       β
                     Log     2+n+m 1+β Ψ+1               2  (1   −   α)    Ψ+α
                                                                                 α  c  =
                                                               Ψ+α
                                                                   1+Ψ                   
                 (1 + β)Log ( 1 − α)F (τ i )α (1 + γ t )−α              (1 + βf( Ψ+1 Ψ
                                                                                       ) +
                                                                               1+Ψ
                                                                                                           β
                          Ψ          β   Ψ  (1+γ   )((1−α)F (τ   )α
                                                                    (1+γ   )  )
                                                                            −α Ψ+α
                                                                                    (1−f (  Ψ
                                                                                               )       1−α
                              )2Ψ ( 1+β Ψ+1
                                                               i
 Log α((1 − α)(1 − Ψ+1                           t
                                                             1+n+γ (1+m)
                                                                         t                 Ψ+1
                                                                                                 )−Ψ ) Ψ+α
                                                                             t


                                                                                   (74)
    In addition, we must require that if kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )] , than also kt+1 which
is equal to the following expression:
              β   Ψ   2                                                      1+Ψ
kt+1 =                    (1 − α)ktα 2−α (1 − τ i (kt ))                     Ψ+α
                                                                                    (1 − f (τ i (kt+1 )))
             1+β Ψ+12+n+m
                                                                                                 (75)
                                                                              11
     will be in the relevant range, i.e. kt+1 ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )]                 . Since the deriva-
  10 If the fertility rates are both positive than next period policy variables are:
                   n
γ t = Max[γ ∗ , − m  ] and τ t = 0, since next period decisive voter is young. Thus the
                                                     −(1+β)                        
                                           2    β   Ψ             Ψ (1 − α)
                                                                             β(1−α) β
condition in this case is simply: Log    2+n+m 1+β Ψ+1
                                                                2              Ψ+α α c   =
                                                                                                                −Ψ
                                                                                                                                   1−α
                                                                                                           1+Ψ                          Ψ+α
                                 1+Ψ                                              α        −α
                   α           −α Ψ+α                   β   Ψ (1+γ t )((1−α)F (τ i ) (1+γ t )   (1−τ t )) Ψ+α
(1 + β)Log F (τ i ) (1 + γ t )         +βLog          1+β Ψ+1               1+n+γ t (1+m)
                                                                                                                      (1   + γ ∗ )Ψ 

  1 1 It                                     β   Ψ     (1+γ t )                                 1+Ψ
           should be noted that if kt+1 =   1+β Ψ+1 1+n+γ t (1+m)
                                                                    (1   − α)(1 + γ t )−α ktα    Ψ+α    (1 −
     Ψ
f ( Ψ+1 ))is also in the relevant range, under the previous condition, the value of the young
voter’s indirect utility function is higher under the first decision rules. Thus the optimal
solution is τ t = τ i (kt ), and γ t = 1.


                                                  34
tive of kt+1 by kt is negative in both equilibrium
    i = 1, 2, if kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )], than kt+1 ∈ [ki , ki ], where ki and ki are defined
respectively by the following equations:
              β   Ψ   2                   α
                                                                   1+Ψ
    ki =                  (1 − α) (F (τ )) 2−α                     Ψ+α
                                                                         (1 − f (τ i (ki )))    (76)
             1+β Ψ+12+n+m
            β   Ψ   2                                                      1+Ψ
 ki =                   (1 − α) (F (τ i ))α 2−α (1 − τ )                   Ψ+α
                                                                                 (1 − f (τ i (ki )))
           1+β Ψ+12+n+m
                                                                                          (77)
                                                            i
    Therefore the required condition is that [ki , k ] ⊆ [F (τ ), F (τ i )] .
    Otherwise, if kt ∈ / [F (τ ), F (τ i )] , we must prove that the indirect utility of
the young voter subject to πt+1 = Ψ(γ t , kt ), is
                                          n
    maximized by γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m        ] and τ t = 0.
    For kt > F (τ i ) according to the first condition the value of the young voter’s
                                                        n
indirect utility function is for γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m     ] and
    τ t = 0. It should be noted that since this optimal solution changes next
period decisive voter from young to old for all values of
    kt+1 , there are no additional conditions on kt+1 12 .
    For kt < F (τ ) if kt+1 > F (τ i ), where kt+1 is defined as in equation (74),
then as was proved the young voter’s indirect utility
                                                        n
    function is maximized by γ t = M in[γ ∗ , − m         ] and τ t = 0.In order to derive
the condition that kt+1 > F (τ i ) for all kt < F (τ ), we must
    require that ki ≥ F (τ i ). Combining the previous condition with the latter,
we derive the conditions: ki ≥ F (τ ) and ki = F (τ i ).
    An additional condition is necessary in order to insure that τ i (kt ) is the only
solution in the range [F (τ ), F (τ i )]13 .
    The condition requires that for τ j (kt ) where i = j, if kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )] and
next period decision rules are given according to
    γ t+1 = 1 and τ t+1 = τ i (kt+1 ) than kt+1 ∈         / [F (τ ), F (τ i )] , where kt+1 is
defined by:
              β   Ψ   2                                                    1+Ψ
 kt+1 =                   (1 − α)ktα 2−α (1 − τ j (kt ))                   Ψ+α
                                                                                 (1 − f (τ i (kt+1 )
             1+β Ψ+12+n+m
                                                                                      (78)
   Since τ 2 (kt ) is increasing in kt , τ 1 (kt ) is decreasing in kt , the derivative of
kt+1 by kt are positive in both cases. Therefore the
  12 In      the   case     where         fertility      rates     are positive   than   we   should
also      require that if kt             >      F (τ i ) ⇒kt+1       >  F (τ i ), where:   kt+1   =
  β    Ψ       2
                                                               1+Ψ
                                      α (1 + γ ∗ )−α (1 − 0) Ψ+α (1 − f (0))
1+β Ψ+1 2+n+m
                    (1  − α)F  (τ i )
  1 3 This is due to the fact that as was proved in the first part of the proof, both solution for

the tax rate τ 1 (kt ) and τ 2 (kt ) maximizes the young voter’s indirect utility function.


                                                35
    required conditions, should be that for kt ∈ [F (τ ), F (τ i )] , either kt+1 <
F (τ ) or kt+1 > F (τ i ). Defined ki and ki by the following
    equations:
 β   Ψ   2                                                     1+Ψ
             (1 − α)(F (τ i ))α 2−α (1 − τ j (F (τ i )))       Ψ+α
                                                                     (1 − f (τ i (ki ))) = ki
1+β Ψ+12+n+m
                                                                                 (79)
 β   Ψ   2                                                     1+Ψ
             (1 − α)(F (τ ))α 2−α (1 − τ j (F (τ )))           Ψ+α
                                                                     (1 − f (τ i (ki ))) = ki
1+β Ψ+12+n+m
                                                                                 (80)
   Namely, the sufficient conditions are either ki < F (τ ) or ki > F (τ i ).


References
 [1] Benhabib, J., "A Note on the Political Economy of Immigration," European
     Economic Review 40 (1996), 1737-43

 [2] Bergstrom T. C. , John L. Hartman, (2005) "Sustainabillity of Pay-As-
     You-Go Social Security", Cesifo Working Paper No.1378.

 [3] Boldrin, M. and A. Rustichini (2000), "Political Equilibria with Social Se-
     curity," Review of Economic Dynamics Vol 3, Issue 1, January 2000, Pages
     41-78.

 [4] Borjas, G.J. (1999), Heaven’s Door, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
     N.J.

 [5] Browning, E., 1975. Why the social insurance budget is too large in a
     democracy. Economic Inquiry 13, 373—388.

 [6] Cooley, T.F., Soares, J., 1999. A positive theory of social security based on
     reputation. Journal of Political Economy 107, 135— 160.

 [7] Dolmas, Jand Huffman G. W. (2004), "On the Political Economy of Immi-
     gration and Income Redistribution". International Economic Review Vol.
     45 No. 4 1129-1168.

 [8] Feldstein (2006), "The Effects of the Ageing European Population on Eco-
     nomic Growth and Budgets: Implications for Immigration and Other Poli-
     cies",

 [9] Forni, L (2005), "Social Security as Markov equilibrium in OLG Models",
     Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 178-194.


                                        36
[10] Galasso and Paola Profeta (2002), "The political economy of social security:
     a survey". European Journal of Political Economy Vol. 18 (2002) 1— 29.

[11] Hassler J., Jose V. Rodriguez Mora, and Kjetil Storesletten and Fabrizio
     Zilliboti (2003)"The Survival of the Welfare State", American Economic
     Review, 93, 1, pp. 87-112, 2003.

[12] Krusell, Per, (2002), "Time-consistent redistribution," European Economic
     Review 46 (2002) 755 — 769.

[13] Lee R. and Miller T.,(2000) " Immigration, Social Security, and Broader
     Fiscal Impacts." The American Economic Review, Vol 90, no. 2, 350-354.

[14] Lovell, M.C. (1975), “The collective allocation of commodities in a demo-
     cratic society”, Public Choice 24, 71—92.

[15] Meltzer, A.H. and S.F. Richard (1981), “A rational theory of the size of
     government”, Journal of Political Economy 89, 914—927.

[16] Mulligan, C.B., Sala-i-Martin, X., 1999. Gerontocracy, retirement and so-
     cial security. NBER working paper #7117, Cambridge, Mass.

[17] Ortega f., 2005. "Immigration Policy and Skill Upgrading", Journal of Pub-
     lic Economics Vol 89 1841-1863.

[18] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (1999), “Political Economics and Public Fi-
     nance”, NBER Working Paper 7097.

[19] Prescott, Edward C., and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, (2000), "On the equilib-
     rium concept for overlapping generations organizations," Federal Reserve
     Bank of Minneapolis, Research Department Staff Report 282, November.

[20] Razin, A. E. Sadka and P. Swagel. (2002),"Tax Burden And Migration: A
     Political Economy Theory And Evidence," Journal of Public Economics,
     v85(2,Aug), 167-190.)

[21] Razin, A. and E. Sadka (1993), The Economy of Modern Israel: Malaise
     and Promise, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

[22] Razin, A. and E. Sadka (1995), “Resisting Migration: Wage Rigidity and
     Income Distribution”, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceed-
     ings 85 (May), 312—316.

[23] Razin, A. and E. Sadka (1999), “Migration and Pension with International
     Capital Mobility”, Journal of Public Economics 74, 141—150.

                                       37
[24] Razin, A. and E. Sadka (2000), “Unskilled Migration: A Burden or a Boon
     for the Welfare State”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 1(May), 463—
     479.

[25] Razin, A. and E. Sadka (2001), Labor, Capital, and Finance: International
     Flows, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[26] Razin, A., E. Sadka and P. Swagel (2002a), “The aging population and the
     size of the welfare state”, Journal of Political Economy 110, 900—918.

[27] Razin, A., E. Sadka and P. Swagel (2002b), “Tax burden and migration:
     A political economy theory and evidence”, Journal of Public Economics
     85,167—190.

[28] Razin , A., and E. Sadka,      (2004), "Welfare Migration: Is the Net
     Fiscal Burden a Good Measure of its Economic Impact on the Welfare of
     the Native-Born Population?" CESifo Economic Studies, Vol 50, Issue 4.

[29] Persson, T., Tabellini, G., 2000. Political economics. Explaining Economic
     Policy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[30] Samuelson, P.A., 1958. An exact consumption-loan model of interest with
     or without the social contrivance of money. Journal of Political Economy
     66, 467— 482.

[31] Storesletten (2000), "Sustaining Fiscal Policy through Immigration", The
     Journal of Political Economy, Vol 108, no. 2: 300-24.




                                      38
