                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INCENTIVES FOR DIVERSIFICATION AND
             THE STRUCTURE OF THE CONGLOMERATE FIRM


                      William J. Marshall
                         Jess   B. Yawitz

                        Edward Greenberg



                     Working Paper No. 1280




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         February 198b




We wish to acknowledge Harold Demsetz, Nicholas Dopuch, and F.M.
Scherer for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. Much
of the work on this paper was done while Marshall visited Stanford
University and the University of Michigan, and he gratefully
acknowledges their support. The research reported here is part of
the NBERts research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #1280
                                                                February 1984

Incentives for Diversification and the Structure of the Conglomerate Firm




                                     ABSTRACT



      In   this paper, we examine the proposi ti on that both the structures of
conglomerate firms and their merger activities evidence a systematic attempt
to   diversify income sources and reduce the volatility of firms' profits. We

test whether firms that are active in one line of business are more likely to

be involved in another, the lower is the correlation between returns to the

two activities, and whether, ceteris paribus, the likelihood of merger depends

inversely on the correlation of cash flows to the principal activities of the

candidates for merger. We conclude that firms do act as if their goals

include firm—level diversification.




                                               William 3. Marshall
                                               Jess B. Yawitz
                                               Edward Greenberg
                                               Washington University
                                                St. Louis, MO 63130
                                                (314) 889—6340
I. Introduction

     In this paper, we examine the proposition that both the structures of

conglomerate firms and their merger activities evidence a systematic attempt

to diversify income sources and reduce the volatility of firms' profits.1

Specifically, we test (1) whether firms that are active in one line of

business are more likely to be involved in another, the lower is the

correlation between returns to the two activities, and (2) whether, ceteris

paribus, the liklihood of merger depends inversely on the correlation of cash

flows to the principal activities of the candidates for merger. We conclude

from our findings that firms do act as if their goals include firm—level

diversification.

     It is generally thought that business combinations are superfluous if

they have no effect on the nature of the cash flows to the activities of

participants. Such diversification would be redundant since investors can

achieve identical results through appropriate structuring of their own

portfolios. Differential efficiency, economies of scale or scope, increased

control of input or product markets, influence over positive externalities,

and other sorts of technological or "real" incentives may underly conglomerate

organization. However, these factors provide no special incentive to choose

combinations of activities with low correlations of returns when structuring

the firm.

     We propse four motives for conglomerate organization that would cause

firms, ceteris paribus, to select combinations of minimally correlated

activities. The benefits of these motives cannot be realized by portfolio

diversification, i.e., each has real effects on cash flows. Since our

theoretical models are developed only to the level necessary to illustrate the

proposed motives, substantial theoretical questions are left unanswered.
                                     —2—

     In an important sense, our empirical analysis is partially exploratory

and partially confirmatory. Other important motives for conglomerate

organization of which we are aware provide no basis for expecting preferences

over pairs of activities to depend on the correlations of returns to those

activities. Our tests specifically address the issue of whether minimally

correlated activities are more likely to be chosen. In essence, we test

whether among all motives underlying conglomerate organization, those favoring

systematic diversification are sufficiently strong relative to others as to be

manifest in the data.   If so, the collective importance of these motives will

have been confirmed.

     Our analysis is exploratory in that we are unable to discriminate between

the proposed motives based on the data. More vigorous theoretical

developments of these motives would presumably suggest ways of discerning the

effects of each on firm behavior. Lines of inquiry we view as potentially

fruitful are pointed out in the paper.

     The first two motives for firm—level diversification center on the role

of contracts and incentives in determining firm behavior. We argue that the

profit stream of a diversified firm can provide a better basis for management

incentive contracts than that of a specialized firm because it constitutes an

indicator of effort and expertise that is less sensitive to random

disturbance. Second, to the extent that the effects of non—systematic

disturbances are moderated, the risk perceived by managers will correspond

more closely to that of fully diversified owners, and the decisions made by

managers will more nearly approximate those desired by owners.

     Two motives for conglomerate diversification are derived from the

technology of production and valuation under uncertainty. First, an input to

the production process, broadly construed, can be used more efficiently by the
                                      —3—



conglomerate firm than by the single—activity firm if 1) it must be acquired
before output decisions are final, 2) cannot be costlessly stored or exchanged

between firms, and 3) has some value in alternative employment within the

conglomerate firm. The final motive for conglomerate diversification comes

from portfolio—theoretic models of capital market equilibrium, which imply

externalities in valuation. To the extent that a firm's profit contributes to

the nature of the distribution of the return on the market portfolio, the

risks of all assets and thus their values are affected by the firm's

decisions. Therefore, a firm may diversify to gain control over the level of

activity in a line of business closely related statistically (not necessarily

technologically) to its own.

     Our analysis focuses on the nature of conglomerate organization, i.e.,

the choice of activities to be undertaken from a menu that excludes vertically

or horizontally related activities. We make no attempt to explain empirically

or theoretically the extent of conglomerate organization. Presumably, the

severity of antitrust legislation and the vigor of enforcement affect the

extent to which firms seek new activities that offer benefits from

diversification   rather than the widely recognized benefits of
specialization. Moreover, the concentration of one's own industry would
affect the desirability of conglomerate investment by constraining other
choices. We attempt empirically to identify motives for conglomerate
organization   by looking at patterns of activities rather than at the extent of

conglomeration relative to specialization.2 As progressively less attractive

combinations are considered, the limits of each motive will eventually be

reached, at a stage of diversification that depends on transaction costs.

Thus, specialized firms can be observed, as could be any degree of

conglomeration, depending on the costs of undertaking an acquisition or

expansion.
                                          —4—


       It   is important to recognize that the benefits of conglomerate

organization referred to above cannot be gained through the activities of

stockholders in structuring their personal portfolios.3 Cash flows of the

conglomerate firm are fundamentally different from those of the single—

activity firm, not just repackaged. Although some benefits could be realized

through     naive diversification by the firm, if cost is incurred in adding or
maintaining lines of business through acquisition or direct investment, it
will be more efficient to combine activities that are minimally correlated.
Therefore,     not only do   these motives provide further justification for

conglomerate     organization, but our theoretical arguments advance a strong,
testable proposition about the choice      of activities by the conglomerate.

Ceteris     paribus, firms will undertake minimally (preferably, negatively)
correlated activities.
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II the
theoretical arguments that motivate our tests are developed. The data used,
the tests conducted, and the results obtained are described in Section lIt.

We conclude, in Section IV, with suggestions for further work, including

direct, separate tests of the proposed incentives for firm—level

diversification.

II. Motives Underlying the Organization of the Conglomerate Firm

      The   point of departure for our analysis is   a recent, thorough critique of

the   literature on conglomerate    merger provided by Copeland and   Weston [5]. We
concur with their conclusion that to be credible a proposed motive for

conglomerate organization must be shown to affect cash flows. Purely

financial motives —— those involving a reorganization of claims against

unchanged income streams —— have no basis in theory [10]. Managerial

theories, such as those posutlated by Grabowski and Mueller [12], are
                                       —5—

inconsistent with the empirical evidence. Synergy arising from economies of

scale in activities that are common to diverse lines of business is one likely

motive for conglomerate organization. Lemelin [18] focuses on motives of this

kind. Other motives that we describe subsequently meet the condition that

they potentially affect cash flows, and more importantly imply a specific,

testable pattern of conglomerate organization: the combination of minimally

correlated activities.

Agency Costs——Profit—Based Contracts

     The source of the first motive we investigate is the "economic theory of

agency," considered by Alchian and Demsetz [1], Wilson [29], Ross [22], Jensen

and Meckling [17], and others. An agency relationship exists when the welfare

of one party, the principal, depends on the actions taken by another, the

agent, under authority granted by the principal. The relationship between

owners and managers is one agency relationship in an economic setting. Other

examples are lender and borrower, manager and subordinate, insuror and

insured.4 Usually, both principal and agent are portrayed as rational and

selfish actors who are aware of each other's motives. The focus of the

analysis is on the resolution of a moral hazard problem: the agent will

expend the least effort consistent with receiving a compensation schedule of

given value. The "principal's problem" is to induce the greatest effort on

his behalf from the agent, given the value of the compensation (fee,

incentive) schedule, and to choose the contract that maximizes the value of

the payoff to the owner, a product of the value of the contract and the effort

induces.

     Harris and Raviv [13; 14], Shavell [26], and others have considered the

structures of incentive contracts that arise to resolve the "principal's

problem" under a variety of circumstances. If the agent's effort can be
                                         —6—

exactly measured by direct observation or inferred from some indicator of the

firm's performance, a contract can be designed that will resolve the conflict

entirely.     Moreover, if agents   are less risk averse than are principals, the

principal    has no comparative advantage as the residual risk bearer. In that
case, the optimal arrangement is for the agent to rent the firm's capital for
a fixed fee. No better arrangement for risk bearing exists, and the moral
hazard problem is eliminated entirely since the principal's compensation is

independent of the agent's effort.

       If principals are less risk averse than agents and the agent's effort can

never be known precisely, the optimal contractual arrangement provides the

agent with compensation that is contingent on the firm's performance, and the

expected level of compensation to the agent is at least as large as his

reservation wage for that level of effort which he will choose as optimal.

The optimal contractual arrangement maximizes the well—being of the principal,

who correctly anticipates the level of effort chosen by the agent.5 Since

contracts of this form appear to be predominant in practice, we will continue

under the above assumptions.

       If   firm—level diversification reduces the dependence of profits on random
factors, the ability of owners to monitor the performance of managers will be
enhanced because profit will be a more precise measure of the effort expended
by management on behalf of owners. Managers will benefit because the risk

they bear in accepting an incentive schedule based on profit will be reduced

(since their efforts will more precisely determine profits), and owners will

be willing to place more resources under the control of managers whose efforts

can be more accurately assessed. Finally, owners will benefit because

managers, subject to less risk, are willing to provide a given level of effort

in   exchange for a contract with lower expected return. Since the compensation
                                           —7


demanded by the agent for risk bearing is greater than the value of the risk

reduction as perceived by the principal, any reduction in the influence of

random factors on the performance of the firm will permit an increase in

aggregate welfare.

     The improved efficiency of contractual arrangements provides a motive for

conglomerate   organization:6   Suppose firms A and B have profit streams that,

conditional on managers' efforts, are distributed with correlationp

where p <   1.0. Now, suppose the activities of         the two firms were combined

within one organization at one—half the scale so the manager's effort would

not be diluted. Then, the manager would derive greater utility from the same

level of effort, given a contract based on income, and could be made at least

as well off by some contract more desirable to owners.7 This is so since

expected compensation is unchanged, while the variance is reduced

(recall p <    1.o).   The lower isp   ,
                                           the   greater the increase in welfare.

Therefore, presuming combinations are not costless, minimal values ofp will

optimally be sought.

     What factors limit these gains? First, an agency problem between

managers arises from the dependence of individual fee schedules on total

profit, that might be avoided in some instances by reducing the scale of

operation and combining diverse activities under the direction of a single

manager. Unfortunately, managerial talent is not nearly so general and

readily transferable as would be the ideal, and certain operations benefit

from technological economies of scale. Casual observation would suggest that

managers' compensation schemes are often designed to provide rewards based

both on the consequences of their separate efforts and on the basis of firm

performance. Our analysis does suggest that such schemes are likely to be

desirable as attempts to gain the benefits noted above while responding to the

manager—manager agency problem.
                                    -8—


     The second motive for conglomerate organization we consider derives from

aspects of the agency relationship considered by Ross [22; 23] and Ueckerman

[15]. Since the manager's compensation must be tied to the firm's profit in

order to achieve proper motivation, the risk perceived by the manager depends

on uncertainty about profits. Managers not only choose the level of effort

they will expend, but also make decisions that affect the riskiness of the

firm's activities. If the perceptions of risk by owners and managers differ,

another type of agency problem exists.

     Owners are usually assumed to be fully diversified, in the sense of the

capital asset pricing model [25; 19; 21]; therefore, the relevant measure of

risk to the owner is the firm's beta.9 In contrast, managers derive a

disproportionate share of their income from their salaries (equivalently,

their wealth is disproportionately in human capital). Since compensation is

tied to firm profit they view risk as proportionate to the variance of

profit. A second agency problem thus arises because the manager would

exchange some expected return for a reduction in the non—systematic component

of the variance in the firm's profit, but the owner is unwilling to do so.1°

The difference constitutes a conflict that may be costly to both parties.

     To the extent that the non—systematic component of the variance of profit

is reduced through firm—level diversification, this agency problem is

mitigated and both owners and managers benefit. Indeed, if the non—systematic

component of profit variance can be eliminated, variance and beta will be

linearly related, and a reduction in one will reduce the other. The motives

of owners and managers can then be brought close together by appropriate

choice of the terms of the incentive contract. The problem will be no more

severe than if owners' and managers' perceptions of risk were identical.
                                       —9—



      One   implication of agency problems is the desirability of having firms

consist of lines of business that have minimally correlated non—systematic

return components. That motive would lead us to observe behavior that is

consistent with our hypothesis that firms will choose activities with

minimally correlated total returns ——    (systematic   plus non—systematic).

Technological Economies

      Suppose some factor of production must be acquired in a fixed quantity

before the state of the economy and actual requirements for the factor are

known with certainty. To the extent that the factor is mobile and may be

allocated to a specific use once demand is known, efficiency is evidenced.

Often, however, market institutions, transactions costs and other

considerations would seem to hinder —— even preclude —— such recontracting.

For example, managers, perhaps the least specialized of all resources, may

require compensation for the uncertainties inherent in such a recontracting

arrangement. Further, owners may hesitate to share managerial talent when

managers possess proprietary or privileged information. As another example,

the   sharing of marketing channels of distribution may expose the firm to the
risks of losing certain exclusive rights or revealing valuable information.
Plant and equipment may not be mobile, though flexible in      possible   uses, and

transportation    costs for materials and finished goods may preclude rental. If

 sharing between firms is costly, an incentive exists for the formation of

 conglomerate organizations. Of course, that result is a fundamental insight

 of Coase [4]11

       The proposition put forth above is easily confirmed by a more formal

 argument. Suppose firms 1 and 2 operate respectively and exclusively in

 industries 1 and 2.     Let r and r be the returns to capital equipment

 employed in industries 1 and 2 if state of the world s obtains, and Ps be the
                                          — 10 -



value of a dollar to be received if state s obtains. Then the values of firms

1 and 2, V1 and V2, are



               V1 =         P5 r K1; V2                                                 (2.1)
                                                      PS r K2
                      scS                    scS


where K1 and K2 are capital employed in the indicated industries and S is the

set of all possible states of the world.

     Now suppose the Ki can be utilized in industry 2, where it would be

equivalent to C12K1 units of capital equipment intended for exclusive use in

industry 2; K2 is similarly convertible at a rate of C21.12 The two firms

operating in concert can produce a maximum return in state s of




               r [C12K1 + K2]                if r /
                                                          r   <
                                                                   C12



               r   K1 +   r K2               if C12 r / r                     1 / C21   (2.2)




               r [K1 + C21K2]                if r /       r       > 1    /
                                                                             C21



     The value of the combined firm must be at least as great as the sum of

the values of the two operating independently. This is so since capital need

never be converted unlesss it is desirable to do so and Ki and K2, the amounts

optimal under the old regime, may be chosen if that remains the best decision.

     It is evident that the greater the tendency for returns in one industry

to be higher than their mean when returns in the other are lower than their

mean, the greater will be this incentive for conglomerate organization. We

have therefore identified a third incentive for systematic, firm—level

diversification.   The limits of this motive are reached where the costs of
                                     — 11   —




conglomeration exceed the benefits as the values of C12 and C21 become
smaller.

Externali ties

     The firm may benefit from control of both K1 and K2 even if no sharing of

resources is possible, if the market valuation of the two firms is determined

according to the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) of Sharpe, Lintner and

Moss in [25; 19; 21]. Here, we adopt the viewpoint of Jensen and Long [16],

Stiglitz [28], Fama [7], Yawitz [30], and Greenberg, Marshall and Yawitz

[11]. In this framework, the firm may control, in a constrained fashion, the

covariance of its cash flow and the return to the market (the aggregate cash

flow accruing to all assets). The firm's decisions include the choice of

activities to be undertaken, prices charged for products, labor hired, capital

acquired, and other economic variables. The objective is to maximize the

market value of the firm as determined via the CAPM. In what follows we

suppress all decisions save for the choice of activities the firm will

undertake and the amount of physical capital to be acquired for each.

The following notation will be used:



            The th firm's random cash flow from activities in industry s.
      4
            The total cash flow to firm i from all activities.

             Capital equipment of firm i used in industry s.
      K
            Random return per unit of capital used in industry s.

      S'     Capital market value of firm i.

      r      Market rate of discount on riskless investments



      X      Market price of risk.

      Xm     Aggregate cash flow on all firms.
                                                     — 12   —




      Ks          Capital equipment employed in industry s by all firms other than

                  the 1th firm.

      E( ), Cov(      •,   )       Expectation,    covariance operators.



                 Cov(P ,P ).
           St          S       t

      According to the CAPM13, the value of the firm is determined to be

      Si        (1/r) [E(Xi)_XCOV(Xi,Xm)]                                    (2.3)




To demonstrate that there is an incentive for joint operation in two

industries (1 and 2 for convenience), consider firm 1 that operates only in

industry 1 and finds the use of K units of capital equipment to be optimal.

The value of the firm is



      51 =      (1/r) [1K - XCov(PiK,Xm)J                                    (2.4)



and




      Cov(PiK,Xm) = E{[(P1 -                i1)K] [P1K      + E              (2.5)
                                                                  PK]}

                           =   (K)2ci11 +          KKjai
                                                                                1
If the price of a unit of capital equipment is it, then the optimality of K1

requires that14



           = 1—x[2K1               +
      it
                                           Kja1]
                                       3
                                               — 13 —




or



        K = 1/2 C[(            - )/xi1]   -
                                              [K                                    (2.7)


The dependence of S1 on the capital investments of all other firms is evident

from equation (2.5). Similarly, equation (2.7) indicates the influence on K

of others' valuations and decisions.'5 In this case, the motive for

cooperative behavior arises because of the externality that results from the

appearance of covariances in the equilibrium valuation expression. Suppose

that firm 2 operates entirely in industry 2 and employs K. The effect of an

increase in             on S2, ceteris paribus, would be


         2        1        2
        oS bK1 = —XK2,12                                                            (2.8)



If c12 <     0,       then firm 2 would be willing to pay firm 1 to extend K beyond

the level indicated by equation (2.7). On the other hand,                   > 0 then

firm 2 would willingly pay firm 1 to restrict K below the otherwise optimal

level. Firm 2 might offer side payments or attempt coercion by threatening to

use K to affect S1 or threatening takeover to capture the externalities. In

either case, cooperative behavior would be Pareto superior, but may be

constrained by law or inhibited by information and agency problems.

      The advantages of cooperative behavior can be obtained through merger,

while   avoiding the difficulties of repeated bargaining between firms. By
comparison, de novo entry suffers from certain deficiencies. If                   > 0,
de   novo entry offers no benefits. Second, de novo entry rather than merger
leaves the potential influence            of other firms unchanged. In summary,
                                         14 -




financial   externalities provide a motive for merger that is greater, the

greater is the absolute value of a12; de novo entry is a less potent strategy,

but offers some benefit, if a12 <   0.

     Our analysis has implications for the effects of concentration on merger

activity. In particular, if          0 and firm 1 acquires firm 2 and modifies
                              a12
its level of activity, then all other firms in industry 1 benefit in

proportion to their levels of capital investment. The greater the level of

concentration in the industry, the greater the average investment of each

firm, and the greater the incentive, on average, to merge with firm 2. This

may be especially important where there are transaction costs to be covered

for merger to be desirable. In addition, there are incentives for a firm that

intends to acquire another (for motives such as those described above) to

first acquire as great a share of its own industry as is possible.

Implications of these incentives are not considered further herein.

Summary

     We propose that motives for the conglomerate organization of firms are

provided by a) reduction of agency costs as the relative importance of random

disturbances to profits is reduced and the usefulness of profit as a basis for

incentive contracts is enhanced, b) reduction in agency costs as managers' and

owners' perceptions of the firm's risk are brought in closer correspondence,

c) increased efficiency in the use of input factors that must be acquired

before demand is known, and d) control of levels of activities in firms that

have significant financial externalities on others through relationships

between cash flows. Since none of these benefits can be attained by investors

diversifying their personal portfolios, diversification at the firm level need

not be redundant.
                                      — 15   —




III.   Empirical   Evidence of Diversification of the Conglomerate Firm

       In this section we test two hypotheses suggested by our analysis. The

first is that merger is more likely, ceteris paribus, the lower is the

correlation between the returns to the primary activities of the two potential

merger candidates. Second, a firm doing business in one industry is more

likely to be active in a second industry the lower is the correlation between

the returns to activities in the two industries, ceteris paribus. Although

these two hypotheses are related, the second is somewhat broader than the

first because the composition of a firm's activities depends on de novo entry

as well as merger.

Mergers

       We address first the issue of merger activity. The proposition to be

tested is that mergers between members of two "different" industries will be

more likely to occur, ceteris paribus, the lower the correlation between

returns to activities in the two industries. To test that proposition, we

compute correlations between the net cash flows to several manufacturing

industries and record the numbers of mergers between each pair of

industries. We hypothesize that the cash flow correlations and numbers of

mergers will be inversely related, other factors being equal.

       The data and methodology employed to measure the correlations of returns

 to activities in different industries are the same for the analysis of merger

 activity and that of firm—level diversification, although different levels of

 aggregation are used to define industries. From the Annual Survey of

 Manufactures [2] we draw data on the income flows to each of the manufacturing

 industries included in Standard Industrial Classification (S.I.C.) codes 200

 through 399.
                                    — 16 —




     For the purpose of computing correlations between returns to various

activities, we estimate a cash flow for each industry as follows: from the

value of industry shipments we subtract the cost of materials, wages and

salaries, and new capital expenditures. Clearly, this measure of cash flow is

incomplete, for such costs as advertising and shipping are not included except

as they are paid to labor. New capital expenditures are included on the

assumption that a going concern must constantly replenish its capital stock.16

     To the extent that deductions from cash flows not captured in our measure

are either constant over time or proportionate to measured cash flows, the

correlations computed from these numbers are unaffected. In addition, errors

in the measurement of the cash flows will introduce error in the measurement

of correlations, biasing against confirmation of our hypotheses when

correlations and conglomerate structure are compared.

     The survey data are collected at the establishment level to achieve more

accuracy in identifying industry cash flows. Firm level data might permit

more accurate measurement of cash flows, but the errors in attributing the

cash flows to a single industry, or in attempting to allocate to different

activities of a single firm, would be extreme. In our view, the costs and

benefits favor the use of ASM data over firm—level data.

     To obtain the correlations, we first detrend the cash flow series.

Defining jt as the net cash flow to industry j during period t, we compute



     it.   = a.+b.t+u.                                                    (3.1)
      jt      3   3   jt



using annual data over the period 1958—1971, where a and b are coefficients
to be estimated and ujt is the residual. The correlations, Cjk' are computed

from the estimated regression residuals,     and ukt, for all pairs of
                                      — 17 —




industries.    The jt series are detrended on the assumption that market

participants can anticipate trends, which are reflected in expectations; the

relevant notion of risk in a mean—variance world is based on the deviation of

actual from expected returns. Where trends exist, correlations computed

around raw means would he misleading: declining industries may appear to be

negatively related to growing industries or those that are secularly stable,

even if the rate of decline could have been anticipated.

     Linear trends fit the data well, although exponential growth might have

been expected to do better. Recall, however, that the calculated cash flow is

closer to a profit measure than to a measure of sales, and that it is net of

new capital expenditures. Inflation and a constant rate of growth will affect

capital expenditures as well as profits. These factors and changing profit

margins might explain the adequacy of a linear model for trend.

     The merger data used, at the two digit level of S.I.C. code, come from

the Statistical Report on Mergers and Acquisitions [27], (hereafter, Report),

of the Federal Trade Commission. This source records mergers of firms and

acquisitions of subsidiaries or divisions along with the primary S.I.C. codes

of the participants. The Overall Merger Series of the Report [27] provides

approximately 1000 recorded mergers for which the primary S.I.C. of both

acquiring and acquired firm was given. The S.I.C. codes recorded are those of

the firm, subsidiary, or division acquired, and of the primary activity of the

acquiring firm. Although divisions and subsidiaries acquired in mergers are

likely to be predominantly involved in the specified industry, firms often

have significant activities outside of their primary industry. Nevertheless,

for lack of better data, we use primary industry classifications to represent

the motivating concerns of participants. This assumption should bias against

empirical     substantiation of diversification as a motive for merger. Where Mik
                                     — 18 —



is   the number of mergers between participants in industries j and k over the

period 1973—75, our hypothesis is that Mjk and Cik will be inversely related,

all else being equal.

      In part as a practical consideration, this analysis utilizes data

aggregated to the two—digit level. The tendency to merge should depend on the

relative magnitude of the correlation of a firm's income stream with income

streams of all potential merger candidates. At the individual firm level, the

number of potential candidates is overwhelming. In addition, the finer the

industry classification scheme employed, the fewer the number of mergers that

would be observed between any two industries over any period of time

sufficiently short for stability of the Cjk to be assumed. For many

industries, low values of Mik are observed even when data are aggregated to

the two—digit level, a lack of variation that impedes the statistical

analyses. On the other hand, aggregation across industries may reduce the

range of computed values of Cik' especially if negative values are as rare as

is commonly believed. As a compromise, we settle on a two—digit level of

analysis.

      For reasons of data availability, the empirical work presented below is

confined to the manufacturing sector of the economy. This restriction is

unfortunate because there may be important negative covariances across

sectoral lines —— perhaps, for example, between electrical machinery and fast

food establishments. On the other hand, since the restriction to

manufacturing most likely eliminates some mergers undertaken to achieve

vertical integration, and since vertically integrated firms should display

moderately high positive correlation, our data should permit the effect of

negative covariances to be seen more clearly. We exclude within—industry

mergers, which are likely to take place for market power and/or production—
                                     — 19 —




related   reasons. Our analysis does not control for vertical market and

technological factors that might influence mergers except that the exclusion

of non—manufacturing industries eliminates the possibly large numbers of

mergers   that might be expected to take place between manufacturer and
distributor. The determination of whether the baby is thrown out with the
bathwater by this exclusion will have to await improved data. The input—
output structure of the economy might be used in future empirical work to
control for vertical integration, and concentration coefficients could be

utilized to control for market power. Then, both non—manufacturing and

manufacturing data might effectively be used, if available.

       Table I presents the computed values of Cik and Mjk in matrix form. The

principal diagonal and upper half of the matrix contain the Mik; the lower

half contains the Cik. It is interesting to note that several of the Cjk are

negative, whereas negative correlations of returns on equity securities are

extremely rare. One possible explanation of this is that total cash flows to

firms are seldom negatively correlated because firms choose the activities in

which they engage to accomplish within—firm diversification. In that case, a

firm   would tend to he active in industries with which it might otherwise be
negatively correlated. Negative correlations between within-firm activities
would therefore tend to be muted or swamped by positively correlated

activities in analysis of aggregate firm cash flows.

       As with the correlations, a broad range of values of Mjk is observed.

Intra—industry mergers are predominant, and little else is immediately

evident. For each industry, Spearman rank—order correlations were computed

between the income correlations and numbers of mergers with other

industries. The hypothesis is that these correlations will tend to be

negative. We use rank correlations because nothing in our theory suggests a
                                      - 20 -


linear   relationship between the Mik and Cik, and the rank correlation is a

more robust measure of association than a product—moment correlation. As can

be seen from Table II, fourteen of twenty are as predicted. On the null

hypothesis that merger activity is independent of income correlation, the

probability is less than .06 that fourteen or more negative correlations will

be   observed. This finding is stronger than the test indicates since we have
not fully controlled for synergistic, vertical, and technological motives for
merger, which are strongest among firms with positively correlated income
streams.    We conclude that this evidence supports the hypothesis.

      A firm can unilaterally decide to enter an industry, but must obtain the

cooperation of a partner to effect a merger. That difference substantially

complicates the analysis of mergers. As a result, the rank order correlations

reported above are conservative because no allowance is made for the numbers

of mergers in which each industry is involved,   an endogenous variable, or the
possible   difference in relative attractions of one partner for another. On

this latter point, industry A may prefer a merger with B over all other

candidates, but it is unlikely, given the data, that B also prefers A over all

others. These considerations make more detailed empirical analysis desirable,

although the bias in the simple tests, if any, would seem to favor acceptance

of the null of no association.

       In recognition of the endogeneity of the level of merger activity,

expected numbers of mergers were computed for each pair of industries based on

the hypothesis that the probability of a merger between firms in two

industries depended only on the proportion of total mergers involving each

(ie., marginal independence). The subsequent regression and logit analyses

dealt with ratios of actual to expected numbers of mergers, and discrete

representations   of that data.
                                    — 21 —




    The other complicating factor is the necessity that two firms consent to

a merger, that is, the bilateral nature of the act. To measure the relative

attraction perceived by one industry, say A, of a merger with another, say 8,

we use the rank of the correlation between A and B among all correlations

involving A. The rank of the correlation between A and B among all

correlations involving B measures B's perceived attraction to A. On the

assumption that neither firm enjoys any advantage in bargaining, their

perceived attractions should receive equal weight in the decision.

Consequently, the causal variable in this analysis is the sum of the ranks.

     Results of the logit estimation are reported in Table III. Since intra—

industry mergers are ignored, from the symmetry of the merger data there are

n(n—1)I 2 = 190 independent observations for analysis. The dependent variable

is 1 or 0 depending on whether the actual number of mergers exceeds or is less

than the expected number. For Model A, the coefficient on the attraction

variable, the only dependent variable, has the hypothesized sign but is not

significant.

     The causal variables used in Model B are a set of dummies based on the

quintile structure of the attraction variable, as described in Table III.

Since the coefficients on R2—R5 are marginal contributions to the standard of

the first quartile, each should be negative, as all are, and successive

coefficients should decline in value, as they do not. Again, the data mildly

support the hypothesis.

     Table III also reports the results of OLS estimation of a simple model

 (Model C) relating the ratio of actual to expected numbers of mergers and the

attraction variable. The Model C results must be interpreted with caution.

First,   the dependent variable is bounded at zero and although the zero
 observations are excluded, coefficient estimates are biased (albeit, against
                                      — 22 —



the hypothesis. Second, we have no reason to believe that the model is linear

in the attraction variable, only that it is monotone. Although correct

estimation procedures are known (e.g., extensions of logit with ordered

categories based on dummy variable representations of the attraction

variable), the marginal value seemed small relative to the difficulties of

implementing these procedures. We report these results for their descriptive

content and simply note that again the coefficient estimate is as

hypothesi zed.

     In sum, the merger analysis provides significant, but moderate support

for the hypothesis that firms attempt to systematically diversify via their

choices of partners in conglomerate mergers. The relationship may be somewhat

obscured by the bilateral nature of the decision to merge. We turn now to

analysis of the structure of the conglomerate, where the alternative of direct

entry may mitigate this difficulty.

Structure of the Conglomerate Firm

     Eventually the structure of a firm's participation in various industries

will reflect a sustained pattern of merger and investment activity. We

hypothesize that a firm in one industry is more likely to be in another, the

lower the correlation between income to the two industries. A test of this

hypothesis is far stronger evidence on the validity of the underlying

proposition of firm—level diversification than is a test of mergers, since a

structure test is less susceptible to distortion by temporal influences on

motives. Moreover, structure reflects both merger and direct investment

activities.

     There exist no readily available and appropriate data on the extent of

participation by conglomerate firms in various industries. Public financial

reports and statements of individual companies are not sufficiently detailed
                                          — 23 —




or   consistent in the line—of—business classification scheme used. As an

alternative, we construct a measure from information reported in Enterprise

Statistics, 1972 [6]. Let j and k denote three—digit industries. The

enterprise data give Ejk, the number of workers in industry k who are employed

by firms that also participate in industry j. We use wk, the average value

added per worker in industry k, to construct Vik =                Vjk is value added
                                                         wkEjk.
by all firms in industry j through their activity in industry k. Finally, we

compute e. = V.    /   V.   ,   where the denominator is taken over all three—digit
           jk    3k K jk
industries (industry k).             is the proportion of the total value added of
                                jk
firms in industry j that is due to their presence in industry k. The jk are

analogous to the weights of securities in portfolios. For each j, these

weights measure the relative importance of each source of income to firms that

are active in industry j.17

       Our hypothesis is that ek and Cik are inversely related. Two

circumstances beyond those mentioned in discussion of the merger tests are

likely to bias our findings against affirmation of the hypothesis. First,

there is presumably some threshold level of size for each industry below which

the enterprise is not economically viable. Therefore, we may observe no

participation in cases where the desired level of participation is below the

threshold. Second, cjk may be small even if Vik represents a substantial

proportion of all value added to industry k:         firms in industry j may control

virtually all of industry k, but tjk will be small if industry k is small

relative to all activities of firms in industry j. As a rough method of

dealing with these problems we use the discrete form of jk defined below.

Our inability to incorporate these two factors explicitly should bias against

 the finding of an inverse relationship between Cjk and Cjk making an

affirmative result stronger.
                                                — 24 —




        Our analysis of the relationshiop between Cjk and Cik uses both

continuous and discrete forms of those variables, where the latter are defined

as



                        1         ife >0
               Cjk_                   jk
                        0         otherwise

                        1         ifC. >0
                       0          otherwise


The primary concerns motivating our use of discrete versions of the data are

the desirability of non—parametric tests of the relationships, the possibility

that a threshold problem might result in a massing of observations on c.                  at
                                                                                     jk
zero,    and the possibility the              is small because industry k is small
                                       Cjk
relative to j.18

        The first step in our analysis was to compute summary statistics on the

Joint distribution of              and Cjk. Data are available for the 31 three—digit
                            Cjk
industries listed in Table IV, providing 30 values of jk and Cjk.'9 In an

attempt to reduce the influence of technological considerations, for each j we

eliminated    those observations for values of k within the same two—digit
industrial classification. Table V provides summary statistics on the joint
distribution    of Uk and Cjk' computed from the 'pooled' observations for all

values of i. The correlation between Cjk and ejk is negative, — .039 with a

p—level of .12, which is weakly supportive of our hypothesis.

        The tests performed using the discrete version of the data provide

stronger evidence in support of the proposed inverse relationship between C'jk

and           The pattern of observations reported in Table VI indicates the
      Cjk.
apparent popularity of negatively correlated pairs of activities: firms

participate in a significantly greater proportion of pairs of industries with
                                      — 25   —




negatively   correlated income streams than of all pairs. This analysis was

replicated for each three—digit industry taken separately. For 25 of the 31

industries, firms in the industry under analysis were in a greater proportion

of industries with which their cash flow was negatively correlated than in

other industries. The probability of this occurrence is less than .001 if no

relationship exists. In addition, the large number of empty cells in tables

for individual three—digit industries prompted us to sum three—digit tables

within   each two—digit industry for further analysis. The separate tables are
presented in Table VI. The results for 11 out of 15 two—digit groups were as
hypothesized.    The probability is less than .059 of 11 or more negative

relationships due to chance alone. These results are, in our opinion,

strongly supportive of the hypothesis.

     The externalities argument would suggest that the incentive to enter an

industry varies with both the absolute value of the correlation between

returns and the extent of concentration of the target industry. The latter

effect is supposed to exist because the more concentrated the industry,

ceteris paribus, the more influence the entrant can have over industry output

and thereby over the externality. All the analyses reported above were

repeated using a four firm concentration ratio, based on the Annual Survey of

Manufactures [2] in addition to the inter—industry correlation. The

relationship between industry structure and correlation was virtually

unaffected.     The concentration measure did have the predicted effect. Rather
than present the extensive three way cross tabulations, that effect will be
considered in the context of the following logit analysis of structure.
     Logit analysis was used to investigate four models, for which results are

reported in Table VII. For all models, the dependent variable is C•k•       The

results for Model A are consistent with our earlier findings. However, as
                                      — 26 —




concentration   is introduced in Model B, the significance of correlation

declines, as does the coefficient in absolute value. In Model B, both causal

variables have the predicted sign, and concentration is significant. Models C

and D are counterparts to A and B, with correlation replaced by a set of dummy

variables so that nonlinearity, if present, might have less effect. The

results are substantially the same as for A and B.    In both models, the

coefficients on C2—C5 are negative, as predicted, but successive coefficients

do not decline, as the hypothesis requires. The pattern of coefficients here

is remarkably similar to that obtained in analysis of the merger data, Model B

of Table III. Again, the concentration variable has the correct sign and is

significant, and when introduced diminishes the importance of correlation.

     The logit analysis provides further support for the hypothesized

relationship between industry structure and correlation. The evidence of an

effect for concentration is consistent with an externalities motive, but we

are hesitant to consider the evidence more than suggestive; the analysis does

not provide for what could be many potentially confounding factors.

IV. Conclusions and Suggestions for Further Research

     The empirical evidence supports the proposition that a systematic effort

to achieve firm—level diversification underlies the structure of the

conglomerate firm. That is, the activities outside of a firm's primary

industry are in lines of business that are negatively correlated. As we have

shown, incentives for such behavior have a basis in theory. Although our

empirical tests do not distinguish between those potential incentives, the

detection   of a pattern in conglomerate organization would seem to be of
interest to those who seek to forecast mergers and suggests the value of
further   investigation.
                                    — 27 —




    The incentives for conglomerate organization developed above might be

separately tested, at least under ideal conditions. If the motive is a closer

correspondence between managers' and owners' perceptions of risk, one

implication is that, ceteris paribus, the probability of inclusion in a

conglomerate organization will increase with the non—systematic risk of an

activity. As noted in Section II, the strength of this incentive for

combining two lines of business should vary with the correlation of the non—

systematic components of profits, not necessarily the correlation of profits.

     If the profit of a conglomerate provides a better basis than that of a

single activity firm for incentive contracts, then those contracts a) should

be more prevalent in conglomerate organizations, b) should depend more often

and to a greater extent on firm profits rather than single lines of business

for more diversified firms, and c) should provide lower average levels of

compensation in the conglomerate, since less risk is borne by the manager,

ceteris paribus.

     With respect to the financial externalities argument, levels of activity

ought to be affected when a firm adds a line of business. This incentive

might empirically be differentiated from the factor—sharing motive by noting

that no incentive for merger is present if the level of activity cannot be

modified as a result of such considerations as existing contracts or limited

availability of necessary inputs.
                                      - 28   -




References

      1. Aichian, Armen A. and Harold Demsetz. "Production, Information

Costs, and Economic Organization." American Economic Review, December 1972,

777—95.

      2.     Annual Survey of Manufactures. Bureau of the Census, U.S.

Department of Commerce, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.

      3. Baron, David. "Investment Policy, Optimality, and the Mean—Variance

Model." Journal of Finance, March 1979, 207—32.

      4. Coase, Ronald H. "The Nature of the Firm," Econometrica, November

1937, 386—405.

      5. Copeland, Thomas E. and J. Fred Weston. Financial Theory and

Corporate Policy, Philippines: Addison—Wesley, 1979.

      6.     Enterprise Statistics, 1972, Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department

of Commerce, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1977.

      7.     Fama, Eugene. "Perfect Competition and Optimal Production Decisions

Under Uncertainty." Bell Journal of Economics, Autumn 1972, 509—30.

      8. ____________________.      Foundations of Finance. New York: Basic

Books, 1976.

      9. Fama, Eugene and M. Miller. The Theory of Finance. Hinsdale,

IL.: Dryden Press, 1972.

     10.     Galai, Dan and Ronald W. Masulis. "The Option Pricing Model and the

Risk Factor of Stock." Journal of Financial Economics, 1976, 53—81.

     11. Greenberg, Edward, W. J. Marshall and J. B. Yawitz. "The Technology

of Risk and Return." American Economic Review, June 1978, 241—51.

     12. Grabowski, Henry G. and Dennis C. Mueller. "Managerial and

Stockholder Welfare Models of Firm Expenditures." Review of Economics and

Statistics, February 1970, 68—74.
                                      — 29 —



     13.   Harris, Milton and Arthur Raviv. "Some Results on Incentive

Contracts with Applications to Education and Employment, Health Insurance, and

Law Enforcement," American Economic Review, March 1978, 20—30.

     14. ____________________.   "Optimal Incentive Contracts with Imperfect
Information." Journal of Economic Theory, 1979, 231—59.

     15. Heckerman, Donald G. "Motivating Managers to Make Investment

Decisions." Journal of Financial Economics, 1975, 273—92.

     16. Jensen, Michael C. and John B. Long, Jr. "Corporate Investment

Under Uncertainty and Pareto Optimality in the Capital Markets." Bell Journal

of Economics, Spring 1972, 151—74.

     17. Jensen, Michael C. and W. Meckling. "Theory of the Firm:

Managerial Behavior Agency Costs and Ownership Structure." Journal of

Financial Economics, 1976, 3:305—60.

     18. Lemelin, Andre. "Relatedness in the Patterns of Interindustry

Diversification." Review of Economics and Statistics, November 1982, 646—57.

     19. Lintner, John. "The Valuation of Risky Assets and the Selection of

Risky Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets." Review of

Economics and Statistics, 1965, 13—37.

     20. Maloney, Michael T. and Robert E. McCormick. "A Theory of Cost and

Intermittent Production." Journal of Business, April 1983, 139—53.

     21. Mossin, Jan. "Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market."

Econometrica, October 1966, 768—83.

     22. Ross, Stephen A.    "The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's

Problem." American Economic Review, May 1973, 134—39.

     23. ____________________.    "The Determination of Financial Structure:

The Incentive—Signalling Approach." The Bell Journal of Economics, Spring

1977, 23—40.
                                        — 30 -



      24.   _____________________.   "The Current Status of the Capital Asset

Pricing Model." Journal of Finance, June 1978, 485—90.

      25. Sharpe, W. F.     "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market

Equilibrium Under Conditions of Risk." Journal of Finance, September 1964,

425—4 2.


      26. Shavell, Steven. "Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal and

Agent Relationship. Bell Journal of Economics, Spring 1979, 55—73.

      27. Statistical Report on Mergers and Acquisitions. Federal Trade

Commission, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1973—1975.

      28. Stiglitz, J.    "On the Optimality of the Stock Market Allocations of

Investments." Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1972, 25—60.

      29. Wilson, Robert.     "The Theory of Syndicates." Econometrica, January

1968, 119—32.

     30. Yawitz, Jess B. "Externalities and Risky Investments." Journal of

Finance, September 1977, 1143—49.
                                     — 31 —




FOOTNOTES



     1By a conglomerate firm, we mean a firm engaged in two or more distinct
lines of business where the motive for combining the activities under the
control of one firm is not increased market power, vertical integration, or
any conventional technological economy of scale. This definition is
arbitrary, since lines of business are no less difficult to define and motives
are inherently unobservable. But our usage is consistent with that found in
the literature and in the business world.

     2As an alternative, one might investigate changes in the intensity of
diversifying investment which accompanies changes in the strength of the
hypothesized motives.

     30n the one hand, conglomeration may impede the selection of a portfolio
by forcing one to purchase shares in several activities in a fixed proportion,
but if each activity is represented separately by some other security,
investors can "unbundle" and counteract this effect. On the other hand,
superior knowledge of the nature of a firm's cash flows might enable managers
to    diversify better than investors. We ignore these aspects to focus on other
than strictly financial motives for diversification.
    4Harris and Raviv [13] use a variety of examples to demonstrate the
general usefulness of the basic principal—agent paradigm.
     5The costs that are incurred to motivate and monitor the agent are
referred to as agency costs. These costs can be considered to be the cost of
employing an organizational structure that separates "ownership" from
"control." As Aichian and Demsetz [1] point out, owners who choose such an
organizational structure presumably do so because it is more efficient. Thus,
agency costs are no more or less desirable than are the costs of labor or
materials. And, the agency cost component of total costs in no sense
constitute an inefficiency.

     6Ross [23], recognizes that an incentive to diversify through merger may
be provided by the risk inherent in managers' incentive contracts. Also,
mutual funds, as Ross notes, and separate firms that provide management
services under contract offer possible alternative solutions to the problem.

      7Note that the manager's compensation cannot be written as a function of
 the expected value and variance of profit, which are unobservable, but must be
 tied to some measure about which there can be no dispute, such as the actual
 value of profit observed. As accountants will attest, the problems in
 measuring profit, though simpler than measuring expectations, are not trivial,
 and the contracting parties must agree on the basis for measurement ex ante.

 Also, some portion of the randomness in the firms' profits could be attributed
 empirically to industry factors, input prices, and similar observable
 variables that might be incorporated into contracts. It is the residual risk,
 after these controls are implemented, that causes an inefficiency that might
 be   reduced by diversification.
                                             — 32 —



We stress that the benefit derives from the manager's effort being allocated
over several activities, so the average (or equivalently total) outcome is a
better measure of his effort. To simply tie the manager's compensation to a
diversified income stream, the greater part of which is beyond his
would be detrimental.                                                control,

     8io see this, let X1 and X2 represent the returns to firms 1 and 2 with
            = t a2   =a2 =     their respective equal means and variances. The
manager's claim is to some proportion, say a, of income. The mean and
variance of his return are at and a2a2 before the merger. Subsequent to the
merger, his claim is to a( X1 + X212 ), with mean a, and variance

     S2 = (a/4)
            2
                (a12 +    a2
                               2
                                   +
                                         2
                                        (a/2) pa1a2

     S = a22
      2                    2        2
           a — (1—p)     (a    /2)a

which is strictly less than a2a2 for p < 1. Further, ôS2Iôp > 0, so the
manager is better off, ceteris paribus, the lower is p.

     9For an introduction to the capital asset pricing model, see Fama [8] or
Fama and Miller [9]. In that model, the relevant measure of risk is the
contribution of a security to the variance of a fully diversified portfolio,
the market portfolio of all assets. That risk is measured by the covariance
between the returns on the security and the market portfolio, and is referred
to as systematic risk. Investors who hold full diversified portfolios endure
only that systematic risk, since firm—specific, or nonsystematic, sources of
uncertainty are eliminated by diversification. Since it is presumed to be no
more costly to diversify, asset prices are determined so that compensation is
provided only for systematic risk. The arbitrage pricing theory due to Ross
[23] has essentially identical implications, for our purpose, at the cost of
less restrictive assumptions.

     10Here again, we assume that compensation schedules must be written in
terms of actual observations drawn from the profit distribution, since the
parameters of that distribution, including 1, are unobservable. Also, we
assume that diversification of the risk inherent in the manager's human
capital via the market would be prohibitively costly (possibly due to the
moral hazard problem).

     '1Maloney and McCormick [20] show that in the case where demand is known
a factor of production that is subject to indivisibilities provides a motive
for development of a multiproduct firm. As we argue, under uncertainty that
motive exists even where input factors are not lumpy. Of course, in both
cases costs in sharing or transferring the factor are necessary.

     12By   assumption, C12 and C21 are such that at the unit prices of K1 and
K2 and given the distributions of r]. and r, the initial allocations are
optimal. If prices and distributions are identical, then C12, and C21 < 1     is

imp lied.
                                       — 33 —




     13The review by Baron [3] is recommended for those interested in the use
of the CAPM for the purpose to which it is put here.

     14The choice over other inputs could easily be incorporated explicitly,
but it is sufficient to assume that optimal decisions are implicit in the
distribution of P . Note that separability, or constant stochastic returns to
scale, is assumed Generalization would not influence the aspect with which
we are concerned here.

     '5As Ross [24] notes, this and other issues of externalities involving
the CAPM revolve on whether the firm acts as a price taker in the capital
markets. It may do so even though it is a monopolist in the product market or
may not even though it is a competitor in its product market.

     16Accounting treatment of depreciation, as well as other pertinent
economic costs, varies across industries. Consequently, this cash flow
measure is far from ideal. However, it does improve upon firm data, as
described below. And we have no reason to believe that differences across
industries in accounting methods bias our tests.

     17Value added rather than employment is used because our concern is the
extent to which firms diversify the sources of their cash flows. Continuing
the securities portfolio analogy, if one were to use proportions of employees
as weights it would be like using numbers of shares rather than weighting by
share value.

     18ldeally, one would provide for the massing of observations at zero by
use of a bounded dependent variable technique, such as the Tobit model.
However, we are not especially comfortable, given our data, with the necessary
assumptions about the causal variable for such models. Our estimated cash
flow correlations are naturally, bounded by —1 and +1. Moreover, they are
measurements with error of the true correlations. Given all these problems,
we are most comfortable to rely on the simple, categorical tests based on

    C. and c.
               jk
       19The three—digit classification scheme used in the Enterprise Statistics
[6] differs from S.I.C. codes. Therefore, we were limited to the cases where
a   one—to—one relationship existed.
                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                                                                                                                      0)

                                                                                                                                                                      CD




                                             Number of Mergers (principal diagonal and upper half) and
                                       Estimated Cash Flow Correlation (lower half) for 2—Digit S.I.C. Codes

S.I.C.
Code       20     21     22     23      24      25      26         27       28     29        30    31        32        33     34     35         36     37   38   39

  20       77      3      4       5      0        4      1          2       10      0         2      1        0
  21     -.54      1      0      0       0       0       0          0        0      0         0     0         0         0      0      1          2      0    1    1

  22     —.68    .61     11       7      2        3      2          0        2      0         1     0         2         0      2      0          2      1    0    1
  23      .11    .75   —.12      8       0        1      0          2        2      0         0     1         3         0      3      1          3      0    1    1
  24     —.22    .43    .73    .33      17        1     18          5        2      2         1     0         3         0      3      1          3      4    0    1

  25      .07   —.16   —.13   —.40     .54       8       1          1        0      0         0     1         3         0      2      1          2      1    0    2
  26     —.26   —.18    .51   —.06     .00     .82      19          4        4      0         4     0         0         2      2      2          0      0    1    3
  27     —.63    .88    .86    .74     .72     .08     .56         37        1      0         0     0         0         1      0      1          2      1    2    5
  28     —.36    .28    .81   —.53     .72     .02     .25        .60       62      3         6     1         9         4      7     12          8      4   11    8
  29     —.01   —.40    .06   —.29    —.02     .22     .74        .04      .24      0         0     0         3         0      1      1          0      1    0    0
 30      —.58    .91    .81    .88     .72    —.06    —.15        .93      .56   —.29         7     0         6         5      7      4          5      1    2    0
 31      —.64    .74    .75    .26     .58    —.03     .56        .89      .64    .19       .77     1         0         0      0      1          1      0   0     2
 32      —.95    .68    .84   — .02    .45    — .14    .20        .79      .54   —.09       .76   .74         8        4       8      2          2      1    3   3
 33       .33   —.77   —.18   —.78    —.18     .33     .36       —.54      .25    .45   —   .54   .36                        20                 5       7        0
                                                                                                          —.38         14            11                     2
 34      —.51    .74    .78    .55     .73     .79     .46        .95      .54    .10   —.91      .82       .66   —.39        19     42        13      13   5    2
 35      —.20   —.73    .40   —.61    —.07     .76     .64       —.07      .66    .89   — .63     .29       .10       .83    .13     60        39      20   10   11
 36       .47   —.81   —.69   —.43                     .42                              -
                                      —.62    —.81               —.87   —.46      .23       .89   .63     —.62        .46   —.88    .75        60      10   14   4
 37       .19   —.28    .16   —.15     .70     .33    —.26       —.11      .37   —.02       .05   .20     —.07        .37    .27   —.00    —.22         9   5    3
 38      -.69    .89    .78    .64     .57             .32        .92      .44   —.13                             —                        —
                                              —.08                                          .92   .84       .81       .58    .87   —.31        .74   -.10   12   0
 39      —.49    .88   .73     .84     .69     .04    —.21        .87      .52   —.37       .96   .72      .68




                                 Sources: Annual Survey of Manufactures and Statistical                  Report on Mergers and
                                                             —   Federal   Trade Commission
                                             Acquisitions,                                        [2;27].     For method of computation,
                                             see text.
Table II

                     Merger and Estimated Cash Flow Correlations By
                                 Two—Digit S.I.C. Code


                                    Total            Total
                                 Mergers as        Mergers as
                               Parent Company   Acquired Company       Spearman
S.I.C. Classification          Within Outside    Outside S.I.C.      Correlation
                               S.I.C. S.I.C.                       of Cjk and Mjk



20 Food Products                77      32             13                 .210
21 Tobacco                       1       8              0             — .236

22 Textiles                     11      11             18             —.258
                                 8                     20             — .068
23 Apparel                              10

24 Lumber & Wood Prod.          17      17             29                 .263

25 Furniture & Fixtures          8       7             16             —.071

26 Paper Products               19      35             10             —.014
                                                       13             —   .366
 27 Printing & Publishing       37      13

 28 Chemicals                   62      58             36             -.025

 29 Petroleum Refining           0       7              4                 .181
 30 Rubber & Plastics            7      11             33             —.373
                                 1       6              3             — .433
 31 Leather Products
 32 Stone, Clay, Glass &
     Concrete Products           8      38             15                 .072
 33 Primary Metals              14      40             23                 .250

 34 Fabricated Metal
     Products, Except
     Machinery & Trans.         19      55             76             —.266

 35 Machinery, Except
     Electri cal                60      55            110             —.010

 36 Electrical Machinery,
                                60      59              57            —.201
     Equip. & Supplies
                                 9       56             19                .331
 37 Transportation Equip.
 38 Measuring Instruments;
     Photographic, Medical
     & Optical Goods;
     Watches & Clocks            12      25             32            —.222
                                 15      16             32             — .213
 39 Miscellaneous


 Sources: Annual Survey of Manufactures and Statistical Report on Mergers and
           Acquisitions, — Federal Trade Commission. [2;27] For method of
              computation see text.
Table III

                                Results of Logit and OLS

                              Analysis of Merger Patterns



                   Variable                 Coefficient     Standard Error   P—Level

Model Aa,b         Intercept                   .826             .237         .0005
p = .4805          Attraction                 —.001             .001         .4805


                   Constant                   1.135             .383         .003
                   2nd Quintile   Dummy       —.665             .505         .188
Model Ba,c         3rd Quintile   Dummy       —.237             .524         .651
p = .6168          4th Quintile   Dummy       —.639             .511         .210
                   5th Quintile   Dummy       —.555             .508         .275




Model              Intercept                  1. 9807           .2314        .000 1
p = .1099          Attraction                 —.00 24           .00 15       .1099


    a Dependent variable is one if ratio of actual to expected number of
      mergers exceeds one, and zero otherwise.

    b Causal variable is the sum of the ranks of the inter—industry cash
      flow view from each industry's perspective. See text.

    C The causal variables are a set of dummies representing the
      quintiles of the attraction variable.

    d The dependent variable is the ratio of actual to expected numbers
      of mergers, and the data is censored to exclude zero values. That
      procedure biases against a coefficient that departs significantly
      from zero. See text.
Table IV

           Three—digit Classifications from Enterprise Statistics, [6].

                     Used in Analysis of Industrial Structure

Industry Code                                Description

     20G                             Grain Mill Products
     20J                             Sugar
     20K                             Misc. Food & Kindred Products
     22D                             Floor Covering Mills
     22E                             Yarn and Thread Mills
     22G                             Women & Children's Undergarments
     23J                             Misc. Fabricated Textiles
     248                             Sawmills & Planning Mills
     24C                             Miliwork, Plywood, & Related Products
     268                             Misc. Converted Paper Products
     26C                             Paperboard Containers & Boxes
     27C                             Books

     288                             Drugs
     28E                             Agricultural Chemicals
     28F                             Misc. Chemical Products
     31A                             Footwear, Except Rubber
     32B                             Structural Clay Products
     34B                             Cutlery, Handtools, & Hardware
     34C                             Plumbing & Heating, Except Electric
     34G                             Screw Machine Products, Bolts, Etc.
     34J                             Metal Services, NEC.
     35G                             Special Industry Machinery
     35K                             Service Industry Machines
     36A                             Household Appliances
     36B                             Electric Lighting & Wiring Equipment
     36D                             Electronic Components & Acces.
     37A                             Motor Vehicles & Equipment
     37D                             Ship & Boat Building & Repair
     38C                             Medical Instruments & Supplies
     38E                             Watches, Clocks, & Watchcases
     39A                             Jewelry, Silverware, & Plated Ware
TABLE V

                           Analysis of the Structure of Conglomerate Firms


A. Continuous versions of variables — Pooled data (for all j)


    Variable                       Number of        Mean             Standard Deviation
    _________                      Observations     ______                 Deviation
                                     919            .0076                     .0549
         Cjk

    Cik                              916            .3910                     .3372

                            Correlation: — .039 (p—level = .1155)


B. Discrete versions of variables — Pooled data (for all j)




                                                  Cik

                            (Cjk                                 (C> 0)


                      89                                530

    619                                                                   0

                 56.3%                                  69.7%
                                                                     (cj 0
                      69                                231

    300                                                             1

                 437%                                   30.3%           (e. > 0)

totals          158                                        761

                 X2 =       10.551 (p—level = .0012)


Sources:       Annual Survey of Manufacturers [2] and Enterprise Statistics [6].
             Table VI




                                         Analysis of Industrial Structure


                                         Tables of Association Between C'. and c'.
                                                                         jk       jk
                                         Aggregated from Three-digit to Two-digit Level
                                               of Industrial Classification

                     C                                                                   C
                         jk                                                                  jk
             0
                                           Industry
                                                                             0
             II               58                                         I   12
                                    20                     22                                                Oc
jk               5            13
                                                                         '5                                         jk



.0
jk
              12
              6
                              30
                              12
                                    23                     21+
                                                                                 3                37
                                                                                                             Oc.
     i                                                               I
                                                                                                  17     I   I
                                                                                                                    jk



 .0
jk            14
                 7            29
                              20
                                    26                     27
                                                                     II
                                                                                 2                2+
                                                                                                    '4
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                    jk


.0
jk
              5
                 3
                              48
                              30
                                    28                     31
                                                                     I
                                                                                 2
                                                                                                  23
                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                             Oc.jk
                                                                                                             1




.0
jk
              14

                 I
                              21+
                               2    32                     314
                                                                 I
                                                                                 —




                                                                                 8
                                                                                                  61
                                                                                                  35
                                                                                                             Oc.
                                                                                                                    jk



.0
jk
         1

         1    7
                 3            29
                              21
                                    35                     36    '
                                                                             12
                                                                              6
                                                                                                  48
                                                                                                  21
                                                                                                             Oc.jk


.0
jk
             16
              6
                              26
                              12
                                    37                     38
                                                                 :
                                                                                 3
                                                                                     -
                                                                                                  1+2
                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                             0 c'
                                                                                                             I      jk

                              20
 .0
jk
              14

              0                6
                                    39
     Table VII




                                      Results of Logit Analysis

                                           of Structure Data


                                                   Non- zero                 Standard
                          Variable                 Interval    Coefficient     Error    P—Level
Model                      ntercept                              -.657         .108      .000
p = .1230                 Corre I at ion                        -.36           .201+



                          Intercept                            -l.45l          .233      .000
Model                     Correlation                           —. 131+       .211+      .532
p=                        Concentration                           .021



                          Constant                   all        -.350         .199      .079
                            C2                    —l<C<.l       -.585         .321      .069
Model a,d                   C3                    .l<C<.3       -.392         .337      .21+1+
                            C1+                   .3<C<.6       -.51+2        .232      .019
                            C5                     .6<c         - .1+1+1


                          Constant                   all       -1.256         .305      .000
                            C2                    —l<C<.1       -.397         .330      .229
Hodel                       C3                    .1<C<.3       -.238         .31+7     .1+93
p=                          C1+                   .3<C<.6       -.301+        .21+3
                            C5                    .6<C          -.217         .21+8     .381
                          Concentration              -


        a
            The dependent variable is one if c. exceeds zero, and zero
            otherwi Se.                       jk


        blhe causal variable is the correlation between returns to the
         pair of industries.


        CThe concentration measure is a four firm ratio based on sales.

        dcz_c5 are dumies taking the value of one if correlation is in
         the indicated range, and zero otherwise. The resulting proportions
         in the order (Constant, C2-C5) are (.10 ,.09,.08,.39,. 31+).
